Jay and I are becoming everybody our
event this evening it would be really
interactive as you could see you have to
work as well people on that side people
on that side and presentations they will
work for us as well so you have
different elements we will present of
course s project as well but our main
tools and a kind of it's kind of like
every second one because you need to
negotiate at the end and during the kind
of show your own initiatives or you want
to do maybe you did already something
will be really good for to have an after
effect of this presentation as well so
you have both sides to write on and as
one of the men you would explain every
dish in more detail but you see already
if somebody is allergic you have to read
through it anybody with some energies
please read the text but it's all
plant-based and as you could see and
each as well as the kind of section from
us
it's we on purpose I mean this should be
more event like and so we rather have
not crystal clear present kind of
projections but an atmosphere and we
want people you can talk if you can be
among yourself as well you don't have to
be a little it's and like it's like the
super naturally so it's a whole point
that it actually is more about what you
do and we get inspired so we are not
lecturing about the course per se couple
of ideas and from it but we want to show
how is brightest in a way all right like
and we become activators and mentors we
didn't know what to call them but like
we doing this lecture we discussed like
who are the people who actually inspired
us throughout the time so they will come
up a little bit we talked a little bit
about that but mainly by them we went to
explain as well the concepts of what we
actually tried to go for so the food
it's all vegan of course with us it's
all organic it's all made from scratch
there's nothing prepared like or bored
already
it's all literally from a local farm
drop kind of things called fam drops and
they deliver everything with econ's and
there so it's really nice yeah so some
things yeah needs so made from scratch
they're they're from peanuts which
turned into peanut milk and then made
cheese out of it and so on the forces
which will be the first ditch yeah we
have to have this lovely kind of
disclaimer I think to Porsche last week
[Laughter]
right so we start and missus tava which
is a section of protest then the main
one is a performance of performative
element and the last one the nice desert
its first stitch blood and browses why
is that called bath yes thank you please
help us bring out the dishes ahead
yeah our students kindly agreed to help
serving the dishes otherwise we would be
here tomorrow morning so the first dish
is blood and roses because it's made
from blood orange and rose pepper so
those two in combination are quite a
unusual kind of taste it's quite savory
is quite it has a lot of Tang in it as a
main kind of ingredient for all of it is
peanuts roll peanuts which like made to
cheese but as well to it as a source and
it's yeah that's pretty much it
because it's that the more you want to
have kind of strong taste the the less
ingredients you actually should use and
that's always a quite interesting thing
for a starter as well teeny ass pasta
which is marinated in it for a day
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
in general what we sing if we talk about
the protest when always things actually
we want to continue actually from
Porsha's lecture from last week we see
all this kind of huge kind of movements
going on and people like in masses go
out to the street and we kind of assumed
that the same tendency among many of
them actually most of yours we're in
this kind of productive in creative
realm especially seventeen and things
like that so that like movements that
actually are not just to preserve
something that I actually go further
than that then the most common ones
actually you just want to keep the
status quo and a lot of things we come
through in a couple of things there as
well and of course they're destructive
ones the ones which kind of turned into
revolutions and or reveling and I think
it's like quite important to always keep
that in mind which kind of what protests
are we talking about and how we kind of
frame the whole thing and so the
interesting thing is as well that
usually they are quite related to one
another in that Center they turn from
one into another so often the ones which
are preservatives turn into either
creative destructive and actually we
have again examples of that coming up
you saw the two inspirator sway have
there they actually stand for this kind
of two things quite well Daniel
cohn-bendit
and Greta Thunder completely different
generations but those like the biggest
people in green movement I think in
Europe has to offer and we start
which is always protesting but in a kind
of social and engaging manner so you can
see them here in someone so young to
Paris in order to study and impossible
at that time as you can see proper food
testing on that side the kind of
[Laughter]
politics and social engagement so if you
go to the next as you can see he's
always protesting his group managed to
create three kind of creative and you
could see it there for South they
spraying their comments and yeah are
pieces as well so it's one of the first
refugees ever known one and let's say it
was before we do so 60s already to
protest and of course for us it's
important because it's a 68 generation
so for Europa even Germany it was really
important to fight against fascism so I
guess you all know even and the states
of course as well it's a big revolutions
again let's say that would Nazis who
were still in power in different let's
say teachers judges in so it was if we
stayed young or just for trafficking
so I want to know the situation this
Daniel and his group are really closely
linked to them as well and so then I
thought the kind of discussion because
it came from the literacy was really
like a hot discussion words today still
really important the kind of a massage
we found but you may know it's kind of
different methodologies so it's like so
we city in a different way you take on
different layers of the kind of
environment but the kind of human it's
actually an architectural discussion and
interesting yeah I think it's a kind of
first one which actually turned from
protest into proper urban design policy
and working before was always the other
way around those like it states that
design for testing for years and years
in Paris as it still wouldn't be afford
the accommodation and even food on some
point so they really thought for a kind
of more social future as well but mostly
important they didn't had any saying in
the kind of university ran so they were
protesting as well to create as well a
kind of student forum still Union so
after the shutdown of the support
University there was a proper
established Student Union created as
well but I'm not tell you
[Laughter]
study he went to the University he so
there one of the most influential ones
in Germany as you can see him on the
left hand side and so like immediately
and in support of course he created with
the other colleagues as well this kind
of who but in Berlin he really fell into
the kind of existing network already so
yeah really important dinner for as
easily Germany now again arresting him
trying whatever to undermine all the
students revolutions the next one so it
is his trip he didn't nobody before so
he went around and we enjoyed the 68
year and the kind of discussions on the
left-hand side in some time but for us
and we just sit as well two weeks ago
it's more important for Daniel and just
because it's more create positively
sinking and third reservation on it
already the second one went into
killings and everything so for us it's
more important treasure waited for the
children singing person and again
because of this protesting and
everything he got babies for all of us
we good because at the end it was I
think in 75 he organized with another
liquid party one of the first ones in
Europe and
yeah not handle it but still as always
in the discussion and as you can see on
the other side is as well Europe and
colleges as well in the European Union
so he's for us one of the most
influential in politics as far so we
came studying as a student to be
creative and then be political as well
for us as a kind of story it's like what
you remembered as well as kids we were
protesting as well always was organized
marches from the Green Party and even if
it was against nuclear power nuclear
weapons but then we all had some okay
and the state yeah and I think the
interesting bit is obviously this repeat
of generation a little bit now the green
movement was very strong in the 1780s I
mean literally like our generation in
Germany but as well couldn't get here in
other places where I'd used to go onto
the street and like and beyond rallies
inside layer but the interesting thing
is now was Greta Sundberg how she did it
like as a complete self initiated person
and where you would I mean it's a very
kind of known story for all of us by now
but it's only in a bit that she was
sitting by itself and is now in front of
mega masses so main spokesperson for
such a huge group so again is kind of
interesting to to for us ya know really
being a different generation than her to
get this reads variations off somebody
just 16 years old and it's really
important as well how mannerism how way
of talking is quite unique and she
brings for so many more topics to the
front rather than the main course is all
about know like with her autism and all
this kind of things it there is a kind
of new respect for standing up and I
think that's quite important to do
with her it's how she starts talking
just among masses but it's were in front
of all this institution I mean she
wasn't divorced now like the big place
where you really did start it I guess so
I think again how she bit by bit just
has this persistent no matter what the
kind of problem is which is being caused
for her as well she keeps on going I
think there's quite a difference between
her and extinction rebellion because
extinction rebellion not yet does have
really this kind of creative part and I
think that's an interesting thing to see
and they put now on the terror lists
like it's not really one but likely how
surprising is that as well like in the
80s everybody like from the Green Party
or the preachers half of them and so but
the protest there are still more the
kind of preservative once or slightly
destructive once they're trying to hold
people in a way like what is the massive
now to actually bring to the next level
that you actually they not only talk
about the doom which obviously is there
and real but is what is a kind of way of
doing it in a positive way not only
having a theater on the street that
might help a little bit but like
actually what are the kind of
methodologies they want to bring forward
and I think these are the kind of things
which we we discuss quite a lot of
course we all kind as Europeans like
travel was practicing but that's purely
preservative no no I think the big
problem of that point it was lost was
mainly because nobody actually talked
about any positive things or even
positive changes they should be there in
order to accept them what other kind of
things to come and so you always have
just only the kind of half excuse it's
not perfect but rather than it's not
perfectly to do something and I think
that's a big issue for anything you'll
kind of who feels strongly about the
shouldn't maybe just defeatist
or preservative you should actually go
for something which is a bigger idea and
stands for slightly more I think from
the recent histories we except for a lot
what you showed with 17 and things like
something which we found is creative is
the woman's much because whatever
picture you see whatever kind of
situation you saw it was always
something which brought people together
and then created something as an oval
framework new and it was always about
kind of coming together in negotiating
things without actually talking against
anything
it was talking for something like the
respect for women and going beyond of
course it has all this kind of and
amidst goodness things in it's kind of a
given already and I think that's a big
step forward if you have a situation
which is given then you can go further
and and and make an argument for
something you did develop because of
that a couple of people using that
starter we leave you to it however we
come to the main course as well
absolutely
because it will be just changed over now
for the next course and in that meantime
please yeah keep your folks in ice
otherwise you have to you would think us
so this is the main course something
it's smoke and mirrors we call the
because often it's like a nice
expression I think for being false but
in a nice way and obviously that's as
well a methodology which is if you use
it positively in the right way you
distract in the right moment and
entertain the right moment to bring
people together has a lot for it and
actually that's something we're going to
discuss as well a bit later so this is a
feel of mushroom pastry it's a
yeah I mean feel it's a very thin kind
of pastry with mushrooms cashew cheese
inside made from scratch as well and
pine nuts again very few ingredients
it's with a beet and leek sauce and the
kale is raw but smoked overnight in a
back off smoke literally one of the slit
of sentencing machines every chef has
nowadays where this looks like a shisha
or literally smoked anything but so it's
a lot of smoke and ngerous literally and
that kind of things to prepare the
cheese and it's like in fresh cheese
took three to four days the can we did
and the Fiedler this morning because
everything has a different timing so and
I think that's especially performance
such an important thing that you know
your timings and for tonight that is
kind of a nightmare to do three
different things
no you either do cooking or lecturing or
kind of a presentation you hardly ever
do kind of a mix of everything so yeah
in this case we did don't know why our
inspirations
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
just quick over you right this is diesel
two-minute kind of s intro video with
just to put you into that must fear what
usually do
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Applause]
we come back to our inspiration
everybody knows I guess pina bausch
[Laughter]
trained dancer in Germany and video and
the combination of our dance movement
and space major again one of the most
notable first worldwide and as you can
see a building of course she's really
young but even until her performing as
well as you can see and later pictures
how these kind of movements are teach
[Music]
but we always watch we always think for
two-and-a-half a court when they have to
perform but it's really amazing so
something we come back later to as well
but I think this intensity and true
artists can do is quite inspirational
especially like you can see if the idea
is really from within a huge difference
between who's performing as well and
with somebody who's across under dancer
you see the piece once performed by
herself and then by somebody else you
can see a world of difference and I
think that's for us a very cool thing I
come back to its really young
there you can see her as a garage so
always on like as well as a director and
it was always for the kids as you can
see behind the scene everybody is
smiling and discussing zip so she's
really open as well to discuss her
performative elements but I found that
on the right-hand side if you see her
face like one director is explained that
this in New York and explaining her I
don't know how to change maybe her
performances and she's just like like
you can see from the face not really
happy but it's not like so she's always
come so she would say she wouldn't say
anything but then there's things about
it and maybe don't hurt or not I think
we it's a typical case of men's blaming
[Laughter]
I don't know but you know if she's even
like that's Kathy Beulah and
supercharged in I think in 1999 so
really in her old age she still
performed with Dance Company as well so
that's quite impressive loss so if yeah
it's like what hurts all about
atmospheres and it's really interesting
so I found many quotes as well from yeah
different generations of Caracas verses
and they always said the same thing but
we always say about her and so it's like
she puts dancers into night go on so
it's like um
like dresses and nice suits as well but
then at the end as you can see they're
like splashing water marks you know
being in the mud but it's always what we
found as well we saw that show in Bogota
and in London and even the in-between
stage when they had to bring the mat as
well that was a performance so everybody
went out to go to do and it's a big
something and I said to tell
changing the stage so you make from
water then to mutt or whatever dirt it
was really interesting so to feed off
the kind of scene as well but as you can
see in usually like I think the dance
company had 34 dancers always performing
as you can see here as well and I think
the total dance company is around 14
they always select the right people the
ones who want to collaborate on the
network so it's really like a network by
its surface world and the next one as
well it shows so they're like it's
always fun so for me it's as well like
going now from having Pina on the stage
and to a dancer or going outside so that
still of course on the stage but I think
you get the feeling I think that was
performed in acres and you could feel
even if they performed it in Bogota
gonna swallow this kind of heat and the
different kind of movement hues slower
so it was really interesting and you can
see the different movements so they went
around suppose that's what for two and a
half hours moving through this kind of
field but then as well using tables
dancing above underneath the table and
as you could see all this one are men
wearing dresses really chooses different
not only neck yeah changing the movement
as well as the kind of behavior and
really I'm good to see a problem and as
you can see now outside that's in close
to a pattern so it's all in the area and
as you can see this top of this really
high up and maybe you see you know it as
well from the pinna film it's always
interesting how they perform what is the
backstage what is in front how you can
achieve different views as well so it's
for me as an urban designer really
interesting to bring movement outside
and that's what we do of course with a s
as well we have many performances inside
and like inside old spaces you remember
Doody bars underneath London Bridge and
really run down somewhere and you could
hear the train or if you're really
outside and can achieve a similar
atmosphere and that shows as well so
they're all the dancers there so like
for her as well she's not the individual
is an individual but she always have fun
dance group with her
that's always as well as you know the
mix so she's down movement but that's
why putting into theater so you have a
swell on some of the pieces that they
discussing as one ghostly like everybody
knows we wanted to do that as well that
students when they serve they shout out
the names in one direction they always
called the dancer so if you see ten
different productions at the end you
know all the dancers by name by name
what is smoothly interesting for us
because it represents the a that
represents the a s as well and to have
different ages in inside one group and
as well different backgrounds so they
all come from different cultural
backgrounds and they always try to
create a new nice atmospheric experience
that's what in 73
after being really behind her all
creative years were up before she came
back to her hometown in order to give
something back to the local community so
that was really interesting for us so I
don't know because I think usually what
part I would be on the map somewhere
it's known because everybody they use
already aspirin see CNN put a bottle on
the 22 see cities in 20 as you can see
maybe if you can't go to any of the show
see at least peanut as a food even it's
the kind of achievement from the food
industry because the 3d doesn't work was
but it shows we everything that shows
the atmosphere and even without saying
anything through music dance faces it
shows like what what they're even
vendors obviously being a friend and
from Vata the interesting thing is how
see and the company was dedicated to
this literally very rundown area in
their time if you I mean literally ten
years ago the first time we came to work
with I had like my god what a dump
I mean you literally went through the
most awful station and came into office
down that's developed now but I but she
always kind of just said there doesn't
matter I mean she toured worldwide and
all the international artists came there
lived there and performed there this
year she wanted to bring the culture
back to that area
I mean it's time you said yes well I
think the freedom of what you have as
kind of facilities and literally pretty
much a whole town kinda was working not
with her actually the kind of town
officials work very much against her she
was the Shocker office city and it was
always in the press button and a
negative for her international advancing
how international artists came because
of that Tampa tar and actually the whole
culture exchange of on purpose being
this often map place and on purpose of a
lot of kind of strange artists like you
know Tony Craig is right now he
literally bought a whole mountain as his
own private garden like for sculptures
and signa and so this color but is kind
of due to her I think the interesting
thing is how much back then like the
establishment hated her and if you now
go to peanut Peas you literally look at
this kind of opera goers think anyway
and and liking it but like in a forced
way because it's part of the culture of
a now I think it's something to watch
out for after we will notice it about
house we know dessert there this is kind
of when things bow houses and you know
noise just lunchtime you know if you're
in this hour it's like it's the same
kind of crowd who's going there and but
so something which used to be protests
and revolutionary all of a sudden is not
only mainstream but actually belongs to
the having to do things and yeah it's an
interesting development now I'm coming
too he's from Hanover where I grew up
which is if you go as a young person to
museums that you're you can see
paintings paintings paintings and all of
a sudden there's a broom there's a space
we come to that in a second and you
think what the hell is this like
literally he brought me to architecture
and knew the link between architecture
and art what you heard before was it
sound Sonata a piece he did just by
himself and you can hear the voice he
was enjoying it like hell you can see it
in the face of this photos as well and I
think somebody who's that kind of
dedicated to his art but not in a kind
of I want to be famous and rich he was
so not respected in in in their time but
was dedicated to have fun he moved to
Britain as well and we can I go each
over this person just by a couple of his
faces and I think you can see a positive
person who's really into what he tries
to do and how he wants to get art
through no matter what the singer
so he was obviously Kane of linked to
data but is actually art Woodson nerds
art which he just cut out of the word
Commerce Bank in Germany and and that
became his kind of style he worked with
Lozinski and other very famous artists
together and had worldwide connections
and I think this kind of way of how he
produced work for the long run is quite
inspiring as well as I think it's often
quite important as well to think how you
as an artist or one as an artist works
in this kind of bigger picture things of
between the different disciplines
physically which he always did in this
kind of medium he never worked in one
medium only you know there were so many
kind of possibilities I mean from sound
as you hear now started as well data
it's just noise he trying to do
something as it sonata which is kind of
linking the tradition to something new
and of course he's still the inspiration
through places like this the notes out
which is what's originally inhabit
animal and I was rebuilt in the ring and
was in where I you've got to know it
first but this is like the first sahar
building all the kind of
deconstructivist ideas that kind of that
but in a much more playful way a lot of
all the Eisenman's
all the kind of movement of to me in
there and it's a tiny space but it's so
dynamic that if you come in there it was
probably 10 winners or the first time
you're just overwhelmed and and thinking
that he was his flat he actually did
that at home the original was bombed
during the war he moved to Britain in
that time or actually it's just before
where he had too much about just outside
London as well I think there's a replica
of it now existing as well very much
important to go a little bit sad he was
imprisoned here as a German during the
time because obviously family kind of
person but apparently I mean he died
because of pneumonia because of the bad
conditions in the houses there were a
Victorian houses which had no kind of
facilities however it is
that he was like the positive mind
blinking as well between like the the
other inmates are as well the soldiers
who were work with them kind of work
we're with them so there was no
animosity in his well he kind of it was
at the same time as home as it was
imprisonment unfortunately I think this
kind of positive spirit something really
important to take forward what we go
through now is a couple of ideas
performance section yeah you a tour
really really fast so yeah we show a
couple of applied ways of working what
we did throughout the years and it's
mainly about networks and did not net
dynamics of how we create those networks
in order to have an after fact what we
want to do discuss afterwards we have
for work sweets are selected to show as
examples they stand for many and we
refer to them as well but this is at
Madero and a pic of a garden as well as
the very first one in Vemma or inner
cause of the cities and the very latest
one is in essence so I just explained
the dynamic what we had for something
like the bowels lap our very first
project we were Tania actually were long
time working on a you fund very kind of
big kind of organization and got the
funds together even to set up the course
and but the dynamic of how we create the
network's would that we with whatever we
did as a groundwork into a network so
like the different groups came together
by a mediator which was already existing
and inviting us there are many other
examples where we did this like hey
LeBron yo and sing SIA these have big
benefits because you get to know people
you have no idea in no context to just
by the medium of the festival itself so
usually in the mix over the years we
always do a couple of those as well but
the thing is it's less of your own
initiative you find initiatives while
you're there so it's a way what you
bring as a product which is the real big
thing so you're less of
the kind of mediating ground which we in
the bigger picture aim for then somebody
then although something have the benefit
of meeting others and actually
participating in that so we're going to
show the example interesting for you to
see the home so for us like it was a
kind of you grant so we started the
program because we had funds we got
students interdisciplinary
interprofessional students so in that
framework because we started so you
needed a kind of framework even if he
just said it after you found the group
we'd be built up the network as well
that was - European countries with
cities as well it was whatever be in a
kind of creating a network and being in
the network so we came to Dena of
courses was linked with an okapi
festival which checks his own network
and we got to know - kinda who's always
doing workshops first off as well and he
brought a lot in the optional expected
million so really at that time
build our network which at the end is
stainless for answers well lower as you
can see because interests here now about
the kind of mediator so what it is about
it was a kind of just say it's not a
festival they came they didn't know why
it's white anyway and which is really
[Music]
because for us the questions were so
after Germany both unified a lot of
artists period from the west and the
east created this new theatre so there
was a kind of the only Indian and she I
would say good night in this kind of
setup and that it was fresh business of
mine because the city itself
[Music]
[Music]
and the funny thing is like last time we
said but is it the funny things we never
intended to and that's the whole point
we never intended to it's not our aim
but it happens and I think that's an
interesting thing if you have only
artists who really had the craziest
ideas in the world then actually as the
outcome funny enough staff for hunters
in something years of the a there was
the biggest structure and we would have
been happy with no structure totally no
and actually almost came to that and
it's a kind of way of working can create
completely different outputs if you're
outside the negotiation kind of team of
the normal thing people say less note to
you if you're not the ones they expect
to say no to and I think it's in
networking a quite important task
another kind of concept which is quite
the event as a mediator so we've got
again and again invited to multivator
Madrid it's one of the biggest sites in
Europe if not beyond that hundred fifty
thousand square meters something like a
crazy like a huge area the former
slaughterhouse of Madrid which is now
converted into cultural buildings
so the situations that took the locals
have literally no event no contact
whatsoever to their old work area so we
intervened then try to kind of build
that bridge we had no own intention
there were but we were just like neutral
enough to to create something which is
not the kind of Ponce's New Artist
groups which that was a reputation of
everybody becoming in there but
something which is doing that as well
but something which benefits and
actually shows new opportunities for the
place itself so here's a little overview
so this was a really nice situation for
us as well little did we know that we
actually going to be the opening of the
entire site
when we first map them we had a little
workshop a year before then there so you
can come back next year we should be
almost done and you can do a little bit
saying thousand people showed up you can
see quite easily this masses kind of
just moving in and and overwhelming our
artist group in a very positive and nice
way but this kind of dynamic was quite
interesting as well there was something
people were curious about but had no
idea what it could do and so from
something which was literally aside or
years or enclosed to the local community
all of a sudden there was something you
can integrate in a different way those
East where they all disabled buildings
for example 60 me died 5,000 square
meters big now getting rented out per
day for 20 grand weird for two weeks for
four years every time and thinks that so
in this way it's quite interesting if
you come into this moment as well you
get spaces which usually are
unaffordable for artists of our kind of
like age groups of students at Sinclair
but because you're way open a fool then
all the sudden you get spaces usually
Google of people like that support and I
think this is quite important as well
like how you negotiate your point you
can piggyback almost on other courses as
well was it with the work but as well
bring a course forward you're actually
quite keen on to do within this is the
equivalent of what we have now we
because sweeten we need I wanted to
bring culture but as well the local
community together we've got a local
restaurant and boards they're still
friends with us leader decreed a like
amazing chance really fun they're people
they actually lived in London before and
founded here they're kind of city farms
and in happening and so we had this kind
of mini lecture series during kind of
dinners it wasn't a members event as
were so few recognized a couple of
phases yes they were from there and so
we're trying to bring different
communities together just by what we did
[Applause]
the funny thing is that the atmosphere
change you can have we own the dredge in
the middle of kind of a big open still
under construction or half under
construction area and all of sudden you
feel like you know the really posh New
York restaurant because of this grandeur
of this but the structure was a very
nice conversion that part had no
electricity at the times I've never get
like so header and really long cables
and so on forth but like all of a sudden
you have a shift in how you experience
it a kind of the structure and how you
work with it and I think that's for us
again always like a very exciting bit to
do we came back four times three
directors so they changed more than we
did change
[Music]
[Music]
and our school had to sign it and so we
got Google Translate to copy from there
legally signed but I think this dynamic
was really interesting they're still
kind of residues of the times we were
there for us became a bit weird that too
few we have done our job let's say we
would probably go so soon back but the
interesting thing that the market we
opened there the first time for local
vendors is still existing their
restaurants run now by Oliva dich wieder
like the local pizza place I don't know
if they're still there but like last
year they were still yeah and so the
force that I think when we talk about
after effect by this kind of repetition
obviously had an amazing effect for us
the bigger benefit you can have amazing
spaces amazing people we love Madrid but
since then but as well there is
something you can kind of leave on the
way in a way which is still even more
beneficial for us and kind of kind of
read in kind of response as well because
of when we now go there was an existing
network for us really easy to react with
and into his work with a different kind
of network we do is festivals for new
connections this is pretty much what we
did in Covent Garden the very first one
which we put together but it was kind of
a collection of at that time for us
unknown entities we just want to do
festival so we became more less the
producers of the space and found it like
it was by Christina's miss one of the
wonderful places politically was first
important because it was abandoned for
15 years or so on in an amazing area
entire block because had d1 listing so
it was only allowed to be used for art
and nobody wanted it like isn't that
crazy and in London if you don't use a
building you have to completely strip it
down to the bare bones
I come to that in a second is when you
see the building but actually more
onions but this event and weather test
well isn't it was a network with just
literally the core what we are s now we
met for the very first time David we
worked with human collective for the
first time David David was brought in by
Andy Dean who is still our music
producer and what another thing because
of the intensity of the project and
actually opening new possibilities we
got to know each other so well that we
were curious about the kind of new ideas
which came up as kind of overlaps of the
different interest
you know this interactive where you're
performing David and Andy invented that
night in a way is still something we
kind of do right now I can't sing
otherwise I would but I think it's like
what's one of these core moments when
you movement collective was founded
because they were a young group of
people just saying can we dance and we
said yeah go ahead what's your name yeah
week later they come back new moon moon
collective so I think again had an
amazing after effect mainly for us as
well but all those groups which came at
that moment as well but different than
any goes what if you kind of collect the
unknown that's what I think there's an
interesting story as well the things we
couldn't do and kind of who couldn't
make it connections were actually
probably the more positive ones as well
that we avoided those situations so here
comes come on guard
yeah have a look out for they're
incredibly de Larroque building we
literally had to put in electricity try
to get this in you groans and took us
three years to get the big funds and do
nice things the year after we had no
time to of course to get the ground so
we had no money at all so for some of
low budget it was no budget but it's
really nice because it was the most
beautiful experience because it's white
and dark and the viewpoint you always
can walk around and we can see it later
on when the done in the second tunnel
the good thing was we had it for months
I think we had time to build up the
structure - you did drill head still use
this and they Bou the desk
I think how many I think and yeah was
amazing so when we opened it it was we
had to set it to 300 like single suite
on the people because we had two
different rooms so each room had hundred
fifty on the first night
my father came and we were built like an
allotment David had this concert know
that more people wanted to show up so we
even had to say safety issue but I think
was amazing because we had to space so
long so we had two weeks of events in
the evening here you can see the
political talk time just before it was a
discussion what will happen to creatives
what is the Mafia they said already
there now they would cut it in half
Samantha and they did I think everybody
was way too positive and I think one of
the things we discovered on that night
as well when we talked before about Pina
of this complete control of your
profession I think when David and and
the interacted there you could see
complete control of their profession
David as as a thing and Andy as a
producer how they kind of brought the
right network in the right moment
literally I think everybody was
completely melding
[Music]
so don't miss David concert coming up
[Music]
yeah so I think this was probably the
most exhausting of all events we ever
did but as one of the most fruitful in
the in the long as a starting group
where there was a second year and like
it was a foundation of all the
connections we still do have today and
they accelerated and I think this is one
thing we come back to the at the end
initiatives are not just there for
themselves they're there in order to be
exponential and you keep on going
literally through those people we met
then you move in collective David Andy
we have now a network which is in
unthinkable without these people around
us I think there was one more step to do
and this one step was thanks to our
alumni and the whole group we have now
so we did last year
Athens as a festival and we could it's a
festival of overlapping frequencies it's
kind of the best form you can have the
mix of all the things we just discussed
before it's perfect learning environment
for the students it's something where
you have a network because of the people
in place so this a network we did was
with David it was again ISM kyriaki
organizing it as producers in a location
where they have networks as well but we
brought our networks we have together
with Trinity blobbin and individual
dancers and things like that
oh but because of that we have kind of
an ownership of the entire group grouped
as the group all of us together and
there's a kind of mutual exchange of
what you're doing there enough overlaps
that you both benefit from what you're
showing so the dance to perform with us
for example could show their individual
little show
at the same time the producers like
alumni and and and
Achilles and kyriaki could expand on
those kind of things as well and we
showed a new version of their donation
project but far develops and and so in a
way it became a home of teaching
learning networking continuing at what's
it's now part of the concept that we do
actually we have changed this year to
having event always as at least one of
that and board I know of us here as well
developing those together with andrea
garcia as well and again kyriaki and
givers are helping as well to develop
now first in London and then in Portugal
this kind of networks of overlaps as I
said it's a perfect thing to have enough
overlaps to work together but it's were
two separate because that's an
interesting thing as well that do you
need the moment when you actually have
your areas of responsibility and take
responsibility and networks only work
then is not the means of convenience and
especially if we talk about politics and
proper protest you have to have your
expertise within this kind of network in
overlaps you can be experimental and
crazy as if much as you want but you
need to have this kind of areas of trust
or overlap where you can really know
what you're doing okay quick teaser for
that
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
right
which brings us to dessert yeah this is
what we want to talk about it's just the
outlook anyway like how do you literally
find your inspiration and your apps now
yeah
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
just to talk quickly what you have there
these are contradictions as you have in
politics often they work as well so
splice and dice
you know I stopped his bikes and dice as
we called it it's - Musa's off a gaga
but like with fruits gels it's
completely without sugar this is a golf
syrup
it's one is mango and chili the other
one is lemon fresh lemon squeezed and
like yeah - which brings in in the
palate literally it touches all the
different kind of things from sweet sour
UNAMI and so on the sharp salty and so
on like just one after the other
if you mix and match those different
tastes and that's what we're interested
in these kind of things the two
inspirations we're talking about way
less of kind of something we just
lecture about they're literally just
idols for the kind of endurance they had
for the courses and their way of talking
so the first being you know the kind of
history so he's of course the most
influential person going against
segregation pre justice everything so I
think does meta like I think worldwide
it's kind of all heroes yeah it's like I
have loads of goats I think I like so I
took several pictures which shown as a
person as well and I think the most
interesting one is a kind of
non-violence activism so of course it's
not Gandhi did similar things India as
well but I think he really in his
lifetime tried to still even prefer gods
like I'd say as we said like 68
generation was there and radical
movements of course he had to justify
his non-violence and therefore it's like
one of our most influential for politics
as a male person as you can see here we
could stay like a boss I check the kind
of which also they'd like to it samples
one the boss boycott has 15 15 didn't
what refers a trip for three because of
a white man and still went to prison so
we know the story and of course he then
was a leader of the boycott so the girl
I see at the end when I read it right
was in prison usually for half a year
because they didn't get the kind of
what is like hearing in the court so
it's like they ejected along of course
can you always try to help until every
court he knows a lot of money and at the
end like after I think three years the
main court decided there's no
segregation in public transport and that
is what so it was not because they
bosses or we're really aggressive
because they were just saying no like
it's like it's everybody sees so it's
like that's why I choose that one the
other one
yeah then he's already pretty five years
later of course he and is like I think
him and seventy five students in North
Carolina sitting in a kind of segregated
like usually segregated lunch area and
they ask for serving they got the denied
and God in prison so him and 34 students
got into prison and luckily so I think I
don't know if he would have done Kennedy
was the kind of present presidential
candidate at the time it was this kind
of he would call when for their that's
why he said it's inhumane to imprison
young students and their teacher so of
course it got really public but I think
the most interesting one did I see they
were like around a month in prison like
say if you know differently and he was
writing the letter which says as well
about that it's right why it's really
important to have this non violent
active events and it's a kind now it's
called the sit-in revolution so to face
of all the students now they were just
sitting in their places and we always
said okay
do it for hospital as well and at the
end as well around two three years they
changed that law as well so it was
before it always said no you have to go
through the colored section I was really
separated so he of course again that's
why I have to Micromax of course as well
it's similar to baader-meinhof so of
course they went against and so they
said like with non-violence you don't
get anything done so that you have to be
more aggressive because still yeah right
compare white and black communities were
so segregated still as far like the kind
of jobs like people could get was really
difficult in the States and so it was of
course important well maybe this both
sides but still fast it's more important
to do it in a kind of positive active
and yeah nice way kind of aggressively
the interesting thing is why both of
these examples are there is this kind of
endurance and if we talk about politics
how long you actually have to do
something with to what the degree of
sacrifice and I mean obviously he got
killed as the peaceful person and I
think this kind of just I mean starting
all the way back into forty 50s like and
and having this kind of calm kind of
directed endurance we know only the
images the big images but like I think
this kind of calmness he brought across
his duteous nosov it his absolute
expertise about every aspect of the
field I think it was what really makes
it a long kind of big example and
inspiration for what we discuss today
because in the end it's a kind of
performance it's a it's a performance
which is not just the event the event is
entire life and I think that and way
beyond the desk why we we sit there here
like like any yes now later fifty almost
later like discussing the results or not
resourcing that and for many things just
like knowing that you have to protests
just by not going along is one of the
most important things
think so many situation everybody
discusses now in private wherever we are
whatever the situations are I think it's
like looking back at this situation
which was so severe and still there
obviously they're not gone but it's
still endurance it goes on and I think
that is something which is prevalent and
important continuing with another
inspiration I don't like my town but I
like the people apparently so the
interesting thing with hers literally
again against all odds she was never a
favorite of anybody at the time if you
want know she was going out with
Heidecker because she liked his spirit
but of course he was a philosopher or
wanted to be the philosophers of the
Nazis almost and so this kind of
contradiction of how you can she
defended I can into a certain degree or
the process of the whole thing during
the trials in Israel but in order to
bring it to a bigger kind of ideas as
well so her political acting was never
convenient but her thinking like on the
other hand and the kind of long
endurance of the human condition is
something every time I read I'm
completely fascinated again and I still
don't get it
entirely and that's the beauty of it as
well the kind of calmness of thinking
about like what are we actually doing
how we are doing it and why we are doing
it and yet again and again it's it's
inspiring stirring through the kind of
the division just of the simple things
of what labor work and the activity is
obviously for creatives is such a kind
of cool moment when you actually the
human condition depends on action or not
doing things like that and if you see
that in separation to the other two
things labor and work where work is
obviously as was to creating something
for but for different means I think and
then only then we actually can start
being in the realm of calm two
contemplation I think it's really for
what we're doing a place like this at
the architecture ization a kind of one
has to read again and again the human
condition of her I think it's just the
most fascinating one and then if you saw
before literally there was a thing like
they were interviewer what's like
talking and talking when she was
smoking and then gave a one-cent an
answered label
yeah the editing was quite impersonal as
it was yeah we actually want to talk
about the concept of the cause is what
we call always out of thick air it's all
about finding kind of initiatives and
overlaps and it's very different to this
kind of process which is just going
forward just talking bit by bit and like
towards a very defined aim and literally
every year for us is like this every
group which comes in is part of this
kind of network and you sitting here
hopefully are part of the network of
finding inspiration finding moments of
kind of after-effects if only one group
or two groups go out and actually start
a little activity because of this and I
have the examples of endurance half the
kind of overlaps of those things and it
keeps on going there's something like
this is it's a success so this on
purpose that why it so many things are a
little bit kind of just about inspiring
rather than lecturing this is how it's
done because that would be good the
complete antidote or what we're actually
talking about so these kind of diagrams
we have around for a long time already
and they really need updating but the
interesting thing is they speaking
opposite to the kind of normal way of
what designers and creative things and I
think that reflects very well back to
both actually all six inspirations is
that it's not a linear process you have
to find possibilities of overlap you
have to find moments where you actually
find just enough in order to start
something and that spirals off in two
different directions I think this was it
[Applause]
