for those of you who don't know me I'm
Julia Foscari I'm an architect I used to
teach here at the AAA until last year a
diploma unit and I'm now a co-directing
with Francesca Vaughn Doreen who's
sitting there in the front row the a
polar lab some of you might have
wondered what was this sort of
thundering sound in the background as we
were all coming in the lecture hall well
that's the soundscape of the
southernmost continent and territory of
our planet the seventh the seven the
seven continents often neglected by our
collective consciousness but also to
make a a banal example from the Google
search engine which conveniently omits
Antarctica from its normal general
worldview and if you zoom in
relentlessly trying to find information
in Google Maps you'll actually still
find a pixelated collage of images that
reminds us of the blank Imperial maps
denouncing and equivocal II the striking
contradiction between the hyper mediated
image we have of Antarctica and on the
other hand the troubles and ignorance
that in a way surrounds in but the
sounds could also be interpreted as a
territory's response or in a way lamb
the lament to the anthropogenic climate
change as it sort of amplifies and
echoes the sound of the crevasses of the
formation of crevasses and of the
carving of ice that we all know is one
of the quintessential markers of climate
change tonight is the real honor to
introduce to you an architect that has
accepted the challenge of building on
this living ice a colleague who has
understood that human presence in
Antarctica which is an achievement which
is approaching its 200th anniversary in
2020 is essential to be in the position
of building accurate scientific models
that hours for reliable predictions of
the future of our planet and as
therefore collaborating with countries
and their respective scientific
organizations to build scientific
stations on the continent I will refrain
here from sort of indulging too long of
an explanation on the extraordinary site
in which he Bowden and his team has been
working on and operates daily but I'd
still like to show a few diagrams which
reproduce as some of the students I see
here in the in the room tonight I within
the context of the recent a polar lab
workshop we conducted in collaboration
with accurate
I'm tired to go really briefly is as you
can see the continent is almost as large
as Australia it is its territories
defined geographically by the
convergence which is ultimately apparent
where the cold currents and waters of
Antarctica meet the slightly warmer
waters of the sub Antarctica and
politically it is defined by the
latitude south of the 60th parallel the
National planes that some of us might
remember that we're done by made by
seven countries between 1908 and 1942
are somehow suspended since the signing
of the Antarctic Treaty which is
effective since 1961 here you see sort
of a first attempt at diagramming its
operation but it basically is a pinnacle
of the sort of it's a fragile governance
system which prescribes that Antarctic
as a territory which is devoted to
science solely to science there's no
military activity which is allowed and
no resource extraction neither but doing
these sort of past years there are 53
nations that have in the meantime in
race the Antarctic Treaty system leaving
approximately 143 countries still and
represented the territorial footprint of
these from national investments is
manifested in 277 research stations that
you can see punctuated the continent
mainly on its coastline but also in the
middle of the territory and these most
of these have been rebuilt or extended
throughout the years as this timeline
attempts to show and most of them also
have been built in proximity to historic
sites and monuments which are marks here
on the on the map and and their
respective protected areas some of these
include obviously the sort of heroic era
Hut's that you might be aware of
Shackleton and Scot just name a few but
they're also a rather eclectic list of
other artifacts which are a part of this
preservation list and yet all of the
stations vary or most of them vary in
typology it depends primarily on the
altitude where they are located the
climatic condition and obviously the
ground upon or the ice upon in some
cases and very rare cases ice sheets as
we'll see with you tonight upon which
they are built they also vary in size
and program
specifications as well as number of
buildings you can see on the upper left
for example McMurdo Station it's an aus
station it's arguably a small town or a
small city it has many many buildings in
total there are a thousand two hundred
eighty nine buildings in Antarctica
which account for a total surface area
of approximately 211 square meters so
it's a three roof just to give a scale
comparison and all in all they can sort
of host up to four thousand eight
hundred people during the summer months
but how do these researchers live how
can architecture provide more than a
temperature controlled environment that
allows for survival in such an extreme
condition as a side note you know the
lowest recorded temperature in
Antarctica was a minus 89 degrees and
the highest wind speed 327 kilometers
per hour and again how can architecture
mitigate the symptoms of what is called
polar depression or so-called polar
depression I also the psychological and
physical disorders that emerge or can
emerge through long exposures at
darkness during the winter time and
isolation and intense cohabitation
models so all of these questions were
questions certainly answered opposed
within Hugh Broughton scheme and
addressed while building Halle six which
we will certainly see tonight for the
United Kingdom juan-carlos first for
Spain well a redesign or designing
commandante for us for brazil and jang
bogo for Korea and rethinking at present
the Scott base for New Zealand and
expanding it as I just understood and
rather again for the for the UK but
given the trajectory of Anthropocene and
the sort of ever-increasing possibility
that humankind might have to inhabit
exponentially in hospital territories I
believe it's really a true pleasure to
have tonight the opportunity to invite
Huw Broughton to share with us his
experience on Antarctica the
unconventional brief that he was
confronted with offer new perspectives
to our discipline and encourage the
development of experimental prototypes
of which here at the AAA especially
we're immensely fond of that so it's a
very real honor to invite you up in the
stage now to contribute to not only to
launch the a polar lab session and
conversations
but also to contribute to the new
canonical history series of the a please
join me in welcoming thank you so much
that's such a nice introduction and I
actually have to admit I learned quite a
lot during that I was really cool as
well and some beautiful beautiful
diagrams as well of all the different
stations that yeah I could imagine will
be very useful in some of our
presentations and months to come
so yeah my my brief this evening is to
talk to you about the extreme challenge
of building in Antarctica drawing upon
some of the experience we've had over
the last where's now 15 years since we
very first became involved in the halle
project and then working on other
projects since of course I'm sure you're
all aware Antarctica is the coldest
windiest and driest of the continents on
earth and yet holds 90% of the world's
fresh water within within its region and
in this is in fact an aerial view of the
Antarctic taken by NASA and you can see
those areas which are green which hold
land underneath and those areas which
are light blue and darker blue which are
essentially ice shelves which is
thousands of year old ice frozen between
the land masses and there is a sort of
popular thing that you can do looking up
on the internet or what happens if all
that ice were to disappear and this
would be the archipelago that we would
be left with the reality is that if all
that ice melted then sea levels in the
world would rise by around 60 meters but
the safe aspect of that is that it would
take in excess of five thousand years
for all that ice to melt so it's not
something that will any of us probably
experience but what we may experience is
the demise of large sections and in
particular the Western Antarctic Ice
Sheet which is one of the most dynamic
in the Antarctic continent and which is
held in place by a series of glaciers
that if they were to disappear would
allow the ice sheet itself to start
moving
great speed into the ocean and that in
itself could lead to sea level rises of
around three meters which may not sound
so much in the context of 60 but it
certainly would have a significant
effect around the world from our own
perspective we've been very lucky to be
involved in a series of different stages
stations at different levels most of
them have involved some degree of
architectural competition and probably
more than half of those we've lost so it
might look like a lot but actually in
the end I think yeah there is certainly
a good chunk that we have been involved
with but others which we which we've
spent months and months preparing
proposals for that have then led to
other people building them that one I
wanted to focus on in particular is the
British Station Halle Halle station
we designed Halle six that's because
there were five before most of which
disappeared they were either buried or
the last one had to be dismantled Halle
is a really unusual location it's on a
floating ice shelf most of the bases in
the Antarctic are founded on ground it's
at 75 degrees south which means it's
about 900 miles from the South Pole this
is the view of the previous station
Halle v so Halle five by the time it was
dismantled comprised around four or five
structures but the base of the base
components were these three buildings
the largest one on the top right was
called the laws building and that was
the main sort of habitat of Halle five
so that's where all the bedrooms were
the dining recreational spaces and many
of the office spaces and the other two
buildings the Piggott and Simpson
platforms or where the science was
conducted so one did science sort of
near ice science and one did atmospheric
and outer atmospheric science and it was
one of the kind of key social issues of
the base was that there were two groups
of scientists studying relatively
related subjects but working totally
independently and that was a alongside
the technical challenges one of the sort
of
social challenges that our project
presented but the sort of great sort of
geographic and environmental challenge
of Halle however is that it is on a
floating ice shelf so that's ice that's
150 meters thick which has flowed off
the main continent of Antarctica and is
supported by the Weddell Sea underneath
and which was moving at quite some rate
at a rate of around 400 meters per annum
so is a very very dynamic site and
although there are two other stations
which are located on ice shelves that
they were moving at fractions of that
speed so this this diagram just explains
the concept of the ice shelf where the
ice has flowed off the main continent
supported on the ocean and it also
explains one of the other key
environmental challenges of building at
Halle which is very very high wind
speeds because you get cold air building
up on the center of the plateau of the
Antarctic and then their air as it drops
down towards the ocean then picks up
speeds and creates very high winds known
as katabatic winds which then carry with
them ice and snow particles that cause
massive massive drifting around anything
that's left on the surface so this is
the view of Halle v so it's a very
pragmatic structure more akin perhaps to
something you might find in an oil field
supported on 20 steel legs this was the
main habitat building that were a jacked
up every year to keep it raised above
the snow the snow levels rise at Halle
by around one and a half metres every
year is a consequence of deposition but
mostly as a result of drift and it was a
single-story timber structure this was
one of the science buildings actually
this was the last time this one was
lifted before it was eventually
decommissioned and quite lonely in a way
sitting in that huge expanse of the
brunt eyes shelf just flat white ice
pretty much as far as the eye can see
so the challenges of building in the
Antarctica are obviously pretty apparent
the coldness in particular
temperatures at Halle go down to around
minus 55 degrees Celsius so there are
other there are other stations that are
colder bus stop station for example I
think has had temperatures down to at
least minus 90 and at the South Pole
also there are temperatures in the minus
80s but minus 55 is still pretty cold
everything will freeze your eyebrows
your breath everything at that
temperature in the middle of winter the
snow and ice will freeze solid on
anything you leave outside so your
vehicles that you're using in the summer
become totally unusable in the middle of
the winter and then in the summer when
the temperatures rise so also the
regularity of high winds increases and
temperatures at Halle an asari wind
speeds at Halle in excess of 100 miles
an hour or around 150 kilometers are now
and not uncommon and they will carry
significant drift with them so they'll
pick up ice particles and snow particles
and they will bury just anything that's
left on the surface so if you leave a
small tool for your construction that
will get buried if you leave a vehicle
eventually that will get buried and if
you even leave a building eventually
that will get buried so you need to come
up with strategies for how to deal with
that as I said the combination of this
of the wind and the drifting snow and
also precipitation of snow mean that
meant that at Halle there was one and a
half meters of snow every year and that
the only real benefit of that is that if
you do leave things on the surface then
you create little mounds or drifts of
snow just behind which a really good fun
if you're just practicing your downhill
skiing and this for example is our
structural engineer just on his first
ever outing on skis hopefully oh not
found oh well you're gonna have to miss
out on that do you think the media may
be miss connected somehow
yeah um maybe we'll try one of the
others later on that's it it says not
found or some reason doesn't matter
we'll carry him okay doesn't matter
anyway
so every every year at Halle five it was
necessary to Jack the building up to
account for the rising snow level of one
and a half meters and the way that that
was done is that they would create
baskets using scaffolding chi brand each
individual leg and then there were small
electric engines that would then be put
on the legs and they would just Jack the
steelwork up within within that leg and
you would have to put bolts in then Jack
it a tiny bit more put the put the bolts
in move them up jacket some more and it
was a really laborious process took at
least two or three days just for this
building and add H for the other other
buildings but involve every single
person on base all science had to stop
all other operations had to stop
obviously you're working with steel
bolts and things when we went on a visit
we had to help with this process and it
was really time consuming and extremely
cold fine when the sun is shining on you
but the Sun tracks around the building
and when the Sun moves off then you get
incredibly cold when you're doing this
process so there's a challenge of cold
there's a challenge of wind there's also
the challenge of social isolation living
in such a remote location and in halle
five these were the interiors so I don't
think there had been that many
architects involved in the creation of
halle five it was fairly institutional
it was also divided up into a lot of
cellular rooms so for example you'd have
the TV watching room on the right hand
side and I always really admired this
because they would buy book sets of
different things and then they would
just watch one episode a week they would
never binge on box sets they would be
rigorous the other things they had the
bar and the bar was also a separate
cellular space and that creates a lot of
social issues with people you know
particularly in the winter and just
spending all day drinking in the bar and
then you'd get other people who would
feel really disconnected from the group
felt unable to enter these rooms when
there were fun things going on and they
would just walk up and down that
corridor and develop what was called the
Hallie stare so there's quite a lot of
kind of psychological challenges of
living in this extreme environment which
needed to be addressed in any new design
added to that of course in the Antarctic
it is dark for a large portion of the
year so she the Sun doesn't rise above
the horizon at Hallie for a hundred and
five days in every year at that point
the station is totally isolated because
the sea ice will have frozen for up to
200 miles out from the continent and
there's no way to bring ships in and
it's way too cold to fly planes in so
the 15 people on base are if even though
they may have contact with the outside
world are certainly physically isolated
and the only escape they have from the
station is to go on a small trips to
visit their neighbors so they reached
the edge of the ice shelf then they rope
up abseil down and then they go and see
the people who live nearby and there is
a really massive colony of emperor
penguins and just around five to ten
miles away from the well was the site of
Halle five a little bit further from
Halle six so it's a challenging location
everything that is needed to supply the
base has to be delivered by ship the
ship can only get close to the station
in the summer months so around about
Christmas time this was the British
logistics special the Ernest Shackleton
arriving at the edge of the sea ice then
unloading everything on to the sea ice
and then from where it's dragged up to
the ice shelf where the bulldozers are
used to manipulate the ice to create
ramps so that then everything can be
then dragged up onto the ice shelf
itself and across to Halle the sea ice
is very very fragile it's around two
meters thick
and you can't put anything on it that
weighs more than around nine tons so
people always say oh why did you not
build the station in its entirety and
deliver it it's because it all had to be
delivered on to the sea-ice and the
maximum load was nine tonnes which is
only the fraction of a size of a
building you'll see later but one of the
modules that Hallie weighed around 100
tons so everything had to be broken down
there are some places where the ice
shelf does come close down to the sea
but they are a very long way away from
the site of the station this is one of
those it's a creek called n9 which was
occasionally used for resupply in terms
of plain the station is so isolated and
there's only a an ice runway which is
not constantly tracked over by
bulldozers so only planes with skis can
land there and generally only these
small twin otters which carry about five
people the flights may be sort of four
or five flights a year from the other
British station brother so again adding
to the sense of isolation at the base so
against that whole background of
isolation cold and wind you might think
well why would the British Antarctic
Survey want to be working in a place
like Hallie and excuse the crudeness but
it's pretty simple it's because the
science that is conducted in many of
these research stations is leading our
understanding of things as basic as
global warming so for example it was in
the 1980s that three British scientists
first discovered the hole in the ozone
layer at Halle which subsequently led to
the Montreal Protocol banning the use of
CFCs which is probably to this date one
of the most important pieces of
environmental legislation conducted
globally
halli also there is significant research
carried out into the interaction between
the Earth's atmosphere
the outer atmosphere and the Sun into
magnetism and it's part of a whole
network studying global weather which
has significant impact as I say on our
understanding
of how the worst the Earth's weather
systems are operating but around about
2000 the major issue was discovered and
the brunt ice shelf on which Hallie five
was located is very dynamic it's flowing
out to sea but it's lodged in a couple
of places at the top of that red line it
was lodged against some rocks a rocky
outcrop called the rumple's and at the
bottom it became close to where it was
connected to the main continent and
crevasses were seen to be forming in
those locations with the prediction that
a huge iceberg the size of a small
English county would probably break off
from the main Antarctic landmass and
leave Hallie five on the wrong side and
of course it had its legs frozen in the
ice making it more or less impossible to
move possible to remove but not possible
to move and as a consequence and the
British Antarctic de Survey decided to
hold it was a first for them and
architectural design competition for the
new station so they put out an
international call they had around four
multidisciplinary teams to come up with
combined engineering and architectural
solutions and they had around 90 entries
and initially it was quite funny because
at the time we were just a practice of
four people and we were working out of a
small shed in West London and I remember
hearing it on the radio about the
requirements for the architect that they
were looking for at the time and they
said they had to be multinational
multidisciplinary world leaders in
sustainability world leaders in
prefabrication and I remember listening
to all four of them and thinking well
that's so straightforward because I'm
not able to do any of those things but
still I went along to the launch and I
met an engineer from AECOM who many of
you may know is a big global engineering
consultancy and the engineer there at
that time they weren't into
architectural competitions in any way
and he sort of pleaded with me to enter
with us and I pleaded with him to let
then lead the bid which eventually they
did and we were really lucky we found an
engineer based in Colorado Springs in
the US who had spent his whole life
working on the American polar program
and we paid for him to come over to the
UK for 48 hours and he gave us a kind of
crash course in all the things that you
should and shouldn't do in Antarctic
design and he made sure that our sort of
naturally ventilated building with wide
opening windows bit the dust as quickly
as possible and eventually we got the
kind of cool basis of a design sort of
together and it was I guess from that
springboard that we eventually won the
competition our designs I thought it's
worth just positioning the building in
the context of Antarctic architecture
we're having a really interesting
conversation just before this about the
date that Antarctic architecture starts
and it's a very difficult one to
position but certainly some of these old
Hut's are quite unique in their ambience
but also in the preservation of their
fabric but also of the elements within
them so this is Scots Antarctic cup from
his first an expedition which was
actually an uninsulated building so cold
in fact that when they Anne had put it
up they found that they couldn't stand
living in it so they actually lived on
the ship the discovery and use this just
really as a storage facility but it's
preserved fantastically it has actually
undergone significant conservation by
the Antarctic Heritage Trust but still
contains many of the objects from their
original expedition
this is Shackleton's Hut which is also
on Ross Island which is a lot more sort
of has a much pleasant sort of more
pleasant demeanor about it I guess was
insulated with cork and there guys will
slept with in a communal space they
cooked in within the communal space and
it was from here that he set off to the
South Pole reaching within 90 miles of
the South Pole before turning back the
met on the bottom right there that's
Mount Erebus which is an active volcano
and then this is the Scott Hut from
which Scott did reach the South Pole
that didn't return
the huts at Cape Evans which is again a
timber construction the timber
beautifully preserved but again it has
undergone significant conservation and
then more recently particularly from
1957 and there was the International
Geophysical Year when a number of
buildings were erected in the Antarctic
to facilitate science this one was built
as part of the Transantarctic expedition
when the British and the New Zealanders
were intending to kind of wear the New
Zealanders were going to help the
British to cross over from one side of
Antarctica to the other the New Zealand
portion of the expedition was led by Sir
Edmund Hillary shortly after he'd
climbed Mount Everest and he was so full
of energy that he actually reached the
South Pole before the British and he
built the Scot base which is the most
remarkable structure they decided to
build it and 357 days later they had
fully completed it and it was a series
of interconnected Hut's connected with
tubes of which one of them has been
recently restored Hut a you can see in
its original colors on the top left
there and on the top right with its
original colors many of the things from
with inside the building still
beautifully preserved and from the same
era is the first Halle Halle one which
was built as a very simple timber Hut
here we're seeing it probably around
three years after its construction so
the slow level has risen one and a half
meters per year is now up at the eaves
they continued at living in it for quite
a few years after this by climbing down
shafts into the building until
eventually the ice crushed it they then
decided well because their buildings are
getting buried by the ice the best thing
would be to design buildings to be
buried so Halle three on the top left
and Halle four were both built as tubes
which could be buried by the ice but
they had very very short lifespans
primarily because the ice on the Brunton
eye shelf is so dynamic and moves in a
way like water and the ice just crushed
the buildings and you also have to just
imagine what it would be like having to
climb down to where you live down there
in one of those tubes imagine the smell
of the sewage of the generators of the
old food no views out of the building it
was a pretty inhospitable place to live
this is actually the last view of Halle
3 when it was crushed by the ice shelf
and then spewed out into the ocean this
was actually seen by people on the bass
ship around about 15 or 16 years ago
when they saw the remains of Halle 3
being spewed out into the ocean more
recently there have been and some some
more dramatic and contemporary
structures built in the Antarctic
they're probably the best known of all
is the Buckminster Fuller dome at the
South Pole which was a geodesic dome
within which structures were placed and
which was removed only around about 15
years ago the most recent generation of
Antarctic buildings have all tended to
be elevated so they don't get buried by
rising snow levels and so they allow the
wind to flow underneath minimizing the
amount of drift and therefore the amount
of management that's needed with
bulldozers pushing snow around the place
here are just a collection on the bottom
right is the Belgian based Princess
Elizabeth which is a summer only station
and pertains to be a zero carbon station
on the bottom left there is no Maya 3
which is the recently completed German
station which has a very sophisticated
hydraulic system for lifting it up above
the rising snow level the top right is
the American base Scott Amundsen which
also has a system for raising it above
the snow level but although the snow
rise at Scott Amundsen is fairly minimal
only around 300 millimeters per annum
and then on the top left is Concordia
which is the French Italian base and I
am reassured that the French and the
Italians they don't have one is ones and
the other is the Italians actually they
do kind of meet and do stuff together in
the two buildings but the challenge with
Halle always was that not only did it
have to deal with the rising snow levels
but it also
to be relocatable so that in the future
it wouldn't disappear on another iceberg
well so so was the theory I'll come to
that a little later but there but the
point is that it needed to be
relocatable so we had to break with this
concept of a big structure on hydraulic
legs and divide it down into a series of
modules each on hydraulic legs and each
supported on giant skis so it could be
disconnected from a line and moved to a
safer place in land if ever there was
the threat of the site disappearing on a
giant iceberg so we came up with this
concept of standard modules of 160
square meters each each weighing between
80 to 100 tons which could be used for
science they could be used for office
spaces they can be used for bedrooms
there's eight bedrooms in each one of
these modules the bedrooms are all bunk
bedrooms so that in the winter everybody
gets their own room and in the summer
you share a room the idea with the
bedrooms was that they should be
reasonably comfortable but not so
comfortable that people kind of hide
away from the community because you want
to try and bring the small group
together to support each other and then
just with simple things like good
natural lighting good artificial
lighting so we worked with our lighting
designers and with Philips to develop an
early version of a kind of sad lamp with
an alarm clock function to help reset
people's biorhythms boost their
serotonin production and so they don't
suffer so much from the winter blues we
also worked with Angela Wright a color
psychologist who helped develop for us a
special palette of colors for use within
the building again to try and address
issues to do with seasonal affective
disorder and we then exploited what
natural light there was particularly in
the summer when you get great natural
light to make sure that even though the
buildings might have to be arranged in a
line to respond to the prevailing wind
and the potential for drift
that nonetheless each one of those
buildings because you know in a very
simple architectural way become a kind
of destination in its own right
so we widened out the circulation we use
the color to define one module over
another and we also raised that the
ceilings to allow natural light through
the roof so you get these kind of well
lit hearts to each one of the buildings
and then as you get to the transitions
the circulation narrows down and then
there are points at those transitions
when you can then look out onto the ice
scape all around so the building's
actually narrow down for multiple
reasons a so you can get the views out B
for aerodynamics and C so the linking
pieces between could be kept as small as
possible because they were very
expensive to develop the the modules all
have a base structure which is a steel
space frame so that all the building
services can run through that zone and
be kept within the insulated envelope
and then the perimeter structure there
has a perimeter superstructure so that
within the buildings all the partitions
can be reorganized in the future because
the building has an expected lifespan of
25 years but the science programs change
every five years so you want to be able
to reconfigure the interiors on a fairly
regular basis the same modular approach
was used for energy so we have two of
these energy modules which contain the
generators which create electrical power
and the heating and we have two so that
if one breaks down then you can rely on
the other and they contain alongside the
power generation they have things like
water production plant sewage treatment
plant fire suppression systems waste
treatment facilities that kind of thing
and here you can see some of the
services running through that space
frame substructure to the buildings and
the idea of being on the hydraulics is
that when it came to relocation each
module could be lowered down on its
hydraulics and then dragged using the
skis using bulldozers to a new location
where the station could be reestablished
so through that sort of whole concept or
methodology we were able to accommodate
all the
mints of our brief for science
facilities for living speck for sleeping
spaces working spaces but the one thing
we couldn't accommodate was the sort of
primary living space we wanted a place
where you could have the dining
recreational facilities the kitchens
where everybody could come together so
for that we developed a special
two-story module weighing now up to 200
tons and arranged on two floors which
had open plan space for dining for the
bar on the lower level and then quieter
cellular spaces on the upper level for
watching TV internet access the gym and
so on and this was a drawing from the
competition stage where we recognized
that all these people working in the
Antarctic were really into the outdoors
so we thought I will give them a
climbing wall to go from the lower level
to the upper level and then it was at
that point that the Health and Safety
Officer from British Antarctic Survey
pointed out the proximity of the bar and
a vote was taken on whether it would be
climbing wall or bar so the climbing
wall bit the dust unfortunately this is
the arrangement so the building is
arranged in a straight line because the
wind the predominant wind blows 95% of
the time from the east-northeast so the
buildings are in a straight line so that
the wind blows underneath the modules
and then creates drift on the leeward
side that you then don't have to build
those and it's split in two so that if
ever there's a disaster on one side
you've got somewhere to escape to until
you can be rescued and as as it could
take many many months to be rescued you
need decent facilities in which to stay
safe so on the left-hand side there are
two science modules and an energy module
and on the right-hand side is the kind
of the living space and another run of
the energy modules so there's at that
split with a bridge link the idea
originally of that was that it would be
just a sort of operations and
maintenance but actually the scientists
even at minus 55 degrees Celsius in
their t-shirts and shorts will do the 25
meter dash from one side to the other as
part of their kind of like induction to
working at Hallie
this just shows some of the wind
engineering that we went through to
predict where the drifts would take
place the idea of the snow management is
that this is the profile of the snow
that you'd expect after a year so you'd
have one and a half meter of
accumulation on the right-hand side and
a big drift occurring on the leeward
side because the wind has blown
underneath the module and is creating
this big drift on the leeward side and
then to raise the buildings up what
happens is the bulldozer comes along
pushes snow under each foot and then the
hydraulics is used to jack it up and
then the bulldozer pushes snow
underneath them now it's ready again for
another year of high winds and
deposition in terms of the envelope for
the buildings one of the things we was
always impressed upon us is that in the
Antarctic what you don't want to do is
be inventing things for the first time
it's fine to come up with innovative
ways of combining existing concepts but
it's not a great idea to use the
Antarctic as a guinea pig for something
because the people who are there have no
recourse to any other form of safety if
something goes wrong they are stuck
there nonetheless we wanted to push the
boundaries to reduce weights and also
improve performance so for our envelope
we looked around and we see that sort of
some of the more cutting-edge stations
in the Antarctic we're using glass
reinforced plastics for cladding systems
the benefit of which is that it could be
made in big panels and erected quickly
and these are just some examples as a
South African base at Marian island the
French Italian base at Concordia the
South African base of the bottom right
sits on this dramatic escarpment that
seneye 4 and then that was a small
summer sleeping module at the previous
nymeyer nomar - I'm not going to go into
that the principle of the base however
is that it would be really well
insulated with very low levels of air
infiltration it would use a vacuum
drainage system to significantly reduce
the amount of water usage so that
flushing the toilet takes only one and a
half liters of water compared to nine
lead
in a standard toilet we'd have sewage
treatment systems which meant that the
sludge could just be incinerated and
otherwise the clean water could be
dropped back in the ice
we used combined heat and power
generators so that the heat that's given
off to make electricity is used to heat
the building so every step along the way
we were using existing technologies but
in new ways to really drive the
sustainability of the base and above all
drive down fuel usage and that's been
one of the great successes of halle is
reduced water usage and reduced fuel
usage per square meter compared to the
previous station so in terms of the
construction before we started out on
site we need to do loads of testing
because it's one of those places if it
goes wrong then you are really screwed
for a long time so much so that you may
have to abandon the whole summer season
of construction until you can sort your
problems out and come back the next year
so one of the key things of course with
halle was proving the relocation
strategy so we had this test sledge made
and loaded it up with cranes had tried
the skis in different formats tried
pulling it with the bulldozers and then
when we were happy they're met
determined one of the key elements of
the design which was the positioning and
the size of the skis we had loads of
samples made of the cladding to test the
its ability to resist the high winds and
the sort of sandblasting effect of the
ice but also a thermal shock and then
finally we built test modules so this is
one of the standard blue modules where
we put the frame up we put all the
cladding on loaded it up with tanks of
water to simulate the actual finished
weight and then tried out the hydraulics
and then we did the same with the big
red module and this is it and it just
shows the benefits because you might see
just to the left of the window there's a
kind of panel out of alignment and so we
were able to strip that off we get it
reset put it back on again
very easily in Cape Town where the
cladding was made but it would have been
a disaster if we discovered that in the
Antarctic this this photo was quite fun
because literally just as I was taking
it I heard this massive big crash
and I thought oh my god one of the
panels has fallen off on the rear of the
building so I went rushing round and in
fact what I discovered was that there
was two cars rubbernecking the building
and they hadn't noticed that they were
actually on a collision course and just
smashed into each other and it was a
very odd sight in an in a sort of
low-rise residential district in Cape
Town so once everything was ready
everything was a brought together in the
docks
in Cape Town loaded onto a Russian
ice-strengthened cargo vessel beyond
Burma where it was then sailed for 15
days across the roughest seas in the
world until it arrived at the edge of
the sea ice where the largest component
the space frame of one of the modules
weighing nine tons and with some special
skis and smaller legs attached to it was
unloaded and then dragged using a big
plant across the sea ice up onto the ice
shelf and here you can see some of the
first steps of the construction so the
top left that's what arrived at the site
and then it was lifted by crane onto
some shipping containers and then you're
able to insert the hydraulic legs and
the skis which act as the means of
relocation but also the foundation and
those couldn't be installed to start
with because they're really heavy and
then from that position the
prefabricated floors were installed then
we instead inserted prefabricated
services all the generators and the fuel
tanks went on then the superstructure
some of the other buildings we had all
prefabricated rooms so we really made
the most of prefabrication on this
project as we absolutely could and one
of the bizarre things when the building
finished and I did the snagging is there
were just no surprises because we had
seen absolutely everything in factories
around the world beforehand here you can
see some of the modules in a line so it
was it was made next to the site of
Halle five so that the construction crew
could use the existing base to sleep in
and for eating and also the benefit from
the use of the British Antarctic Survey
dr. and so on once all the interior
prefabricated rooms were loaded
then the superstructure went on and then
large cladding panels and this is one of
the largest going on so it's a whole
sidewall of one of the modules which is
around three and a half meters high and
around ten and a half meters long
all with the glazing installed triple
glazing with very high degrees of sort
of solar coating to stop glare from the
ice and here you can see the big red
module with some quite delicate delicate
construction going on here it's a big
big glazing element to the center of the
building that the buildings were built
in a way like you would fabricate a car
so we had a team doing steel work
another team doing cladding and then one
team dedicated to the red building and
and then eventually moved into the
different phases of the interior fit out
and then when the building's had all of
their exteriors finished and all of the
interiors probably sort of 50% finished
and they were linked up to bulldozers
dropped down on the hydraulics and then
dragged 15 miles to the eventual site
where they were all linked together and
that's the view of the big red module
and moving off to site and Monday
morning arrives it's gonna move from
this location I think the difficult part
will be actually bringing it into line
for the 160 tons we definitely over to
just out of our comfort zone slightly
good team on the job
anybody can shift it weekend
surprisingly it pulls out relatively
easily for 200-ton building
[Music]
so in a minute the camera pans round and
on the horizon you can see a little dark
speck are they just off to the top right
and that is the site of Halle six where
the module was headed they had had to
drive across this route multiple times
to compact the ice so that it would take
the load and they had these three
bulldozers behind for two reasons there
in that formation one so that if the
building gets grounded they can help
push it out but also the head of
vehicles was a massive Top Gun fan so he
took that opportunity for and here we
see all the modules linked up together
and now ready for occupation so this is
a photo taken in around 2012 when the
station was complete and that's what it
looks like on a normal day this is what
the average walk back from the vehicle
workshop for lunch is like so fairly
lonely and a little inhospitable the
connections between the modules are
flexible so to account for sort of
settlement but also as you lift one
building up next to another and we have
we've got these made by a company that
normally make connections between train
carriages and they make them in the
Arctic to go down to around minus 50 and
so they have a micro file insulation in
this is within the actual space frame
itself sitting in checking all the
services just a view looking down on the
building and this this is the South End
which is the science modules the
southern most of the buildings actually
has an observatory on it which is for
checking the weather and it's also where
measurements of ozone are taken so this
is within Observatory where they've
continuing the measurements of ozone
which which the depletion remains but
the level of depletion is decreasing and
that scientists there is using a Dobson
spectrophotometer to carry out those
measurements
this is within some of the science
spaces so it's a it's a it's a fairly
robust working kind of space very
flexible you need to be able to add
science equipment take it away
according to what experiment is being
carried out at the time in terms of the
water production at halle five it used
to be a bit of a team bonding event
because you would have to go out with
shovels and you would shovel the snow
down a hole into a kind of buried giant
kettle to create all the water that was
needed for washing and for drinking
which was kind of quite good fun on a
summer's day it wasn't so good fun
in a hundred mile an hour wind when
people had to wear helmets to cope with
the blast from the ice in the new
station it's much simpler there are
these two tanks they have a hydraulic
lid the snow is pushed in it melts
there's two of them so that if one fails
then you can keep the other keep the
other one going the MT stands for melt
tank but only afterwards realized how
ironic it was that a water tank should
be called empty so we have a vacuum
drainage system like you get on an
aircraft or on or on trains which saves
an enormous amount of water this is
within the plant rooms where the sewage
is incinerate the sewage waste is
incinerated and the fresh water to get
them just be dropped back into the sea
this is the main living module so the
white glass is actually a highly
insulated glass using nano gel so it has
a very good level of thermal resistance
and then the black glass is actually the
the clear glass giving views out dining
spaces the darling spaces have to be
designed so they suit as a winter
population of sixty or seventy people
but don't sort of overall you when
there's only 15 of you in the winter
there's a pool table this is within that
glazed space and that's within that same
glazed space so that the bottom
triangles are actually clear views out
onto the US and then there's a staircase
within a timber cylinder that rises up
to the upper level the timber cylinder
is lined in Lebanese cedar because it's
one of the fever
that gives off a sort of pleasant smell
and so we're always conscious of the
sensory deprivation 'z that people have
in the Antarctic and smell is definitely
one of those and the royal family of
course is another one so we made sure
there was a picture of the Queen this is
the spiral stair leading up to the upper
level and then here one of the quieter
spaces for watching TV or playing games
and so on and then as you come along to
the north end of the station there's a
sort of office and control spaces so
this is the air traffic control and
operations hub there's a dr. surgery
with an ability to carry out small
operations up to an appendix the doctor
also is trained as a dentist these are
the corridors with natural light coming
through those holes in in the roof there
and that you can see the use of the
color and then here's one of the
bedrooms so with a desk plenty of
storage the colors again all derived
from our consultation with the color
psychologist all with a view but then at
the same time with a blackout blind so
you can darken the space in the summer
when you have 24-hour sunlight and then
this is the process of just jacking the
modules at the end of the summer
next the modules are dug out and
preparations for jacking the jacking
frame is brought in
[Music]
[Music]
snow isn't filmed under the ski
skis then plays back onto the heap of
snow this continues all the way along
the length of the station once all the
legs are up the first jacking takes
place
[Music]
then the process is repeated for the
second jekking and the melt tank is
placed back in and there's the view of
the station fully elevated ready for
another winter and here we see in the
middle of the winter so you can see the
rising snow level on the right-hand side
and the big drift on the left-hand side
this is what it feels like that - for -
someone with a boiling kettle of water
just throwing it from that bridge link
into the air and you can see just
instantly breezes this is a view of the
station during the Queen's Diamond
Jubilee where the southernmost Britons
played croquet underneath the building
in he was about minus 35 and blowing at
about 50 miles an hour they also played
cricket on the bottom right this is the
station emerging out of the out of the
winter so covered in a hall frost which
is a very good sign because it means
it's not losing any heat out of the
envelope so for us as a practice it's
been very good as a demonstration of
British innovation publicity is a book
the book is actually on sale if you're
interested afterwards it's also been on
a coin and a stamp a coin however that
only has legal tender in the British
Antarctic Territory so fairly limited
appeal I guess and then and then this is
the best accolade for any architect I
believe and I honestly found this on the
Internet just while strolling around the
station I discovered that a man in
Grimsby who really loves the building
has actually had it tattooed on his arm
probably of course the best thing for an
architect is that it leads to other
projects and I just I won't spend so
much time on those but I just show you
very quickly where else we've been
working in the ant
Arctic the first first project after
Hallie we had was designing a new base
for Spain at Juan Carlos on Livingston
Island which is further north than
Hallie just off the Antarctic Peninsula
it's a summer only station it gets very
high snowfall in the winter up to 3
meters but then in the summer all the
snow melts the wind blows in every
single direction there are quite rare
plants or lichens and mosses which grow
around the site there's also a very
fragile ecology large colonies of Gentoo
penguins elephant seals the mosses I've
mentioned and then you get regular
visits by leopard seals and whales out
in the bay so it sort of very different
parameters within which to be designing
albeit still very cold and logistically
challenging and the seals and they just
get absolutely everywhere they will sit
on the fuel pipes they'll come up to the
building they'll come into the buildings
if you don't shut the door the base also
has neighbours so there's a Bulgarian
base which is about 2 or 3 miles by boat
round the coast and you can see bottom
right that's that's me visiting the
vulgarians that's after we drunk half
their store of raki for the winter so
it's another time I'm actually probably
not safe to go back in the boat at that
point and then these were our concepts
for the station so it wasn't going to be
moved it was going to stay in location
the wind as I say blows in every
direction so it's still elevated but to
account for this change in the snow
level it has an entrance at first floor
level but also an entrance at ground
floor level and then arranged in three
arms one for living and two sleeping and
here you can see some of the earlier
CGI's that we developed with a separate
Science Building
so that that provided a point of refuge
if ever there was a disaster in the main
habitat and then the three wings
connected with this central core so
everybody passes through that as a sort
of not only a device for joining the
buildings but also for a promoter
social interaction amongst all the
residents and with big glazed elevations
so that people could really make the
most of the spectacular scenery that
surrounds the site originally we had in
tended for the building to be an
entirely glass fiber structure so using
more of the technology that's used for
example in creating some of the new
generation of airliner but again that
was an untried form of structure within
the Antarctic and in the end the
construction was along the same lines as
a Hallie with a steel frame glass fiber
cladding so this is some of the smaller
buildings around the perimeter being
constructed and on the bottom right and
top you can see the building nearing
completion there also wheat as I
mentioned taking part in a number of
competitions one of the most interesting
I think was working on the Korean
Station Jambo go it was actually a
competition in the end between hi
Hyundai and Samsung and we were teamed
up with the Samson team the building
combines the kind of basis of designing
for an Antarctic station which is that
when you have low level buildings you
want them oriented in line with the wind
because then you get a big drift just at
one end whereas when they're elevated
you want them perpendicular to the wind
because then you get the drift set away
from the building so we combined the two
principals at the same time the Koreans
were very keen that the building should
be inspired by Korean culture so we
looked long hard at the sort of concept
of gateway to create a kind of gateway
to Antarctic Science with the living
space in the blue modules on one side
with the science on the other side
bridged by the limit this sort of make
that I guess it's bedrooms on the
left-hand side bridged by the living
space and here you can see the kind of
final designs for that that project it's
also allowed us to move into the Arctic
where we've worked with the US on the
development of a research laboratory so
just a very small building at their
station sonic station in Greenland
summit station is really an in hospital
site it's hundreds of miles from the
coast their bath 800 miles from the
coast of Greenland there's around 3
kilometers thickness of ice at the top
of the Greenland ice cap has horrendous
high winds again temperatures down to
minus 50 minus 60 I'm just a small crew
of four or five people who actually work
here during the winter although they can
be relieved by plane every two or three
months and our design was for this
laboratory
which the idea again was it was elevated
to allow the wind to pass underneath so
very similar principles to Holly but at
the same time the kind of development of
concepts easier cladding solutions and
just this individual building so no need
for connections we worked a little with
Nessa on ways to push the snow around
the site because it's an atmospheric
observatory you can't have any kind of
pollution next to the building so you
can't use normal bulldozers for pushing
snow so we needed to find a way of
pushing it with electric vehicles which
is what NASA we're also looking at at
the time looked into the forms of
construction and then here is the the
final design actually hasn't been built
but there it's still it's still kept in
the top drawer of the NSF just ready for
construction one day and you know
probably those principles informed other
designs that we've done in the office
whether it's housing in Russia whether
it's for music temporary museums in
Washington also through the work that
we've done in the Antarctic we have
ended up collaborating with NASA on some
really interesting exercises one of
which was looking at the net habitable
volume that might be required for an
astronaut and a long-duration mission
probably to Mars on the basis that
previous missions to the moon people
have been in spacecraft for relatively
short periods and they're really sort of
just for transit whereas traveling to
Mars you'll be living in the module for
nine or more months and the situation on
Mars of course is very similar to the
Antarctic it's a featureless featureless
landscape
the crafts that are needed to take you
there are very small and determine the
design through the logistic process you
have to wear very heavy and cumbersome
clothing and and so through this process
we work with anthropologists with
doctors with other architects with human
factor experts to look at the base
requirements for sleeping for living for
exercise for working to eventually come
up with the kind of base volume well
originally it was 18 cubic meters but
eventually went to 20 cubic meters which
is now used as the kind of basis by NASA
for developing future designs for the
module I'm sure it will get challenged
in time but that was certainly the start
point and one of the kind of really fun
parts of the project was when you
realize that you can work on every
surface so you can sit on the roof and
you can lie on the floor and you can sit
on the walls there because it's all a
zero-gravity environment you can use
every surface we've also started working
again with the British Antarctic Survey
as part of their new construction
partnership so British Antarctic Survey
have combined their two ships into one
big ship you may remember the saga
around boaty mcboatface which eventually
evolved into the Sir David Attenborough
which is the new ship now nearly ready
for commissioning but because it's much
bigger it'll do all the logistics but
also all the science in the ocean around
the Antarctic for Britain it means it
will visit the station's far fewer times
so there needs to be much more storage
on the base they need bigger wharfs and
so on so our role has involved looking
at sort of infrastructure in it in a
very simple buildings at both sydney and
at brother so this is sydney station
which is a very beautiful site in this
more or less in the sub-antarctic again
only used in the summer where we've
developed just a very simple timber
timber building lined in timber with all
the living space on the upper level and
then all the science space waste
management and so on and the lower
levels and then kept one of the existing
buildings and reclad it for the power
generation sewage treatment and so on
and here just really just a very simple
almost like a kind of you know
Scandinavian or house or something you'd
find in the New Zealand or Australian
outback I guess and then a rather a
station which is Britain's largest
station which has a summer population of
a hundred people again there's a move to
improve storage improve the operation
and the building there are very very
simple and is sort of actually not
really a kind of Antarctic building but
highly insulated using solar power
incorporating air traffic control and so
on and then kind of most exciting
Antarctic project at the moment which is
in its infancy is the redevelopment of
New Zealand's Scott base so you remember
you may remember that early historical
slides showing Sir Edmund Hillary's Hut
the one that was kind of like a kind of
fawn and orange color well Scott base
has been New Zealand's base in the
Antarctic since 1957 now supports a
summer population of 86 people and has
science expeditions heading out from the
base right across the Ross Ice Shelf
into areas such as the Dry Valleys which
are amazing places for carrying out
science research this is a an image of
Scott base so that very first building
is one of those smaller buildings in the
foreground Base was significantly
redeveloped in the 1980s and then there
was one building added in 2004 but has
had no redevelopment since then this in
an incredible site right next to the sea
ice where the sea ice meets the Ross Ice
Shelf with Mount Erebus in in the
distance I was there actually only three
weeks ago and we were up in the
helicopter just taking some photographs
down on the site just checking out the
topography it's quite a challenging
place to build because you've got to
keep the existing base it's on a sloping
site you can't get too close to the sea
but there are plants that grow round and
about that we have to be mindful of and
then a big road which leads from the US
base McMurdo the largest station in the
Antarctic
out to their airfields
following that road at number six and
these are some of the issues to do with
the station it's on red multiple
different levels much of the equipment
is really old the services are really
difficult to get out
it's got poor fire safety snow drifting
all around the site and all all these
are all different constraints so people
always think I'll building in Antarctica
there's no constraints but actually this
is that this is almost as complex as
building something in a city center
because there are so many different
parameters that we have to consider in
the design in in developing our
proposals not only have we thought about
our previous work in the Antarctic the
previous work of other architects in the
Antarctic but also started looking I
think a lot more than we did before at
things that have been successful in the
Arctic and in the Arctic of course
there's many more architectural examples
to draw upon I love these two that I'll
show you now one one is the
administration building for the governor
of Svalbard and designed by yeoman
visionaires in in Longyearbyen in the US
archipelago
you know just very robust structures but
making the most of the fantastic lights
that you get in the Arctic and this the
Svalbard Science Centre which is again a
very beautiful building clad in copper
with a timber interior and with a series
of really inspiring spaces and then
here's some of our just very early
sketches of what we may or may not be
doing at Scott Base and I think with
that that's a pretty rapid run around
the Antarctic I hope that's giving you
an idea of the kind of practical side of
building in Antarctica and thank you
very much
Wow that's really really impressive
thank you very much what is this very
very instructive that tour of Antarctica
- i'm francesca bender in the
co-director of the polar lab and while
you prepare a few questions i think we
have what maybe 20 minutes before 8
o'clock I have one question as you know
where we're trying to look at all facets
of architecture in Antarctica we started
with the early settlements even
archaeology and then the heritage what
is heritage sure some some of them we
looked at the second big phase of
construction which is the 1950s and 60s
with the scientific stations and so on
and then we look at the third wave which
is the ages in 91 more people more and
more countries came to the Antarctic
Treaty and now the fourth wave is Q
Broughton now as time goes by and
because they say erosion and of this
building's very fast they become removed
or some some parts of it become heritage
so first question is what is in looking
at the contemporary more modern
architecture 50s 60s and 70s what do you
think what would be in your view some
component that could in the future be
consider heritage because they did
contribute to establish new principles
of architecture technology and so on a
couple of example I think you showed
about you show the new zealand and
that's i think it's a good neighbor but
because we've seen many bases maybe you
have some suggestions on what future
heritage of these bases and secondly i
noticed that you're working now on
remodeling reconstructing and this is
gonna be probably the big business in
the future look at most of the bases are
from 80s and 90s on 20 20 30 years they
get the gone right so of course you know
maybe some countries will finance
important construction like Holly or
others but probably most of the
countries will try to renovate
so what how do you match the principle
that you have so cleverly developer the
new bases which are entirely you know
brought in prefabricated but I think we
need to find some some some cross point
between new technology and new and new
design principles and what exists I
think this is a big challenge if you can
elaborate a bit on these two things and
I will see the question of heritage in
the Antarctic is is really intriguing I
think you know in the first wave of
conservation it was very it was very
clear what should be preserved because
the building's you know was so in
intrinsically connected to the great
exploration you know to the work you
know to know where it is bortion of ink
or whether it was Scott or whether it
was Shackleton or Amundsen or whatever
you know so those were it was a kind of
no-brainer that those those were
buildings worth preserving not
necessarily because of their
architecture but because of their whole
historical social significance with in
world history I guess I think the the
next generation from the 50s are
interesting because they're still
persevering that sort of sense of
exploration but they become more
challenging you know it becomes more
challenging as to you know do you keep
do you keep doing that preservation you
know the Buckminster Fuller dome for
example was a really interesting piece
of architecture but you know he built
other geodesic structures and and that
one by the time it was eventually
removed was not in very good condition
and and had potentially no real future
at the South Pole Station so I think I
think we have to you know it is a
question of size you know preserving Hut
a at Scott Base you know it's a space
you know a third or a quarter the size
of this room so there's there's a kind
of rationale behind that preservation
there's a history still connected to it
I think when you're talking about you
know preserving big components it
becomes it becomes more of a challenge
I wouldn't certainly ever envisage
anybody preserving any component
of Halle six for example because it
would just be it would just be mad and
you know it was never you know there was
never intended with that in mind I don't
suppose actually Edmund Hillary ever had
in mind that that Hut a of Scott base
would ever be preserved but I guess he
became such an important figure within
New Zealand's own history that
preserving that Hut became an important
part of the whole kind of Kiwi heritage
so I think I think people need to think
you know very carefully you know is a
pristine continent we don't want to
litter it with things if they don't have
an important part to play in telling the
story of scientific endeavor in
Antarctica so yeah I I actually don't
know the answer but I think it'll be
really interesting I mean certainly on
Scott base already people are saying are
is there some part of the old base we
should preserve and I'm thinking well
why why would we you've already
preserved the most significant part why
would you premier serving something from
the 1980s maybe some great science
occurred there but it's not really
telling any more of the history than the
original first building so I think it'll
be an interesting and interesting
subject how that kind of sense of
maintaining the historical line carries
on but what it is we should keep yeah we
should try at least to keep one module
of Elysa construction yeah I think
that's a really interesting thing as
well you know obviously building an
Antarctic research station is
unbelievably expensive so the cost of
halle six only two thousand square
meters but was fifty million pounds so
when it comes to cost per square metre
that's about as high as you can get
anywhere in the world I should think so
you know redeveloping whole bases is a
really expensive process and and and you
know we are seeing many more where
people are adding adding a building but
of course you run the risk then that the
principles which underlie the original
construction which may be to do with you
know managing the snow or you know just
efficiency in operation but gets slowly
eroded because the next building is
placed according in to its specific need
but not necessarily according to the
requirements of the whole base
so all of a sudden it creates drifts
where no drifts occurred before or it
creates an energy burden where there
wasn't where there wasn't one before so
I think it is definitely with them
Roderick they have gone through a a long
long master planning process to try and
ensure that this sort of a slow slow
development is managed within a kind of
master plan kind of scenario and I guess
that that's that's the key and that's
definitely the approach that's also
being taken at McMurdo McMurdo has a
hundred buildings and they're reducing
it down to six but reducing it to six
over a kind of 15 to 20 year period and
I think I think it's really important to
you know in you know follow that sort of
line of master plan to carry out these
developments very interesting ok guys
time for you to read some questions and
hence if you win please wake up
John thank you that was amazing and
fascinating I guess pounding on
Francesca's question and walk I would
say that does Britain in terms of this
is not really to do with architecture
but with territorial occupation yeah I
guess the entry point of a nation
becomes a in Antarctic history might
become a place for a place for
preservation so for example the Chinese
who are we doing there you're wrong
science station are there's
conversations about keeping the first
building because that's of course
it sets up a founding stone on one day
began there so it's not so much about
the architecture but about their own
Antarctic history and the same thing I
guess in McMurdo where you have these
bars where people have built their
social personal histories that's kind of
also interesting I had a specific
question to do with them had e6
which was you mentioned that the
waterways goes back into the sea does
that mean that there's an actually a
tube it goes to the bottom of the ice
shelf or does it go into the ice shelf
itself halli was completed and they they
had a major issue because they lost
power through the whole station it's an
and they lost power for 19 hours at
minus 55 degrees Celsius so I mean the
good thing was that it was it's very
well sealed and very well insulated in
the temperatures I think dropped by only
five degrees so it went from 20 to 15 so
that was okay but that was only you know
because if they managed to sort it out
in 19 hours and the reason that they had
the problem was because the pipe that
drops the water needs to be a certain
distance from the building but it hadn't
been moved year-on-year when it should
have been so the water was dropping very
close
- one of the energy buildings and it's
warm water so it creates a big cavern
and so slowly one of the energy
buildings have started to subside into
the hole and as a result a it puts the
water pipes under tension and they
sprung a tiny leak and those water pipes
do all the cooling of all the generators
it was it was a it was a design issue I
guess and as a result the water coolant
of each generator sort of kicked in and
failed to work so the generators shut
down so one after the other they shut
down and it then took the you know the
rest of the day to find that hole patch
it up and then the next season there to
come and they had to excavate the whole
move the pipe fill it in so it's amazing
how tiny thing just can lead to so much
work and maintenance so that's the sort
of not quite the question but you know
nonetheless the big issue there room you
know Hal e6 was shown at the Biennale in
Venice in 2016 it was the pavilion was
for the Antarctica's pavilion joint -
very futuristic designed by Hani Rashid
I think the Hadid also has some some
some which are somehow imagining a life
or possible life of people in Antarctica
ok let's talk about future what do you
think it's is that possible is that
imaginable to have settlements in
Antarctica they're not permitted now but
maybe a few years for decades for now
this might be a case per se are not
allowed
you know like in Chilean base the
Chilean Army base there are family
quarters on the Chilean Air Force Base
on King George Island there are children
and who go to school there are people
born there yeah so in a way there are
kind of you know some micro communities
and who exists there I mean even
Hellenic
tourist resort at times when the budget
was really stressed they talked about it
there are torque there is AM there was a
there's an amazing camp next to the
Russian based novelist Gaia called white
desert which is put up every summer
which is like geodesic domes and it's
you can you can go there to do a week's
long exploration roundabout or they'll
fly you to the South Pole and it'll cost
you I think it's sixty thousand dollars
for a week's holiday but it's sold out
four years in advance it's amazing and
you know the the rooms are all decked
out like a kind of five-star
Scandinavian hotel they fly in a gourmet
chef from Cape Town and you know people
go on holiday there and so but will that
will there be more of that I guess it
kind of depends you know that the treaty
is intended to prevent that kind of
thing from happening to design your
hotel so far no hi thanks so much for
the lectures fascinating looking at this
this is as a design process for you as
an architect it seems like normally you
will have some ideas on how things I and
what living is life but for you I would
imagine that you haven't been to
Antarctica when you start your design
process and you had to rely on the
consultants now you have visited that do
you think you gained quite a lot of on
different design ideas or was it enough
for you to just kind of rely on
experience of other people to be able to
design things in a more empathetic way
that's a really interesting question so
it is true when we did when we did the
first designs for Hallie we we hadn't we
haven't been to the Antarctic so you did
rely a lot on scientists who we met who
told us about the experience during June
after we won the competition but whilst
we were still designing then I did go on
the first visit and it was quite
interesting because there were some
people who said oh well the
architectures already established why
you need to go on the trip but actually
probably of all the people who went on
the trip the engineers and me and myself
in the Builder I probably did get the
most out of it and we instigated the
most change there might have been just
tiny changes to do with you know storage
in your bedroom to do with you know a
place to put personal things or you know
just things like having a flip-up mirror
in your desk for doing your makeup or
you know whatever it was they were just
a whole series of little changes that we
instigated and I always find you know
when we start each one of the new bases
you you sort of think I wonder how
similar this one will end up being to
the last one but that whole a cultural
dimension but also the specific
requirements of the organization mean
that everyone ends up being you know you
learn from the last one but you
definitely aren't copying that many
things I mean even the we've done
designs for bedrooms at Scott Base and
they're just completely different from
the bedrooms at Halle Halle they were
all fair happy to share
Scott base is a it's one of the key
things everybody must have a single room
and it's so it's kind of really
interesting you know how that sort of
you know countries do have a cultural
dimension and they're kind of embodied
in this base these bases in a sort of
microscopic way which I find really kind
of fascinating we have time perhaps for
one last question
I I was wondering about as a designer
the experience of designing for places
where people have have imagined inhabit
in habitation in fantasy you know sort
of your experience of life imitating art
we've seen many many images of imagined
habitation on Mars or Antarctica the
South Pole etcetera and so I think it's
really interesting that you showed
earlier settlements looked like oil rigs
for example so I was kind of wondering
where your aesthetic references or
things you were looking at or how you
know you navigated images from a kind of
fan of fantasy yeah it's like it's a bit
of it's a bit of a kind of meshing of
loads of things I guess you know the
engineering is a really big part of
driving the design but of course it's
not the only part you know there's a
kind of science fictional element you
know once you've sorted out the wind
you've sorted out the aerodynamics
you've managed to work out how to lift
the buildings you know the building's
still need some more form so you know
when it came came to the outside the you
know there were loads of kind of you
know sci-fi movies that you've seen
anything is an interesting idea and you
know there are bundles and Star Wars we
had cut away books of both of those
sitting on the desk while we were
designing away and then when we were
doing the interior I always find the
interiors are so interesting because
actually they're very sort of first
principle kind of spaces so we really
did start we started with the bedrooms
because the bedroom is the kind of
smallest space so it actually dictates
the sizes of the buildings more or less
and and you just started thinking about
the whole experience from the moment you
wake up you know and you swing your feet
out of the bed what does it feel like
underfoot is it is it warm is it cold as
it soft is it hard
can I see out the window can I see
anybody else out of the window and then
as I go out do I need my own bathroom or
can I share with other people do I want
to chat to people or
be in my little kind of bubble and you
know we just thought about the whole day
and we just did loads of drawings sort
of sketches about moving around the
building from place to place and the
experience and the moments that you
might want to interact with people and
the moments you just want to get on with
your business and and so in that respect
you know it's like it's like starting
just you know designing a house and just
thinking about the needs of the
residents so it's a kind of fusion
between engineering sci-fi reference and
then sort of first principle design I
guess but we have one more but have you
had anybody living in highly five and
Holle six have they give you any
impression of their yeah yeah so
generally the generally the feedback has
been really good it was it was a resume
interesting you know how the fit the
feedback always relates to other aspects
to do with a winter season so you know
there was one year that baths were very
particular about when you when you leave
the Antarctic you can either go through
South Africa or you can go through South
America
and there was a whole group who had
thought alright we'll go out through
South America and we're going to do this
big trail through South America and
we'll fly home from Columbia or
something like that and then Beth said
oh no everyone is leaving through South
Africa so they were all absolutely
furious so they were given
questionnaires and they just put big
crosses across the whole questionnaire
and it wasn't really reflective of the
building but then the next years that
we've done it the feedback has been has
been really good and really helpful and
so yeah I think I think they're the kind
of buildings are you know we talk a lot
nowadays about doing what we call post
occupancy evaluation and these are the
kind of buildings that need it more than
anything else really because you want to
make sure that you know you don't you're
not just transporting problems from one
to the other you know so I mean we are
lucky to do lots of them but hopefully
you know we learn from the mistakes
rather than transport them to the next
project
well Hugh first of all thank you for
throwing so much light into our polar
lab and really on behalf of all the
Crowder is here tonight and Julia and
the students we would like first of all
to thank you very much and applaud you
very warm now that you are in the polar
lab we won't let you go
and we actually intend in the future to
have one or the workshops on design
principles and practices so I hope you
will collect continue our collaboration
on this very very exciting field thank
you very good thank you thank you
