Lauren thank you very much for the
introduction and of course for the
invitation
I feel very very honored to speak to you
tonight's first day of the new decade we
could say and yes I have chosen a title
constellations and correlations and the
title of the lecture goes back to an
exhibition we held in the house of arch
in budweis it's in southern bogna in in
Czechia and the house of art is rather
small institution and due to the modest
side of the exhibition venue it led to a
rather specific concept instead of
assigning individual themes or projects
to each of the five rooms we've decided
on a superordinate setting of different
images each given a specific
significance eight projects were
juxtaposed large urban scales
next to small buildings the precisely
choreographed sequence of images
challenged the perception of visitors
and triggered a dialogue between the
different projects and buildings the D
contextualization enabled at the same
time to focus on the physical topics it
was interesting to see what was
transported through images rather than
plants far from any functional and
problematical tasks similarities in
architectural things could be traced the
relationship of form and space so the
images show one of the exhibition rooms
there about 30 square meters of size and
you see into the next so it was a whole
suite of rooms and you could circulate
from one to the next
in the following presentation I would
like to focus on similarities and the
correlation of concepts by comparing
projects of different scales by using
scale the case studies Iowa straight how
conceptual approaches are found in tests
and very often the starting point us
Lawrence has already mentioned are a
small project so this has to do maybe
with with the situation when we started
what twenty years ago it was mainly
smaller student to project small small
tasks and we still think that the small
task has a certain potential to develop
further ideas and to reuse them on a
bigger scale so by using the case
studies I know straight home the
conceptual approaches are found and
tested and how these mature in the
course of the further development and
how architectural topics are established
they're there from the first between
house and city it can be seen as a
strategy of gradual spatial layering
from the interior to the public space
urban densification is the topic of the
time in which economies a ssin of all
action has also led to the preservation
of space and ground ever since we
started we have been concerned with
associated possibility to react to
density with with the superimposition of
reference basis in this sense
transparency of a facade allows a
certain special participation on the
open ground plan this idea enables to
create further spatial flow in our first
residential project we acted with
densely built within a densely built
area with dissolution of the wall
towards developing an open structure
almost like an archetypical shelter we
constructed an almost membrane like
facade in order to deal with primary
requirements of the facade issues such
as privacy
protection and identity this became a
separate subject the house in Ashe for
instance it is located in the
environment of predetermined space and
reacts to this with ambivalence of
openness and defense the plot of land
lies in a typical 1970s house in
paradise with mediocre design designed
houses hidden we have behind high fences
in a way the situation was irritating to
us because the houses weren't really
seen where they were hidden we reacted
on this with a completely open structure
a glass house that is fully transparent
and transparency it's not just a facade
itself it's also the way that the ground
the floor plan is organized this
transparent house it's it's it's covered
by an outer metal envelope that
stratifies the space between the street
at the house the interspace and creates
a duality the house is open and at the
same time filled the floor plan shows
how open the house is you see the
structure it's detached from the corners
so there's only four columns and two
core elements and you can see through in
several directions so the inner course
they are managering and and there's
still a flow the circular flow around
these core elements
the material discreteness makes
enclosing metal envelope in autonomous
experiment and come home component it is
perforated freely pierced by seemingly
random or natural cutouts so it's a
metal a metal piece of about six or
eight millimeters and the contractor
that's that's made it he said well it'll
take about twenty years until the holes
have grown and the whole thing might
collapse so the house was built in 2003
we're coming closer to that moment
metaphorically speaking
the question of perception of the world
houses itself can we recognize this as a
whole or only as an individual number of
single parts creating holiness
fundamental subjects related to seeing
and being seen or questioned in the
conventional housing hierarchy the glass
house stands for openness transparency
but also self exposure afterall houses
provide us with protection from the
unconscious the darkness protection from
the loss of self-determination and
autonomy we see the metal envelope as a
metaphorical mask mask hides the true
identity of the wearer blinding the
observer in the context of our project
this leads to really revaluation and
levelling of the balance of power
between the contemplator and the
contemplated you see how the
neighborhood that is kind of dull and
boring how its puzzled up and first it
was always a moment where we said oh how
interesting to see details and we can
kind of build up our own image of the
environment around the house the upper
floor is punctuated by an atrium so in
the middle of the house there is an
outdoor space it's an outdoor bathroom
completely you're showering outside and
exposed to the better
the untreated panel corrodes the shape
will be degraded eventually as I said
structural stratification of the facade
creates an interspace that is open to
interpretation and hence makes new
levels of perception accessible the
corrosion of the outer layer extends its
metaphorical significant significance by
an independent time level the garden
tower in Bern the garden tower at the
periphery of Bern is extended by a
circumferential spatial layer with a
relative surface that intervenes the
house with the surrounding landscape the
residential tower is part of a new
housing development built on a field
located at the edge of the agglomeration
belt of the city houses Paul's housing
developments and structures of various
usage usages line the arterial road from
the city a place one would typically
describe as Armstrong Relations to the
landscape exists at the same time so
it's just an arterial road it's really
thin if you look just rectangular treat
you have landscape that dominates the
situation the plot of land is located at
the foot of the Gorton burns local Hill
and besides that the views into the
nearby Alpine region is stunning the
project is based on an urban planning
strategy that is consciously oriented on
collage and taking into account
corresponding frictions arising from
free sampling of different residential
topologies which shape which also shaped
the task for the competition so you see
here the whole top is subdivided five
parts you see different typology is the
high-rise building on one hand the
building on the courtyard building in
tree graph the atrium typology
a house with launchers it was selected
in the in the process of the competition
and we've chosen the high-rise building
by coincidence and you were competing
with other teams and at the end all the
different projects were put together so
causing a certain friction on of course
this differs much from an overall plan
so this is a strategy rather than a plan
for us it was it was of course obvious
that the situation is not really
relating to the city or not much
relating to the city and it's not really
determined to to be built a high-rise
building on the part of land so the idea
was to rethink the typology and to come
up with a scheme that is more oriented
towards the landscape then to the city
so it's more tapas as we truly would
have said the floor plan is developed in
on a polygon ground shape and you see
like this circumferential space is is
it's different in depth and orientation
the house grows towards the sky it means
it also has a certain twist and it has
different platforms every few platforms
it it differs its geometry and the size
in order to become more a body than just
a single single house or a simple
vertical structure
the idea was to insert basins in the
outer platforms that could be humans and
could be planted so we brought the
plants to every every floor and a metal
mesh would cover the outer structure in
order to to to give to give a structure
where the plants could creep on and
climb on here the outer skin and how
it's perforated so there's simple every
floor there areas where we can have
perforated the metal mesh in order to
guarantee a free view into the landscape
the visual fields created by the partial
cutouts in the measure framed by large
metal brackets together with the moving
contour of the edges of the
architectural of the architectures it
becomes a light motif the discrete
morphology makes the interspace appear
as a micro cosmos between private
interior and landscape the relation of
the enveloping garden creates a common
identity that rain forces identification
with the house and the location
as seen from the outside the
superimposition of brackets laps and
climbing plants generates an optical
interplay between free pictorial
pictorial quality and illusion similar
to classical perceptual illusion we've
chosen plants that would would let the
leaves go like wild grapes or vines so
it's the house difference to each side
so they're different plants and of
course the color changes throughout the
year here's a detail of one of the
platforms what is essential is that the
basin is on the same level as the floor
so it's not really put on the slab it's
integrated in the slab so the idea was
to really to walk out of the apartment
and to touch the ground to be able to
see it as a as a similar quality that's
when you just walk out into a garden so
the plants they grow from the ground
even last image word that illustrates
they the the situation with different
structures between housing and and and
landscape with farming etc so this is
all close together so the house itself
is kind of autonomous within this
setting house within a house the house
was in the house superimposes two
identities in constructive honesty the
combination combination of spatial and
typological system systems can create
atmospheric density and high variety of
spatial conditions an original
construction method and autonomous
naturalization is used to formulate the
clear identity the combination enhances
and expressiveness and Drain forces the
architectural autonomy in a dense
contextual environment the residential
house in Laura this is a small city just
on the the other side of the border in
Germany close to Basel the design of the
single family house and Laura response
to the apparently fast-moving need ever
development area with an illusion in the
sense of a trompe l'oeil
that means the owners they have they've
bought the plot of land they've waited
about five years to really think about
building or doing a project and
meanwhile the whole neighborhood has
changed totally so there they have been
the last two to kind of come with with
with the house within an existing
neighborhood and freshly developed
neighborhood so for us it was really
almost frustrating and we told them
first why don't you just sell your
property this is a horrible place we
want a good proposal for that so we came
up with it as I said it's it's an
illusion of course it's normally it's a
perspective solution in this sense it's
it's almost like a metaphorical illusion
so we've created an out your house
and an inner house so like an image to
the neighborhood and a private cosmos
inside this shelter so it's like it
mushroom the first sketch it could be a
children's sketch normally tell them
what would they would draw the chimney
ultimately to the to the roof
this is my partner Daniel who did it you
see that it seems to be kind of very
simple archaic
principle but special that is detached
from the ground just it's like like an
elephant you know just touching the
ground in four positions we haven't gone
far from that actually you've just seen
a minute so this is this is of course a
proper section along to total section
and the inner house it has there is a
difference in the space in between and
this sketch here illustrates the
autonomous core and and the second
structure we inserted that it kind of
follows its own rules and it's like a
let's say other flows it's a three
dimensional concept with over with
double-height spaces and in order just
to create a certain autonomous complex
in in the world so this is the floor
plan and yeah the in-between is quite
clear it differs on sides and first of
all you enter you walk through this
outer shelter and then you have to enter
the house so there's like two doors or
two openings to come close and we
perforated the outer shelter with very
it seems random but of course the
openings were precisely positioned in
order to to also guarantee daylight's in
sight lines to the outside
so this is a model and this is how it
looks
I thought the outer shell is completely
constructed in importing concrete so
also the roof there's no there's no
covering with anything it's a concrete
shell and and of course the you see here
is that the the perforations they're
autonomous they have a they have a
different order it doesn't correspond to
the rooms that are behind it doesn't
really correspond to the secondary
structure so this is how the house is
facing the street and how it's detached
from the ground it's it's not really
clear about what happens here and you
see the opening on the side and you
would first walk in that slot so it's
really slim and it really means that you
have to concentrate not to touch to both
sides and this is one of the in-between
spaces it's a it could be parking lot
but it could also actually now the day
they don't they don't own a car so it's
a place for children to play and and of
course this reminds you maybe of
farmhouses where or you have the house
and the stables besides it so in
Switzerland there are typology is like
that where where you just have the
extension and it's an outer I'd out of
space where chicken would run through
and and and and people could work during
bad weather here this
this shows the double height space
inside and of course this secondary
structure is completely made out of wood
so we've inserted it and it was a very
simple handcrafted
way to construct it with with is almost
like Americans 2x4 and and the frames
the primary structure is also the frames
of the windows and we've just felt them
yeah with huge window panes this
illustrates a little bit the complexity
of team space it's we also try to not
just to to build for to ceiling high
doors but also to create openings that
would give the possibility to change
certain spatial in the transparency so
to the left here this is this is a an
opening it's actually evolved an inside
shutter and this is a children's room
here you have you see a ladder this is a
double height space a library it's
really a very small double height space
so you could even kind of climb from the
upper level to the lower level and it's
all painted in black of course to kind
of increase the homey atmosphere in a
certain way and and to also increase the
the difference between the inside and
the light that comes through the pond
chance yeah stacking of different forms
and here a last image from outside the
conceptual approach creates spatial
density and complexity that is continued
through an unusual material inversion
the gap between ground and concrete
shell reinforces the physical impact of
the shape of the shell and house by
suggesting that the wooden structure
carries the heavy load of the concrete
shell
spatsy
lakatamia the architect or I mean it
easy oh so this next project is an
extension project of the the academia
the architecture I meant ratio so the
architectural school in the southern
part of Switzerland in the mentoring
project a similar concept is used and
adapted to the situation at Stony jacket
is lowered into the ground that encloses
a sling timber structure the open campus
of the main previous School of
Architecture is located outside the
nucleus of the old city in a park-like
area with mainly solitary buildings from
the last centuries there are like
Italian palette sauce from the
Renaissance and the Baroque and the
school has kind of adapted these
structures for the purpose for their
purpose and now there's a certain need
of densification in an area that is
predefined by by these existing
historical buildings so it's a kind of a
leftover plot of land surrounded by
three structures from different periods
and different functions our project is
here in the middle and you see the
difference in proportions inside so on
the left-hand side we have the kids are
they
Kappa Cheney from 1600 and the pelota
took only in the very back this is part
of the school of the campus from 1860
and on the right hand side is a now
built project from Mario Botta rotunda
it's a cultural country cultural venue
for the school also and we were asked to
extend it with it with the workshop and
it was obvious to kind of to respect the
situation with the historical monuments
and to lower it into the ground the idea
was to to come up with with the fourth
typology with a
and to kind of combine this or recetas
as a all song all together so this was
this was a the floor plan and you can
see the proportion it's rather a big a
big feel that we occupy and besides the
church it's even smaller here this club
and the big Palazzo of course a lot
bigger the Rotunda is also smaller but
in the inclination in it's a rather
small building so the jacket that we
inserted follows the outline of the
property so it has this rather awkward
shape and here's some apps like areas
that that are growing into under the
topical topography into the hill and the
inner part here this is what we kept
free to insert the second structure made
out of wood here in the cross section
this part here is it's attached to the
existing building and now the front
facade illustrate the strength of the
size of the different houses of the
different buildings and for us this was
an interesting reference where we said
ok we just have to last the last option
to position a piece and it's rather
small it has a certain but still it has
a possibly a great impact on the whole
ensemble on the whole setting of the
buildings around it
so here first sketches of the inner
structure made out of wood as I said so
did this this is follows kind of a
rather vote oriented construction
principles so we've we've worked out
different principles to organize the
shadow to construct a shed we came up
finally with with this idea of hanging
polls and binders in order to have a
rather very simple orthogonal
organization within the the area of the
roof the light comes in from one side so
this was this was a an option to it
finally this seems to be very
interesting because the knots can be
organized or can be constructed simply
just in wood so we don't need a lot of
metal elements to bring this together a
didactic approach has been developed
from a simple conceptual sketch with the
more pronounced expression of two
autonomous principles of construction
leading to a clear readability
constructively honest and
atmospherically dense realization is a
mat is the aimed at intimacy and size
the topic intimacy in size describes the
relationship of the individual to the
space of imaginary dimensions
differences between spatial concepts are
hardly Illustrated more clearly than in
a comparison of a private residential
house with an office building the
residential building is January composed
of numerous usage parameters leading to
a different spatial configurations in
opposite an office building is mostly
the result of a speciality determined by
optimized work place economy and a high
demand for flexibility even more
interesting when spatial concepts can be
developed which permit a new
establishment of human scale and combine
this with spatial spaces of imaginary
ancients the single family house in
binning and this is also in the
agglomeration area of the city of Basel
it's situated in a enclosed plot of land
in a topography the poverty of graphical
depression
sorry caused by previous excavation work
so this means it was really kind of a
funny story
this photo klein has been owned by a
family and they had a project they
already started with the excavation work
and somehow it fell apart the whole
project and they sold the plot and the
authorities with regard this as the
actual topography of the plot as you can
see it's rather low compared to the to
the other buildings all around it's all
residential so it's not really I mean
there's no there's no exaggeration in
verticality so the idea was to develop
rather specific concepts that is
oriented in words like typology of a
nature and building we could say with a
circumferential wall this external
hermetic act results in the in an
intimate spatial concept a prime feature
is an OpenEdge from in the center of the
main volume around which the usage areas
are arranged so this is a silhouette of
the building and there's just very very
few elements that would illustrate that
is it's a residential or it's a house
there's one though the garden is on this
upper level here this is just filled
with ground with earth there's one
single slot and you have two chimney and
you have a window facing to sitting
the atrium in the middle penetrates the
full height of the building volume and
is visually connecting the two storeys
by planting small robinia trees one is
moving about at the height of the
Crown's of the trees on the main level
of the house so this is the perforation
so the house is mainly organized on this
upper level this is the entrance level
with secondary spaces as you can see
here so this is almost a Plaza like
sighs the entrance is fully covered with
with bricks and here this would be the
place with roubini on trees at the upper
level is organized around this void this
becoming here the open heart of the of
the house so the the main orientation is
towards the inside and of course you
have the garden that has this enclosure
of the surrounding walls of different
heights here few images coming from
outside this is the palette this is the
patio the void and to planted trees if
you image is coming from the entrance
door to the inside and you see here the
house is like an open structure on one
hand you have the garden on the other
hand the inner void and here's some
details how the the framing of the
window continues into insert at wooden
elements in order to kind of create a
very very domestic atmosphere a very
homey atmosphere yet from in the center
since it cannot be entered its impact is
one of calmness and serenity a haptic
relation to nature is replaced by a
pictorial poetic one so this is the
normal daily situation so you're always
referring to this it's like an aquarium
you could say with with within being
within the the Crown's of the trees
the dense densely and proximity of the
vegetative space becomes the narrative
motive of the house so this is the
rather specific space of the house
besides of course the garden itself
there's a bath same and the structure
and the pergola and you would always
refer back to this inner egg there is in
there void of course the water runs
outside there's a pool it looks nice in
the summer the structure completely made
of concrete here visualized in this
concrete model the headquarters of the
Christmas in Geneva the house is built
in 1930s
the original spirit of the building it
needed to be revitalized a new atrium
becomes a main inner space to serve as
generous public area as well as being
seen as a transmitter or mediator of the
inner organization of the bank the bank
building is occupying an erotic corner
position in the historical heart of
Geneva it is to be reorganized to
represent the bank in the city century
so this is the position here really
prominent at the river de Rouen and also
at the corner position of the nucleus of
the ancient city
the house was built in the 1930s in the
style of the Italian rational Islam the
original Esprit has disappeared through
numerous structural changes while its
material strength could still be sensed
in the existing structured framework
made of stone so when he entered the
competition we were searching for old
material and we came up with we found
these all images we thought although the
house is completely different maybe we
can kind of find the way back so this is
this is the scheme we kind of clarified
yeah the structure and you see this and
in the following images this is the
existing so a lot of verticality has
gone by inserts and small proportion of
windows and we would we wanted to bring
back a certain mentality and very
certain simpleness it's just a structure
within fills out of glass so it's more
structure than a full building with with
with all elements but still it follows
some tectonic issues or some technical
topics so obscuring elements that
interfere with the impact of the
building in the last decades were
removed and the structure the structural
facade made of stone worth retaining
supplemented by conforming concrete
elements
the resulting simplicity in clarity
creates calmness and a certain presence
you know heterogeneous environment the
external austerity is contrasted by the
age from inside which allows visual
dialog between the various usage areas
in terms of construction the stony
casing is matched by a friendly but by
finely defined structural grid so the
floor plan on the ground floor level
enabled us to open up to a home front
here the house and to kind of come up
with a plaza like inner atrium area so
this would be accessible for public and
the upper levels with with office spaces
it could also be looked at this is the
white stairs and here the upper level or
you have a kind of a rigid organization
and also Richards great the inserted
that would be overlaid by a polygonal
structure of bump-outs elements that
would scale down from from the big scale
of the floorplan down to human scale
elements that would kind of stick out of
this primary structure and what is what
was essential was of course the the
question of discreteness how much do I
see from what is happening inside the
bank the bank was open to a certain
dialogue but of course it was essential
not to see everything so we we
sandblasted the elements and as you can
see there they're frameless they're
inserted in the primary structure of
white concrete and they created kind of
an illusion at the same time as as
showing what is behind
so the small dimensions of the bump-outs
result in simultaneous enclosure and
exposure in the open space of the atrium
the individual rooms serve as places for
personal retreat people can be seen
moving about contours appear and enter
into visual dialogue which IV to each
other they experience a sense of
community created by looking into the
open central space just like when people
stand next to each other in a museum and
look at the same picture they don't know
each other and yet they enter into a
form of communication at that moment
this creates a specific combination of
aloofness and intimacy the room can
therefore be regarded as a synonym for
spatial for a special kind of
togetherness
load-bearing core today's mixed
constructions obscured a leg ability of
structural principles contrary to this
dealing with old existing buildings can
reveal new possibilities in the quest
for congruence of structure and space
the summerhouse in the nation it's
located in the south of Switzerland in
there we would say remote area or
meanwhile it's quite removed because
well people are leaving from the valley
originally that's quite interesting most
people lived from the forest from the
chestnut trees that grew in this forest
or that still grow in the forest so they
said one family needed one tree to
survive during winter time so they dry
two chestnuts they had they had a
certain infrastructure in their houses
the dry just the chestnuts and they made
different sorts of pastry whatever still
fantastic recipes of course yes but the
summer house it was an existing
structure that was am done for more than
50 years and besides the stone the stone
surrounding stone wall which held
through this these decades the inner
wooden structure it completely collapsed
even the roof collapsed and we when we
visited the place the first time it was
kind of interesting that there's a
three-story house with very low ceilings
originally it became suddenly like a
chapel like a very different principle
of space and the idea was to to keep
this and to build up a secondary
structure or let's say a primary
structure in order to to reinforce the
leftovers of the house so this is the
structure reporting it's a concrete
model in rail we've never seen it
because of course it's hidden behind the
existing
and you can see the form it follows a
certain logic of the existing volume but
still there are different proportions
such as these slots here and can't say
windows it's just slots which are double
height and there is here it's framed
opening of course the chimney and here
also framed connection to the annex the
annex has just one layer of concrete as
put in so here you can see the
cross-section so or its rate has been
three floors stables underneath this is
the heating you have you have animals
under under the ground that would give
you sufficient heat for a certain period
and of course that people would work
here in this level and sleep in the
second level just a few elements that
show the changes of the house this is
the only window we've created and you
can see the inner structure there is
still a second level up here we call
this the onk off so it's a fireplace
that once it's it's really heated it
keeps the warmth inside and and it gives
it gives enough warmth also to sleep
here during cold periods the door here
is inserting an existing opening so it's
not it's not a change in the in the in
the outer and the outer volume so it was
of course appreciated to also be to have
a direct access from the upper level and
therefore be able to circulate through
the house and around the house and the
slots there double-height as I said of
course this reveals the the existing
outer house so you have a dialogue
between the two the two histories the
the the house as a ruin as it has just
been found
and this infrastructure is a total new
proportion and expression as I said it's
almost one chapel like the height these
are not windows these are just shutters
so once they're open you're also exposed
to the climate to the outside climate if
it's too cold or windy you you close the
shutters and you have this one glazed
window to bring sufficient daylight in
to the house he wants again and of
course you can see how it's pulled in
layer by layer and and and and this is
also been shown in the way that the
concrete was was poor
one more image and we come to the annex
at the annex it used to be the place to
dry chestnuts we've changed it all
around and said it's not for fire it's
for water and why not have a bad scene
inserted and of course the shower needs
to be high enough in order to kind of
cause a certain water pressure we're out
in the wildness of the valley
yes the collapse of the existing
structure gave a new space of
possibilities and was the starting
situation for a homogenous single room
house the bareness of the pool in
concrete continues the history of the
house in an authentic manner the unity
of space structural form and material
enriches its existence
the kun style spousal owns a similar
topic not yet built unfortunately we're
working on it
we started this year or we will restart
this year with the insertion of
homogeneous concrete body an existing
low grade structure could be kept and
transformed in the case of this
exhibition venue the Coons frying bar
lunch after it's the art society to
count on parcel County is to have new
exhibition premises an old storage
building located at the development side
drive bits is available for this purpose
options include change or use or new
construction the single-story Hall
served as an intermediate storage space
for merchandise and has a
correspondingly rudimentary construction
the basic structure consists of filled
in steel frame construction with the
trust beam roof it's covered with
corrugated fiber cement sheets limited
availability or limited available
load-bearing capacity would hardly have
been able to cope with the initial
weight of the three retrofitting
requirement to improve thermal
efficiency so a replacement building was
therefore the option the obvious option
so these are structures that
that are dominant in this area so it
used to be a fright area with a lot of
exchanges with access railway access so
it also gave the structure the main
structure to the whole area and in case
of the whole this is this is the whole
from the say 1940s I guess what he was
built so it wasn't sufficient you see
this in this image how slim the beams
are constructed and we were and when we
started with the competition we had two
two options we could tear it down
replace and we thought this of course
doesn't make sense to its this is a
simple structure just really horrible
and of no use but then we had a dialogue
session with with with the jury and
[Music]
finally finally was it was the question
what is what is the the Koons frame
aiming at who's the audience and as this
this site is is also the site of the new
art school it was obvious to kind of
ground it or to keep it as this or to
continue with the history of the site
and as it was a transitory space for
goods we thought yes it's it's a
flexible art space that's that's about
the same thing so why not keep it yes so
of course Gordon matta-clark great how
he he made a big big issue out of
cutting existing structures and and kind
of transforming him just to bring in
daylight so that's that's what we
thought the only thing that is missing
in this this this hole is all how is
this any too light so that the hot light
that you need for exhibition venues and
of course the second structure this is
also an example from an artist's or
Oppenheimer that would have its own
rules its own identity in a certain way
and this was how we started so we
decided to to
work with existing parts of the form of
this very simple house and combine it to
a more me enduring element so this is
this is the actual form that we pour in
in concrete so this you see there are
intermediate levels and finally parts
that would be open full height and
there's three towers that perforate the
roof or they don't
it doesn't perforate they don't
perforate the structure they're so slim
just to go in between but they would
perforate of course the the covering of
the roof this is we could look and the
organization of course they the
structure also kind of dominates the
inner spiritual organization you see
double hides areas here with the sending
to light that would be inserted through
the three towers and then areas that are
just of a height of three four meters
and on the upper level again you have
here the double height areas and the
surrounding walls some openings would
enable people looking downwards from the
upper level this is well you can see
here in this image so there's a certain
visual contact but but in general the
beams the concrete beams they also serve
as exposition walls
so this is the maximum height of the
inner space so some parts it really goes
up full height and then you have niches
and rooms of different sizes and of
course we made studies with the daylight
and it's it's not it's not a museum
situation so it was clear we do not have
to provide homogeneous homo gene light
situation so it's more the idea to have
a light impact that might also change
during the day and that brings in
another quality of light so the main the
main light situation is guaranteed by by
LED and we have we've seen these towers
as the more the the brilliance of the
light that will come from the Sun a
longitudinal section and the cross
section where you can see the
proportions and how its positioned there
is a structure from several here a
residential very nice project and and
baked Danish office constructed this
extension built on existing house as
well and here we have the town with a
four yard school and it is just just in
the direct neighborhood and of course to
go very high it has to do with with the
the very hetero gene situation with the
overall situation and what is special is
that most of the storage holes that have
already been replaced so it was also an
idea to just keep the small size and the
mold small height and extended in
certain positions
the combination of two structural
principles illustrate the development in
the use of this transitory place polite
admits through the same two openings it
creates a suitable space for arch
physicality to morphological approaches
are compared under the title title
physicality their strategies comparable
in the genesis of form a house in the
free topology and a house in an urban
context one can be seen it's based on an
add-on principle
the other is rather based on subtraction
from a blank form the hasn't heard the
Stein well it's it's located in a rather
spectacular natural panorama and it
presents itself from a from a plot here
in the central area of Switzerland you
can see this is the lake of lucerne is
it's it's a life that is man during and
it has in certain moments it has the
quality of I would say in Norwegian
however they call these Norwegian fjords
things
so he can be really you can have those
steep hills directly growing out of the
ground and so we came up with with this
project is more a composition of
elements and it is it is maybe a little
bit poetic or two-point tickets or
formal in order to what we try to kind
of mirror the the ground that sound the
greatness of this natural situation and
so it's a concept that reaches out it's
it's based on an addition of simple
volumes and has of course depth and
different proportions here you have the
volume in a model so it's composed of
different elements and then here in this
image we see the the framing of the main
body that is kind of cantilever and that
as I said that would create in-between
spaces so this is the main body and in
between areas such as the path to and
back and covered areas in the front
there's a path you like in between in or
created by a cutout so the idea was to -
at the same time to create a variety of
spatial conditions
the superimposition and penetration of
ultimately arranged panels and beams
create the rhythmic composition layer
spatial Souls open up successively from
the inner density seeking and connection
to the surroundings the basic volume is
calculated on the basis of a simple
addition of rectangular bodies placed in
a staggered arrangement leading to
diverse room dimensions courtyard like
inner spaces interspaces allow a further
meandering of the facade design being
more vertical in the back so you'd enter
the house here on the upper level this
is the entrance level the path is
already on the main level as you can see
the structure kind of reaches out
towards the landscape with these
gestures just come to leaver beams or
frames that describe and in between
space
so this is the composition and when you
approach there's already a certain
verticality the opening once you enter
the house you glimpse part of the
landscape so it's only a certain it's an
in-between space between two parts of
the volume here we have the Opera Ball
um-- with with an addition of parallel
like elements and of course wooden beams
here as a subdivision the secondary
structure and the main floor plan and
finally the view into
the landscape which is also meandering
and yes the vibrant photograph tries to
illustrate or this this photograph tries
to illustrate the code the rhythm and
the composition of the house a
comparable approach of intention however
is based on the basis of other spatial
and functional conditions it's it's an
urban block of an area that has been
redeveloped a former industrial area
close by a residential zone from the
19th 18th and 19th century
so transitory activities are shaped by
the location right next to the road
traversing the city and the railways so
this is that is the plot of land for the
Volta Center and it's to determine by by
tunneling work for the motorway link
from France to from from Jeremy to
France vice versa and this is this is
actually the leftover plot here
triangular plot with the program that
had to be organized and we came up with
with an idea of or we try to scale down
the house in a certain way although we
knew the program is quite big for them
for the problem in correspondence to the
existing
fabric we we try to
came up with the idea of responding form
so it is in certain parts changing and
this this it has to do with the existing
form of the of the neighbor neighboring
buildings and if the neighboring
situation so this maybe illustrates that
there is a curved house right north of
it and we added a curved element and
there's a let's say an existing
perspective and an existing geometry
from the access road that we've worked
with and of course the the railroad the
rail railway form already here is
already protection it's a rather small
pavilion like building so he couldn't as
public building it could never be as
dominant as the the new construction so
here this is the former how we how its
obstructed from like this triangular
piece we perforated it with two punch
outs in order to organize courtyards the
courtyards they would start at the third
level so it's also multi used with with
with with office area with with shop
areas and the ground floor plan and
residential built upon it but the idea
was to kind of create a form that
unsharpened so it's not really a
tectonic
project so the idea was to really have
just one identity once in one simple
form in the ground floor plan
multifunctional very open and and the
the layout of the apartments follow they
certainly followed the outer contour of
the building
beginning at rectangular in a
rectangular situation but moving towards
rather polygonal room typology
organization there's a an apartment that
is in between the two courtyards that
kind of faces both the houses poured in
concrete and we've used a rather special
technique it's a concrete that got got a
certain period of use it's a insulating
concrete it's a light concrete with that
would even swim very porous and this
model is scale one to fifty we've used
the same material and so just to
illustrate what would happen but of
course if you scale it up to do to the
want one size we knew this deform would
be strong enough because it's it's so
free or free shaped and even then we
could convince the the contractor to go
this direction and to use this material
yeah here again there is of course a
little tectonic because the opening here
describes or a very old gesture and but
the windows are of similar size not even
depending the side of the building this
is the front you can enter the plants
are from the bridge directly via this
spiral stairs and once you go around you
see how the the form evolves and how the
launches they kind of create a certain
depth in the facade the flash parts
they're necessary because of the the
actual noise situation so that the flush
situation is created by a double by a
second window that is open but has a
certain sound buffering effect so this
was the idea to kind of create different
appearances
within the context here again you can
see how of this this sticks out it's the
highest building in the neighborhood
well slightly higher of course not the
high-rise but it kind of goes into a
dialogue with new and existing so this
is also around that house here it would
be kind of very much
relating to the the existing geometry
and of course again the courtyard
they're not or similar similar topic as
this is a free-standing house with the
atrium the courtyard wouldn't be
accessible so we thought it doesn't make
sense it's it's rather stronger than
it's just regarded as a more poetic idea
of garden and wildness within this very
dense dense they organized a volume yeah
what's the positive effect of the
polygonal shape you never have a visible
or face-to-face so it's always a clinic
with a certain flow what is interesting
the second courtyard cuts out a part and
here you have well certainly reference
to this to the scale of the city and of
the neighborhood from the in between
volume you'd trace part of the city and
of course it's a very intimate space
here between the two houses despite or
because of the physical size the
building generates identity and hence
has an integrative impact it is a
permanent component of the city and
extends the morphological experience of
the residents
so the next topic I would like to end
the presentation with two more projects
that follow a more material oriented
strategy to intervene with the context
and hissed and its history the bricolage
of found materials following following
simple constructive principles can be
used to anchor a house in historical
site and may create an atmospheric dense
situation this goes in the line with the
post-war as found principle so the first
would be the house and mansion Stein
residential area it's we would say
Garden City so this is the Swiss garden
city area from early 20th century with
very nicely detailed houses and what's
specific with this site don't have a
house of theory of the former expression
of the former building the houses were
normally double houses in order to
create a certain bigger appearance and
to bring people or several parties under
one roof of course this was one of the
ideas of the Garden City movement we had
to replace this part because it just
simply didn't work anymore it was it was
in a bad condition and so we came up
with the idea and that was it has to do
with the organization and how the houses
are oriented stay they are there they
still have this kind of representative
or representational aspect to
to address to the street but what was
interesting that they hardly have a
dialog with the gardens behind Gardens
were being regardless something
functional of course you would maybe
plant your veggies there but it's not
it's not of course a concept of being in
a dialogue with greenery or me with with
the garden and so we saw this as a
chance to to reposition the house or to
organize it or to depress it into the
plot that's what that's that's the whole
depth of the plot and the idea was to to
rather create a pavilion like a
structure that would more be seen as a
secondary structure because loads of
houses there they've become too small
and people would just build annexes and
secondary structures and so that was the
idea to to kind of come flush the new
volume and make it look as if it were a
pavilion or folly just standing there in
the garden so so it's really we could
also call it naked house that's really
cut down to the very principal form of a
house and as you see in the proportion
it's it appears very slim or slightly
slimmer than the existing but it has it
has an evaluation into into the plot you
know to make it usable and accessible
regardless else well we created elements
to shape the garden or to extend the
form of the houses what you can see here
and so it is a different proportion so
it's rather long and rather slim this is
the shelter the Sun shading that could
be used to cover big parts of
the ground so it's a very simple layout
just rectangle form and some core
elements that structure the floor what's
in kind of interest in the bathroom is
is it the same way it's its circulation
area so you walk through the bathroom
and here this is what happens to the
situation so this is the remaining part
of theme double house and this is the
new house standing in the garden and
opening up and it's covered with bitumen
I don't know B - yeah okay so it's a
very simple material that would also
enable us to cover the whole volume with
the same surface from the roof and
vertically just to have this this very
it looked like something very simple
here
sheltering shading all the big elements
it's almost the size of Drew 4 twice
half of the roof
and how its inserted in the greenery in
the garden and the existing again
this image very simple material being
used in the inside it's in general a
wooden construction with chips and
boards controlled framing of the outside
and yes simple or minimalistic detailing
sliding door here to close the bathroom
and one last image to illustrate the
outer structure and this kind of sanded
surface was at the same time reflecting
the light the certain quality yes the
last project is located at the formerly
front fright railway station at an area
it's called a LeMat it's in the northern
part of the city and it has been
transformed into residential area this
is the in-between area or period it has
been used as a cultural place as with
its very very many ephemeral structures
with locations to party and so the the
there was a certain period of growth on
the whole land and and transformation it
was it was for almost a decade
it was the cultural hotspot of the city
and but the the urban layout was made
and the only thing that is kind of
remaining from that period is the inner
park-like area that is not really much
conditioned so it has this route around
and another room this very natural
oriented vegetation so it's none not not
control a very little controlled what is
interesting is that this whole area that
the land was was bought was bought by a
foundation that was interested in
controlling the programming of the plot
so they subdivided the area and they
were inviting interested groups to apply
to to to loan one one of the plots so
this was that this was a great
possibility for young cooperatives to
organize themselves so it was very
interesting in our case it's it's not
people that were intending to organize
themselves as a cooperative if it was
just people said we simply don't find we
want to live together we simply don't
find any house that fits to this idea
and so they handed in the proposal and
it went into a dialogue in into a
dialogue process with the competition
which we could where we could succeed
with our proposal it's it's a concept
with a very high variety of apartments
so this is this has developed in
the following phases but of course it
was already clear that it should be
based on shared space also so there's
and there are areas for everyone
accessible for everyone and what you
didn't see here is a cluster apartment
and here two room apartment very with a
very simple layout it's accessible from
it extended balconies you could say from
a surround alike space we've run out of
battery here but maybe maybe here this
could help and this shifting here is
very effective to kind of have two parts
of the two to it the way we organize the
floor plan so one part is facing the the
sample a garden or central park and the
other is attached to the to the access
balconies so it is rather open here to
the to the circulation and by having
this shift a certain intimacy is given
in the back of the house so entrance
will also be organized as the kitchen
there's of course given form that we had
to follow so it's not it's not really a
fully organized this these models are
from the from the process of the
competition the participation process
with different let's say think tanks and
possibilities to bring people closer to
the project so we handed out these
models to to make future inhabitants
familiar with with the layout and and of
course to make them understand
house or how the apartment would work
this is the ground floor level which is
a lobby like area this is combined with
laundry so we can really guarantee a
certain frequency throughout the day and
layout here with the two sides so the
interesting thing that the given form is
that we by having this access area we
would without we have already kind of an
overview here once you access the house
or your apartment you know exactly
what's going on in the whole building
yes thanks to the desert to the previous
architects who who designed this but we
were the only ones to come up with the
idea with this balcony
it's shows that it's very effective yes
talking about bricolage this is what
what came out with the facade and
although the form is it has nothing to
do with any secondary structures with a
merrill garden house industrial sites
uncontrolled stuff but still the idea
was to to build a facade that appears as
something simple although it's well
organized it's it there is also of
course a verticality with a socket and
different bands with aluminum sheets and
undulating fiber cement and on the
lighting fiberglass elements
semi-transparent but these elements of
course they they are they are actually
only known from from from garden garden
structures simple secondary structures
here is the back side with a steel
structure that is added on to the main
concrete body and
which yes using very thin profiles it
even it might even it could be seen as
scaffolding it has about the same
proportion or it's a little bit thicker
of course but it still has this very
ephemeral expression tectonics as I said
and here the very ends both ends are
accessible vertically this is how it
looked before inhabitants came in of
course it changes the secondary
subdivision of the apartments as well as
the facade itself is constructed in wood
so it could be replaced
only the the subdividing walls between
apartments it's made of concrete so it's
really also anyway didactic you have the
cement floor seven ceilings and
subdivision walls and the inserts the
kitchens were colored in different
colors so in heavens girls to choose
from a variety of colors and so it has
it has on one hand it's very very also
almost minimalistic expression but it's
determined to surface it's a wooden
surface so you don't have to hang images
it's already the image is there so out
of loss thanks to those maybe this one
image of what happens still people hang
images of course and have lamps and and
this is summer situation or gardening of
course is it must have and the axis
value by the way this is not this is not
things that should be sold it's not the
storage that is outside this is
furniture
back to one of the remarks we had or
maybe this was given the idea great yeah
it was quite it was quite a far way to
go and to be able to do this because at
the same time this is a fire escape area
and you have a you have a you have a
fire loads on the balconies and as I
showed here in one of the previous here
which is said there is one meter 20 will
always be free and this means
Switzerland you know well-organized
people are allowed to position in the
marked areas and of course fire
authorities or fire protection
authorities they would come once a week
or to check if it's happening yeah this
is about it the conclusion but it's
essentially in our work is to search for
specific perhaps unexpected
characteristics that come out of the
development of a particular project
often this result from intuitive
decisions they've pursued they can
further draw out the inherent uniqueness
of the project thank you very much
[Applause]
very much
but I don't think I would visit now it's
coming again thank you the I'm tempted
to say that we could have titled this
provocation because you know I was
struck by the fact that so many of the
projects began with
being provoked by something you found in
the last and then it seemed to me you
you responded with encountered a
complication I was quite the
relationship between your the way which
you told that story in the structure
complexity and contradiction in
architecture and I wonder you do you
teach with that as well not much not
much no no no but maybe we should you
know it seems to me that a big part of
what is being argued in depth is that
there are a series of provocations that
come from later history or they come
from an argument
a recognition that some kind of demand
being imposed from the outside and yet
there's there's always this finer
purpose and sense of purpose about an
inner world that has got to be protected
in this sense the architecture is always
working - as we were talking other to
accommodate - and what what I really
felt was that there was a way in which
your responses were always looking for
that opportunity of maximizing the role
that architecture might play and didn't
the dimension of the of the year always
delaminating at an opening as a space
and that you can work to expose that of
that relationship between its
two different kinds of provocation it's
just fantastic - how you analyze their
arse tragedy finally of course you're
right and of course we kind of look for
options in in very many cases it's
really it's also difficult to deal with
nowadays situation and and maybe you
know just to build a single-family house
in Switzerland is something you
shouldn't do and that's why we said well
when we do it we still we think there's
a toss it's a task and we should do
something that it's just more than than
delivering a house and maybe from that
it's it's it's the way we think about
architecture in general that it could it
also has to to bring something or or
yeah maybe provoke in a certain way
what's the provocation what's that I
mean how far do we go with just building
houses and houses part of the public
area and public it's still it's it's
still in our country there are very many
moments of dialogue about the
architecture so it's really there is
there's a let's say a democratic process
to end with architecture and very many
levels you have to explain and it's this
is this is a long way but so we we find
it interesting to to ask these questions
or for us to make things just more
interesting than they seem to be
ordinate
otherwise we we don't we don't we don't
lift the pencil yeah no absolutely
beautiful we Renee you ever I find your
your word very rigorous and refined I
would say all event and what is a dig
mattock and disconcerting is immense
variety from one project to the next
I'm sure this comment is must be made
very often and as one sees of course
quite a few project one starts to see a
number of themes craft being one I
suppose form being another but I think
it would be helpful certainly to me if
you couldn't just do a kind of sketch of
how you see your work in the context of
architecture in Switzerland or perhaps
in Basel it's a recent past because we
of course know those works and I I would
be interested to get a sense of how your
office positioned itself in relation to
that word
[Music]
simple question is as you know valve is
also dominated by the great fantastic
big firm and so where do we position
ourselves in certain niche maybe but
still we're competing on the same levels
as we are always competing in this did
you that was it may be interesting this
is a dialogue between on one hand the
very private houses may be also private
commissions and the other projects done
all the result of a dialogue with the
competition so where you really have to
also follow a certain task and where you
have to live a precise result and for us
the interesting thing is really the
freedom with with the small houses that
we we have if we face the owner
one-to-one and and we talk about this
and we it's not it's not that we build
houses and someone who moves in its it's
really a different way of approach or a
different way of method rather than a
competition where you you're completely
mostly you're in the office and view you
have a dialogue within the office and
with partners outside and you try to to
trace and to come very close to what is
needed and or to make it even better but
it's just too
Matabele methods are very different and
we find it interesting to learn from
both and to maybe as I try it here yeah
we think the architect is I mean for how
long are you at school here a few
semesters and then you're out there and
what have you learned a little bit about
residential and a little bit about here
maybe once in school but not not that an
office building so you have to learn
about yourself and ins it's it's
actually the practice that that I spend
I spend just a few years being educated
that the rest the last 20 years I do it
myself or I do it dialogue or of course
the students when I immature so this is
the situation we also have to adapt to
new conditions and new situations new
programs and use the new situations
there are always given so you know in a
certain way this is this is the context
wise but we we said these projects there
are contextual they are they are shaped
for a plot for a condition and we really
focus on that it's not it's not
something satellite into an existing
situation but of course what is what its
context and how how close do I have to
come do I have to continue this or can I
concur can I can I try to maybe to bring
your
in for something a situation that is
that is left over it has a stagnation it
should be changed so this is this is
what we were interested in you know when
I I mean I absolutely believe what you
say you know genuineness of the dialogue
with suppliants and also with science
and with the conditions of a project and
so on I guess my question perhaps
touches for specifically about your
particular sense of the culture of
architecture which I can feel is very
strong
you know I mean I I I feel
rightly or wrongly that you your
knowledge of architecture is very
extensive and and very sensitive I mean
your work very often reminds me of
certain things which I have seen no
which I know by which I do not be in at
all that I think the work is derivative
that oh it's this enigma is in its
extreme form or diversity of the world
which it seems to my mind to be a
development of what I know up to that
point about Swiss architecture but the
thing is the strategy to do
to find the four more or two going we
wouldn't even talk about form we'd
rather talk about space the strategies
are so different and the parameter is
they also different one project to the
other so maybe that's that's yeah that
illustrates the diversity of projects
finally so the high-rise building we
said it's it's um the task was living
with the view
so it wasn't first it wasn't the idea of
building something really high vertical
it was low for what what does it mean
living with you I'm here in fantastic
surrounding I have views I and have
experiences maybe with with Heights and
with exposure so the metal mesh you can
really stand at the edge of this of the
slapping and you're totally exposed at
50 meters above ground so this is this
is an experience you share everywhere in
the Alps there are no no handrails and
you could fall anytime so so this this
was interesting to actually more detail
or narrative thing and and so this is
step by step grew into something yeah
like this this amorphous and of course
other questions
it's actually kind of to follow on from
the previous question kind of related in
your mind given your extremely diverse
portfolio and stylistically kind of
diverse as much as in in terms of the
genre that you're involved with in your
mind when you think about your first
commerce coins that our first commerce
how do you explain as a practice to
yourself why do they come to you if
there is such a thing as a reputation
what do you feel your reputation as a
practice is and how does it attract the
clients that come to you for the first
time the situation has changed in the
last in the past years and we do not
like it so much that people would come
because they've looked at projects and
websites and saying alright I've seen
this concrete building look so fantastic
it's horrible it's actually more
interesting just to
see people meet people and then they do
not know what they expect or what they
have to expect it's much more
interesting not to talk about this so to
really start from zero from scratch and
stop the dialogue and but the other
thing happens so really we normally give
it the first face let's say it's learn
to know face we say for free we do first
sketches and and we see what will
interest us and what and what interests
in the dialogue with you and this could
really be the starting point for it for
forever process but what we do not like
so much is to kind of showcase although
we do this of course but to showcase and
say this is this is what we do in yeah
well second question again is kind of
related again to that notion of
reputation supposed to brand one of our
clients once said that some architects
would do exactly what you want them to
do and then why would you pay them
others would do what they want to do and
wouldn't listen to the client which is a
real problem as well now there is a fine
line between these two kind of types of
architects that basically are there to
listen to carefully and the ones that
just don't want to listen so where do
you feel you are because two finalists
and the basic democratic country and
[Music]
this nation that nation is based on
compromise so we always see a solution
somewhere so the thin line is the broad
line and let's just see and
how to start and where it could end yeah
but it has to do it with as I said with
the culture and with all these steps
that can or need it or necessary that
something can be seen as a built form
I think Eleanor
a bouquet of flowers and some of them
are wild
the action
forums and tree to understand each
actions
to be honest this is this is what I talk
about this also post-process its
analyzes I started with the exhibition
in budweis I said it was also kind of
astonishing for us to see what this to
that well that's the theme and my part
would say no there are no themes no no
it's all in your head I've never thought
that so it's it's really the intuitive
moment where we just feel that's what we
like to do and we do it and maybe we
lose we've done and it's more
interesting to follow a certain route or
an idea and visualize it and learn from
it so it's not also it's not a method
that is fully control and that we can
say this is are these are the steps that
we have to follow and then we come up
with perfect houses or proposals there's
maybe a lot of intuitive in it and it
sounds simple you shouldn't say that
I'm sorry I'm afraid I'm gonna bring it
to a close otherwise we'll lose our
reservation that the restaurant and
Andreas won't be fed tonight so I I'm
going to thank undress but the way I
would like to put this is if this is the
first time you're here we feel honored
that we were the ones to bring you and
we hope it's the first of many times you
will return and present your work and
and all its increasing complexity and
richness thank you very much thank you
[Applause]
