thanks for coming tonight so I'm very
happy to welcome tonight our guest
Daniel pol who came all the way from Los
Angeles to give this lecture and late
modern mirror glass architecture and
it's the first time that Daniel comes to
the presents his work in Europe and it's
the first time he comes to Europe to
actually and and I'm very pleased that
I've been able to facilitate this a DAA
where I studied and so Daniel and I
actually met a year ago in Los Angeles
where I was doing a residency at the Mac
Center and front of a mutual friend
introduced us and said we absolutely had
to meet and a year later here we are
actually giving a lecture and working on
a book together and so Daniel is an
architecture historian he's been active
for more than 25 years now and he
practices in three different ways that
I'm gonna somehow introduce a little bit
extensively maybe because I think it's
quite integral to his his work and so he
works as a consultant in a global
company called ICF international with
like 5,000 employees worldwide and as a
freelancer as an independent
architecture historian that's recruited
for specific missions and as a volunteer
as well who actually actively and
relentlessly files preservation reports
in his free time and so I'm gonna start
with a volunteer work because it's
actually somehow the way he got into
architecture history so we studied art
history in the mid 90s and it was
interested in outsider art and somehow
go run into this project called grandma
presbury battle village in Los Angeles
which is some an assemblage of
construction and structures made by this
woman with recycled material in the 50s
and 60s and when you see it to just have
a look because it was pretty close to
where I grew up and
it happened to have been destroyed two
days before by the earthquake the 94
earthquake and he and this somehow got
him involved in rebuilding it on privet
preserving it and it became a sort of
active director for the next 16 years
while working on in in bars and
restaurants in order to to survive
basically so and that's so he did that
and that's basically I think as I
understood led him to basically
understand the importance of
preservation and was kind of
instrumental is forming is like a
peculiar way of practicing architecture
history as I think which I like to
describe as a militant historian
approach even though he doesn't like
that I say that he calls it I mean it
told me to say vigorous which I don't
really understand the difference and so
then basically with this experience
he got involved in the modern committee
which is like a volunteer group of food
to raise awareness about post-world War
two a Los Angeles architecture based in
this framework he learned the the
practice of preservation like in where
he listed for example the Capitol
Records building for some people who
might know it and also wrote the
landmark for the Bonaventure hotel in
2005 which was never submitted on his
steel and listed then also one of the
recent lets a volunteer listing is done
the Ambassador Grillin Lobby which is an
interior landmark it's like a bar
basically on the lobby inside the the
Kevin Russians and inclu united nation
Platts in New York City it's a very
beautiful example of a 70s and 80s
lavish cooperates interior with like a
four skylight well seeing if you can go
and see it and and recently actually
filed erode the ufology contact
statement for California and with with
which he managed to list integratron in
Joshua Tree that you might know and you
also for the anecdotes can ask him later
but he managed to get the alien who
designed the building it will be listed
as an architect
which i think is pretty cool
then as an independent architecture
historian as a freelancer basically is
somehow the good to historian for la
history after the 60s
and he's been commissioned recently to
write for the city of Los Angeles the
post modernism context statement and the
late modern context statements and these
documents are quite big forty pages the
pages that are the official preservation
documents they are used to justify the
story quality of listing so these are
reference document that historians
architects planners
use in order to to define a specific
style unless in a specific area and
through which you justify on you you you
you push a listing so then is also
working as a guest editor for newsletter
on architecture 1993 with dhaka Momo
which is a Spanish preservation group
and is also a teacher as as well and
then maybe the most interesting or at
least I was most fascinated by aspect of
his work is a is he's working as a
corporate consultant in his global
consultancy firm coli CF International
and where I produced his technical
reports about cultural resources and
basically to probably describe it in
vegetables like far too simple terms so
when you have a legal like a large
infrastructural project that's being
planned it looks for like all the
buildings are on the way in the area of
that might be affected by the building
on the every single building and it
checks whether they have any basic
historical importance or and and if they
do he actually gets deep into it on the
rights the the the reason why they
should be saved which in which might
affect the path of the of the
project and so I think what it's quite
interesting is that he's constantly
working on on so I would say in my thing
so yeah the project includes for example
I spilled a high speed rail project
freeway enlargement bridge construction
project or subway lines and and I kind
of I was fascinated by the way described
do his work in the car in the
corporation because he told me something
and I want to quote him for that which
is working a big corporate company
allows him to produce to practice
architecture history in a cold and
calculated way
to be deep inside the regulatory text
and actually write and file all the
reports because it is what actually says
building as he says and I think my
experience for example of architecture
history is much more an academic writing
and and I was quite interested to see
that that pragmatic devotion basically
to the saving of buildings and also
because Daniel spends his days writing
on filing reports but yes
practically actually I mean considering
the amount of work he produces he has
oddly published anything which I find
which is one of the reasons I know we
are I'm focusing with him and trying to
turn his work into a book and so this
allows me to get to the the mirror glass
aspect from his corporate practice which
I think somehow echo each other and so
late modern mirror glass architecture
was the subject of his master's master's
thesis at the california state
university northridge that he started in
2001 and they wanted him to write about
bottle park the first project you
volunteered for but he actually wanted
to write for corporate office parks so
it was in 2001 and five years had passed
since his art history ba and he was
fascinated by the crystalline on
futuristic architecture of mirrored
glass buildings because to him it seemed
to be the next frontier of preservation
at the time because everything stopped
at the 60s but really there was no real
interest for what happened after and
also because all this bill these
corporate buildings were actually hated
by everyone and he was wondering why did
people hate it how did this specific
corporate style come about and also how
did it become such a prominent global
phenomenon
and by Quentin coincidence while
researching it he realized that the
history of mirrored glass was
particularly tied to the history of Los
Angeles and that there were a lot of
example in Orange County so the southern
area of Los Angeles where he actually
grew up
and and so the history of mirror glass
is actually tied to the industrial
history of Los Angeles at the time which
was a hot spot for aerospace electronics
and high-tech industries and it was
actually at the time the world capital
for high-tech industry back then more
than Silicon Valley which was just
starting off and so the the so that so
as we will see the buildings there are
very much of the kind of high-tech
aesthetic and which is why the they got
I mean one of the reasons perhaps they
got they did use so much these corporate
films and but and that my interest in
this which i think is more mind and his
is that this what started with this high
tech industry somehow slowly or like an
aesthetic that was that was at first
used by the high tech industry with
sloly is like slowly basically employed
by the like some sort of proton in
neoliberal kind of business so private
banks investment funds insurances
pharmaceutical industry and all sorts of
headquarter headquarters for global
companies started to actually build
similar buildings and Daniel calls this
this moment sort of like a moment when
Meryl glass became like this corporate
vernacular and so and so yeah I mean the
interesting thing was my old glasses
that it featured all the characteristic
that Daniel needed to focus on it was
basically an untold architectural
history it was hated was corporate with
ubiquitous who was anonymous so whose
mostly done by designers working in the
shadows of like large corporate
companies and I think it's whizzes
basically it's practice as an architect
a corporate architecture historian I
think this that's why I wanted to
underline is
his other work and so I mean at the
moment the this lecture is basically the
first let's say step in a project we are
like sketching together will not fully
show how to play standard shape it's
gonna have but we are planning we are
talking about making a book eventually
which is going to be of course answered
on Daniel scholarship and made glass
architecture and but also potentially is
gonna include a couple of essays that
are going to include this moment in of
architecture in its political history
and also within the art history chapter
and on top of this we want to Commission
a series of like kind of a thorough
photographic survey of the like the best
examples of more glass architecture that
you can find in the LA area for two
reasons because
first of all they are largely
undocumented and also because most of
them are being altered right now or
destroyed because there's a big shift in
the corporate culture at the moment with
open spaces on all sorts of startup
colorful startup open plants and so that
could help potentially to file a couple
of preservation reports for a few of
them so I hope you enjoyed this lecture
and welcome to Danielle Paul
[Applause]
thank you for the best introduction ever
I'm very honored to be a lecturer at the
architectural Association tonight so
thank you for having me as well I'm
going to this is this is about a
four-part lecture and parts of it are
front loaded with a lot of information
that's contextual to Los Angeles and
toward what my research has been other
parts are gonna be slideshows where we
just kind of breezed through a bunch of
samples and then toward the end I make a
case study out of Orange County Orange
County is located about 35 miles south
east of Los Angeles if you've been to
Southern California
Disneyland is in Orange County so
familiar with that so I really could
have began this talk on mirror glass
architecture at any variety of places
Kew Gardens the Crystal Palace you know
sure barred Corbusier but I decided to
begin here with these two buildings by
knees because they come back and they're
directly influential many of you are
probably familiar with these
Friedrichstrasse on the left from 1921
and glass skyscraper proposal on the
right from 1922 this idea of the glass
being treated as a skin as an you know
an all-over surface that's detached from
the structural support and not not
having a structural support of its own
not load-bearing and and not denying the
glass skin not denying it not just
treating it simply as transparency but
acknowledging it as its own entity we're
gonna see that a lot
later so I'm gonna jump to the
post-world War 2 era and the Eero
Saarinen office which plays a big role
in the advent of the late modern glass
skin particularly with mirror this is
the General Motors Technical facility
from 1955 in Michigan in the state of
Michigan in the Upper Midwest and
obviously there was a trend in the
post-war era for the smooth smooth
curtain walls the smoother the better
and as part of this project Kevin Roche
with John bengkulu who both work under
Eero Saarinen come up with the idea for
a neoprene gasket in which to hold hold
the glazing and to sort of you know
support this idea of smoothness the idea
for that comes from the car windshield
itself obviously held in place by a
material not unlike neoprene and of
course this is for General Motors so
it's perfectly fitting for the client
and it just sort of points to the
creative openness of the sarin in office
too
to do this here it's Kevin Roche here at
Kevin Roche Azera Saarinen's primary
assistant here he is
in 1964 give or take working on a model
for the Ford Foundation in New York and
Kevin actually worked on the General
Motors technical facility and it was
sort of his idea to come up with this
neoprene as I mentioned and for our
purposes kevin is very very important
because mirrored glass is his idea he
was looking at a cover of a Life
magazine in the 1950s early 1950s and he
saw somebody on the cover of life
wearing mirrored aviator sunglasses we
thought it would be a really
idea for a building so so fort
foundation is not mirrored but we'll
look at some of his other buildings that
are and initially the big glass
companies in the u.s. Pittsburgh plate
glass Libby Owens Ford and I think he
may have even approached Pilkington
rejected the idea of a mirror of mere
glass and they thought it would be
absurd but he worked with two small
companies Liberty mirror and Kinney
vacuum coding in the Midwest and came up
with it this is the very first project
ever designed to have near glass it was
never built it's for Ellis in
engineering or Ellis an engine company
in India in Indianapolis by then they
were a subsidiary of General Motors this
is from 1955 and you could see that on
the elevation on the right it talks in
the middle it's quarter inch they called
it mural pane
I don't know if that's the best idea
name for a product but it was called
mural pane so anyway it was intended to
have a mere glass but it was not made
the first project to have mirror glass
incorporated and for which an ended up
being made was Bell Labs in Holmdel New
Jersey and these are some shots from the
sarin and office which at that time was
still in Michigan of mock-ups showing
how the the you know solar radiation or
how the light comes through comes
through the glass probably dealing with
some sort of shading coefficient and
Bell is eventually made here it is here
it is under construction and Kevin
thought that this would be a really good
idea considering the fact that Bell is
set within a landscape so the idea
initially was to keep heat out and to
reflect the landscape the companies that
made me relax
initially were so small that
this was okay this was designed in 57
completed in 62 but they did not have
enough mirror glass to cover the whole
thing until 1967 so for a while only the
front facade had mirror glass at this
time Bell Labs Bell Laboratories which
was a the research wing of AT&T was the
high-technology node for the United
States inventions out of Bell Labs not
not only include improving telephone
technology but would include what
include the development of microwave
transmission technology the silicon
computer chip wireless technology the
transistor information theory the space
satellite all of these products and and
approaches we're either designed at Bell
Labs or refined at Bell Labs so from the
very beginning mirror glass is going to
have an association with high technology
starting with Bell Labs now Kevin had a
design manager working on this project
under him this by the way was one of the
projects completed after Eero Saarinen
passed away
Eero Saarinen died pretty young in 1961
and after he died Kevin took over the
firm and it became known as roche ding
Kalu so completed a variety of Eero
Saarinen projects the glass on this
allowed 25% of light to pass through and
70% of the sun's heat was blocked his
assistant on this his design manager was
an architect named Anthony Lumsden and
Tony lumsden was born in England and but
raised and educated in Australia went to
the University of Sydney and on this
building and unfortunate this picture
doesn't really show it you still have
vertical mo Lian's protruding like you
had on many post-war buildings of that
era
Tony wanted to reverse the millions to
imply a skin on the building he figured
well you know you can't really see
inside it anymore and the mirrored glass
gives you a quality of form you know
it's reflecting everything around it but
it's also conveying a sense of form so
the combination of not already you have
an all-over surface why not take it to
the next level and make it a skin but
Kevin declined the idea at the time he
thought that if you did not have
vertical millions on this he would have
no shadow play and you would probably
you know just to have this all-over box
you know which he would have he was
right so this is Tony Leung stood on the
right and on the left is Caesar Pelli in
1964 they were hired by a large Los
Angeles firm called Daniel man Johnson
Mendenhall or dim chin as as they are
known Jim Jim was founded in 1946 and
this was one of it we have a lot of
these firms in Los Angeles and we did
during the post-war era they were
instrumental in building a city that was
growing very very fast
you needed the sort of infrastructure
firms they they weren't boutique design
firms in any sense
from 1940 to 1960 Los Angeles grew from
2.8 to 6 million people Los Angeles
County so in 20 years there was a
population increase in Los Angeles
County of 3.2 million people so the city
was growing very fast dim Jim was one of
these firms that answered to that growth
but they realized they were aware that
they they wanted to do a little bit
better in the design department than
they were some of the early bird
buildings are pretty good but they
wanted to hire they did not want they
were concerned with this idea of copying
the sort of
modernism of you know copying mieze or
whatnot so they went to the Saren infirm
they hired Caesar Pelli as their design
director and Caesar brought on Tony as
his assistant so dim Jim is doing
hi-tech work in Los Angeles they did
work for Lockheed and McDonnell Douglas
and all of these aerospace firms the
year that Cesar and Tony were hired 1964
there were 1321 high-tech establishments
in Los Angeles employing three hundred
and sixteen thousand people so high-tech
is a very very important part of the
Malou you know the situation of LA in
the 1960s it is creating it becomes part
of the culture it's the global capital
of aerospace and high-tech in the 1960s
so it's only natural that a regional
version of high-tech would come out of
it well the very first project out of
the gate was this and unfortunately it
was never made and it actually came this
close to being made this is sunset
Mountain Park from designed in 1964 and
completed in 1966 it won the PA first
place jury award in 1966 and was on a
progressive architecture cover this was
going to be multi this was a
high-density housing project so those
are all condos condominiums 1500
dwelling units with a chapel up in the
middle shops offices so of course it's a
mega structure of sorts on 2100 acres
Tony had worked on a project under Kevin
Roche called Oakland Museum and it had
this stepped or terrorist quality if any
of you have ever been to Oakland Museum
of integrating into the earth and that
same idea gets used here
instead of building like a tower on this
mountain this is in the Santa Monica
Mountains there's this attempt to
acknowledge the terrain of the natural
landscape so there's this interesting
response with for how many units that is
it's it's a fairly small footprint to
nature but still obviously an overtly
high-tech futuristic aesthetic that they
are dealing with this is Teledyne labs
this was an early project that was
completed using what was then a new
technology in this mirrored glass so by
1963 the bigger glass firms are building
this new they're designing their can
they're fabricating mirrored glass and
in the US that's going to be Pittsburgh
plate glass and libyans Ford they
basically use a metal oxide to reflect
solar radiation and tin oxide to enhance
thermal radiation and this is not an
all-over glass skin but you have it on
the front of this building and there's
this sense of reflectivity of form
giving of treating the facade as a shiny
surface and some of these of breaking
apart the box some of these ideas seem
to definitely come from James Stirling
and James Gowen Leicester they were very
very inspired by James Stirling both of
them admitted that so with Leicester
sort of you know wrapping everything
treating it as a skin not not to mention
the workshop wing which approximates a
smooth glass skin of sorts there are
definitely there are definitely some
some corollaries so anyway this is this
is Teledyne it uses a la Olivia
Pittsburgh plate glass on here and
Reyner Banham called this an example of
the case studies style that almost
wasn't and you could see there's these
smooth reversed mo Lian's
there and these are these protrusions
are called fingers coming out of here
and Teledyne was a high tech firm now
this is going to be designed in 1966
this is the Federal Aviation
Administration this is the first
building to have an all-over mirrored
glass skin so on this Tony finally got
to do what he wanted on Bell Labs to
reverse that boolean and treat it in an
all-over capacity Los Angeles at this
time did not have any architectural
critics Los Angeles did not have its
full first full-time architectural
critic until 1969 so there was a lot of
room to experiment it was a really open
city both to new ideas and literally I
mean it was just very horizontal very
undeveloped so where the fa this is the
headquarters for the Federal Aviation
Administration their West Coast
headquarters where this is made it was
wide open at the time and could reflect
its surroundings and of course aerospace
the Federal Aviation Administration it
ties right in to the you know the high
tech concepts that are already floating
around in LA so this wraparound skin the
idea here was to try to wrap it around
to to deny the building as four sides
and to wrap it around corners as much as
possible and it's it's akin to an
encasing on a 747 jet or an early piece
of computer equipment it has some
references to 1930s kind of streamline
modernism so there's a certain nostalgia
about it but nonetheless this is the
first building designed with a mere
glass skin it's not the first building
completed it's not completed until 1973
but it's the first building design Tony
and Caesar refer to this design system
as non-gravitational non-directional you
know there's it's it's an all of the
horizontal of the transcends and the
mullions are the only stick out about
3/8 of an inch there's no implied
verticality or you know Mountie
mentality in fact it's horizontal and
it's interesting that it seems like a
very atmospheric building which is
perfect for Los Angeles this D
materialised lightweight atmospheric
design and those were some of the stated
intentions of this non-gravitational non
directional aesthetic so to go back to
the knees building on the right this
designer on the left is Philo Jacobson
he worked at dim gym under Caesar and
Tony and I only show it again because I
found this slide in Tony lumsden
archives in there there was the building
so obviously it was intended it was
meant to be an influence on what came
you know and early examples of this
design system most of you are probably
familiar with these the som lever house
on the left from 1952 in Seagram's from
1958 I just had these up here to show
kind of what they were tasked with
designing against and and - because so
many people were copy this at the time
so Libra house has a plinth there's a
subtly implied base shaft Capitol still
and of course this gets close to a skin
but you know you still have transparent
vision levels and the vertical mo Lian's
are slightly predominant the meas
building actually has a t-bar added so
this is actually from my thesis which I
wrote a long time ago which is why it's
all typed with a typewriter
but it's a long time ago and there's a
Nepali lumsden mullion on the left in
the end the mesial million on the right
so it's basically reversed with Kali and
lumps in that's still single glazing
they're gonna do work they're gonna do
design work with double glazing later
and they do this building together this
is completed in 1969 this is the first
building to have an all-over glass skin
it's not the FAA is the first one
designed this is the first one completed
so it's a dark it's kind of a dark black
grey skin it's not flat-out mirror but
it's the reflectivity that they were
after this is Century City Medical Plaza
from night again 1969 this was the sole
building was done for $28 a square foot
back then which wasn't too bad when you
work at a company like dim gym the idea
was to keep cost down so I'm really I
really admire their constraints the fact
that they had to work with such tight
constraints and to do something
interesting for a big company that
didn't give you that many hours to
design anything at all because it's just
time and budget and yet they come up
with something subtle but different and
and really really conceived and really
fought out so with Century City Medical
Plaza you know they're kind of using
some aspects of the museum language
against the the folks are copying these
poorly so you have the curtain wall you
have the you know the certain aspects of
it are emphasized you know that idea of
a curtain wall is emphasized or
exaggerated I know that Charles Jencks
has talked a lot about that as a
character defining feature of late
modernism that idea of exaggerating
aspects of modernism as a way to react
against them but in this case also the
has a very sculptural quality this by
the way is the building that Caesar
Pelli credits with being the influence
on Century City Medical Plaza and its
lesser-known of the earlier works this
is beau whom you're Cermak this is the
glass tower complex from 1928 it's an at
an exhibition of contemporary culture in
Brno Czech Republic and you could see
the the membrane here is handled in a
very taut tight manner and the mullions
on sensory City Medical Plaza are you
know similar in dimension you know in
their rectangularity so here's another
shot of Century City Medical Plaza this
is they take away the base shaft and
Capitol and they just give you an all
over you like I said non-directional
non-gravitational blast skin very
atmospheric very future forward and very
much inspired by minimalist art of the
time here's a work by Tony Smith from
1967 called maze this work actually
weighs 9,000 pounds heavy and you know
you're familiar with some aspects of
1960s minimalist sculpture there's these
there's these ideas of three-dimensional
work to treat you know to deal with the
object hood of something the
three-dimensional object and to
democratize the work to take it to take
the sculpture off of its base and and
like you see here and a sense of
dematerialization is often part of that
as well with those sixties works well
you see all of those aspects with
Century City Medical Plaza it's taken
off its base there's no plinth to speak
of there's a dematerialization taneous
lee form giving
and and so there's there's a definite
influence they're comparing comparing
the the two works and it's treated as a
three dimensional object it's it's about
object hood it's not a building in the
typical sense Caesar Pelli is
approaching it as a three dimensional
object the way that much minimalist
sculpture of the time was written of
Caesar Pelli leaves dim gym for Gruen
Viktor Gruen firm in who has a very very
sizable Los Angeles office in 1968 and
right out of the gate he does this work
here this is a proposal for United
Nations City it from 1969 for it for
built on a park between old and new
channels in the Danube River in Vienna
and today there is a work there called
the Vienna International Center this
Caesar Pelli is very interested in the
idea of circulation spines
you know these pragmatic parts of
getting people through a building in a
reasonably efficient fashion so this
deals with horizontal and vertical
circulation spines which he's very
interested in this was going to be four
million square feet 1,500 in the 1500
feet long it was a competition entry and
he actually won the competition and then
for some mysterious reason it was sort
of put out again and he lost and they
just gave it to somebody else so there's
probably some intrigue behind why that
happened but you could see the seven
towers there are mirrored glass again to
reference Sterling's a Leicester project
looks a lot like the tower at Leicester
with the chamfers and this is supposed
to be an open hand which is of course a
symbol of peace so if you look at the
tips of it
the thumb the the pointer the middle
finger the ring finger the pinky
whatever that was the sort of subtle
symbolism of this so again just a
another you know Omega structure being
done you know very early on mere glass
gets used for global you know something
that's kind of multinational like the UN
if not globalist so I'm gonna focus a
little bit on Caesar Caesar Polly's
interests are very very much informed by
the Los Angeles art scene this is a
image called LACMA family portrait shot
at LACMA in February of 1968 and you
have all of these various you know
Southern California artists here they
said I have a pointer let's see so you
have let's see Larry Bell Billie al
Bengston let's see Ed rachet I think
it's back there that's got to be Rishi I
think that's one of his works so all of
these artists in and some others the
writer
Esther McCoy the architectural writer
Julius Shulman the architectural
photographer but you have a couple of
Architects in this as well for there's
Frank Giri right there at the top and
over here is Cesar Pelli holding a
picture of his COMSAT labs project so
Cesar's working for these you know a big
corporate firm like Gruen but he's very
very tied in with this art scene and you
know for Southern California
architecture most people just associate
that's they just assumed that would be
Frank Gehry alone but Cesar was too and
his work is going to be really informed
by it this is San Bernardino City Hall
in the community the city of San
Bernardino about 60 miles east of LA
they wanted something very future
forward for their city to make a
statement this is designed in 1969
completed in 72 and
there's definitely a you know high-tech
or machine aesthetic going on here with
the encasement
he's using the all-over glass skin in
two ways it's very form giving and then
at the bottom level at least it's
intended to be an homage to Larry Bell
so there's a Larry Bell cube on the left
he's a light in space artist based in
Southern California and Cesar Pelli is
very interested in the same idea of
perceptual transparency this idea of
being able to see multiple levels of
multiple layers in a medium then that's
what Bell was after to to see through
the cube to see the cube to see a
reflection in the cube to see different
you know facets or Glade glazing levels
of the cube and at San Bernardino City
Hall on the ground level you see inside
the building you see the glass you see
the reflectivity on the outside and it
was very important for Caesar to get
that balance right and you could see
your own reflection in it as well I
tried to stay out of this picture but so
it's about this idea Caesar is trying to
take the skin and do something really to
give the skin its own presence you know
not denying it not just using it as as
form giving to something else or as
something to see through for
transparency sake but to let it really
do something interesting there's another
shot of San Bernardino City Hall just
this high-tech aesthetic here
Columbus comments mall by Caesar Pelli
this is a work by
Peter Alexander on the left he's a light
and space artist out of Southern
California and who does work in resin
and you could kind of see a little bit
of the same concept with this all black
glass mall where in terms of its cut its
shape in this was built not in Southern
California but in Columbus Indiana from
1973 and this work here this is actually
Caesars image and I think that's him
taking the picture there's a Craig
Coffman work I'm sorry a Peter Alexander
work on the Left called cloud box from
1966 in cast resin and sure enough
there's a shot on Columbus Commons on
the facade of this idea of multiple
layers again with clouds with Caesar
Pelli with a reflection of the building
so he's trying to do interesting aspects
with this skin I just had this in here
for the heck of it Caesar was so into
art that he actually got really in a pop
art and did this work that's kind of an
homage to James Rosenquist I think but
this was a very very very short-lived
restaurant in st. Louis Missouri called
the beef encounter so
and you can see on the sign across the
top the lips are mouthing I love it
works here by Craig Coffman
so the Creek Kaufman is a Finnish fetish
artist and they're really big in
Southern California in the 1960s also
this idea of the glossy the slick
sensual surface hot rod culture surf
glazed surfboard culture which are all
you know surfboards are very shiny and
you know they're these composite
materials from the aerospace industry
from the high-tech industry so there's
just a couple of works in Finnish fetish
and then there's the Pacific Design
Center
so again just that reference to 1960s
art of the time the Pacific Design
Center blue building is designed in 1971
and completed in 1975 it's based off
Caesars favorite building the Crystal
Palace favorite modern era building and
it serves the same basic purpose and it
kind of as a subtle call-out to it with
the vault with the blue and this is a
rather large building it was very
controversial at the time he got a lot
of heat for this from people like
Pauline Schindler and others for how out
of scale it was with its immediate
vicinity in the Los Angeles Community of
West Hollywood everything around this is
very diminutive and then you have this
but Cesar was right he said you know
there's going to be other big buildings
here eventually Cedars there's a
hospital nearby called Cedar sinai
there's other towers being made and
Mario Gandil saunas had a really
interesting point about this he called
it a new tool for mapping the global
city so it's not in scale with its
immediate neighborhood but it really is
kind of in scale with Los Angeles as an
expanded horizontal metropolis now I
think a very interesting comparison can
be made to the Pompidou which I have in
the lower right
there there are two different versions
of high-tech of course the pompidou is
they were designed at the same time
start the design of both started in 1971
the Pompidou is completed in 77 the PDC
blue building is completed in 75 they
are almost the identical measurements
they the Pompidou is 166 by 60 meters
and 7 levels high and the Pacific Design
Center blue building is 162 by 67 meters
and 6 levels high and they're both you
know a little bit out of scale with
their immediate surroundings so there's
a definite there's their I see them as
sister buildings I really do there
they're two different versions of high
tech and cesar pelli is very much
influenced by light and space this is a
james terrell work called rondo blue
from 1969 i am almost certain he must
have seen this he has mentioned that the
facade that Bank was intended to be like
atmospheric like light in space and the
color of that is just so spot-on with
rondo blue and Cesar's Southern
California buildings all tend to be very
very atmospheric a very atmospheric
buildings they they have an atmosphere
about them they try to create atmosphere
and that was one of the intentions of
early these early late modern glass skin
designs was not only to be high-tech but
to create a sense of atmosphere to make
sense then that you know the Los Angeles
context begins to make sense in that
regard cesar pelli
and Tony who we'll talk about in a
minute are both really interested in the
idea of extrusion of sectional extrusion
of taking one part and repeating it and
finding an economy with that of not
giving it a cap you know or something at
each horizontal end and I just sort of
have this slide in here to show that
sense of extrude
that sense of future forward high-tech
with this you know grandma you know
walking into this vortex over there and
very very futuristic imagery and of
course very super studio ask the
connections here are hard to ignore with
continuous monument or you know their
idea the way that they used grid ISM
continuous monument was super studios
starts in 1966 and continuous monument
is put out I believe in 69 so it's right
right around the same time that these
buildings are being designed and Tony is
also very interested in our kazoom we
found you know file our kazoom files in
his and his archives and then ARCA gram
ARCA gram itself Tony really really
loved ARCA gram and he liked what he
liked about this was the idea of total
enclosure it was really interested in
the idea of enclosure the his son told
me that he did not he liked the fact
that this did not have obvious windows
and doors and the typical sense and so
he wanted to get away from that in his
own work and of course this high tech
now something else that very that Tony
is very interested in is the biological
whereas Caesars really interested in the
art components Tony gets really
interested in the biological membrane
aspects of the skin so now I'm going to
shift to Tony after Cesar leaves for
Gruen Tony's now the design director at
dim Jim he would stay there pretty much
the rest of his career until until he
turns 65 and they basically fired him
and and he started his own practice and
so he was very very unknown so he
becomes the vice president and design
director at
a gym gym and all these projects that
they do right out of the gate I swear
you know a sunset Mountain Park for both
of them and then UN City and then Tony
does this this is was gonna be a scheme
if you're familiar with Santa Monica
there's a pier with a carnival and you
know ferris wheel and all that cold it
was Pacific Ocean Park well they were
gonna level that and build this and the
community it was pretty upset about it
actually
you know because remember sunset
Mountain Park was going to be in the
Santa Monica Mountains too so anyway
this was drafted a developer named John
Moore Hart or Jack Moore Hart I really
don't know how serious this this was
it's just so amazing you have a 30 story
600 room hotel that's 300 feet offshore
and it was just gonna be this
cylindrical shaft with the
semi-transparent glass and I guess he
would just walk out there I don't even
know how you get out there there's the
rest of the buildings there's some
really gigantic birds and the
lower-right this is actually a wonderful
rendering by a man named Carlos Denis
who did incredible renderings for a lot
of the big firms in Southern California
speaking of birds this is actually an
image that Tony used to show quite often
this is from his slide deck and he was
really into this idea that he was into
this idea of mutation in nature that you
could have mutations or changes and he
was into this idea that there's not one
like form doesn't just there's not one
right form for for function you could
have variety in nature nature affords
you variety so all of these birds have
the same structural system but obviously
they have variety they have different
colors you know they have different
shapes any kind of
takes that that biological aspect to
note when he designs his buildings which
we'll look at these are just some
scribble notes that he had about
membrane he was always writing about
membrane he gave membrane glass scans
more thought than any other architect I
know us he was constantly contemplating
membrane talking about how it could be
an enclosure connecting it to biology
and and really really sticks with the
glass membrane more so than just about
anybody else he's really into the idea
of extrusion too so he does a series of
buildings on Wilshire Boulevard in Los
Angeles that are vertical extrusions and
he uses the auto non directional
non-gravitational glass skin to really
break apart the box to start breaking
apart the box and this is a very you
know cost economical system because you
cannot see inside it you could kind of
shift the floors in the view wherever
you need it to be in there you have some
give there's no there it doesn't have to
be anything sort of preconceived based
on the exterior aesthetic because the
spandrel and the vision glass is exactly
the same you can make it more economical
inside than otherwise you might be able
to actually so this was another way of
kind of kind of cutting costs and giving
the developers more bang for their buck
but it's also a very interesting design
made with solar band
I'm sorry Libby Owens Ford solar bronze
reflecting glass a lot of people who
write about late modernism talk about
the paradox of a glass building with no
windows but Tony says you know the
windows are part of us they're they're
there he wanted to treat the windows as
part of a surface rather than just holes
in the surface so and you place them
where they're required rather than where
an aesthetic system dictates so there's
a certain pragmatism running through him
yet doing something interesting
in spite not just in spite of but you
know because of that pragmatism you know
because of it and in regardless he's
doing something really interesting with
very very little and in terms of budget
this was designed in 1969 and completed
in 1971 this was the next of his kind of
mutated vertical extrusion so it kind of
breaks apart the box a little bit more
this is Century Bank Plaza from this
completed in 1972 and the this is the
West elevation on the right here where
that this is popping out and he popped
this out he extended this to give people
views of the Santa Monica Mountains he
wanted to somehow find ways to you know
afford people more connections with
views basically and he broke apart the
box to do so and uses the all-over glass
skin as a means to do so Esther McCoy
wrote about these buildings as having an
inner energy dynamic as if there's
something inside them that kind of just
wants to come out
this is Roxbury Plaza the third of these
so it's even more mutated it's even more
it's a box that's even more disassembled
but but these mutations are not
arbitrary this is a trapezoidal shaped
lot and so he's doing this to make the
building more cost-efficient to get more
out of it so that's the pressure the
onus is on him to do this working at a
place like dim Jim so he talks a lot
about economic forces he has said that
you know the it's it's in the control of
economic forces and he had very few
choices he could he could deal a little
bit with the shape the flatness or depth
of the mole Ian and the decision whether
to use opaque or translucent glass and
at what level that's basically it
everything else to tony is economic
forces
so in those constraints it's interesting
that it these big firms you know which
you would associate the globe
the architects within these big firms
have these tight constraints and are
trying to do something incredibly
interesting within very very tight
constraints and that's it's something I
really sort of got out of researching
this then we come to his horizontal
extrusions which are rather remarkable
and were never made so he takes a
section a really unique section and
extrudes it this was going to be for
Lugano Convention Center this was a five
acre site over Luke looking a lake in
Lugano Switzerland and it was going to
be a hotel on Convention Center designed
around certain views he did a
pitch-black model of this too which is
rather remarkable a 360 room hotel this
is 1972 30 2,800 square feet of
exhibition space it's kind of the last
building placed sideways and extruded so
you can sort of see the evolution so the
section is the generator of form and
he's going to do it in mirrored glass
and then you have finally Beverly Hills
Hotel this was never made and it's as if
whatever was was bustling around inside
the forum has now purged itself out and
you're back to having a box again but
now it's horizontal and then something
is rolling out of it
so this is Beverly Hills Hotel the
cylinders are kind of breaking free but
each of those cylinders had a different
use or a different purpose for a
porte-cochere
or shops or whatever the case is and
this is actually rather wonderful - this
is an alternate version of Beverly Hills
Hotel from 1973 and it's based off an
Underwood 450 typewriter so if I saw
this you know without really knowing I
would definitely think that this was you
know from the 80s
it looks so new wave but it's 1973 and
just to show you a couple of other
buildings
Tony's really good at doing the 80s in
but does I doing
visioning the 80s in the 70s the upper
left is a tilman headquarters from 1974
completed in 83 I think and on the lower
right you have Roybal health center in
East Los Angeles with these sort of grit
days these computer graphic type grids
you know these versions of the future
this interesting you know before CAD
really takes hold that's when you have
futurism it seems like after cad gets
going you don't have futurism like this
anymore which is an interesting thought
the building in the upper left by the
way is used as Starfleet Academy on Star
Trek The Next Generation and just a
couple more once the 80s come Tony's
doing really unreal work here this was a
proposal for Bowers Museum in Santa Ana
from 1981 and then this is the Hyperion
waste treatment facility this is for
treating sewage but you know it works
for a big firm like dim Jim and they're
concerned with you know infrastructure
it's an infrastructural building yetee
even a sewage treatment plant he tries
to do something really interesting with
it with the sectional extrusion and this
wonderful color palette and that takes
us to this building by Lumsden this is
boo Media Bank designed in he worked on
this design from 1972 to 1976 and I have
this building on here as an example of
kind of where this goes this was
intended to be built in Jakarta
Indonesia 35 stories 1 million square
feet and this really sort of points to
the idea that this becomes the sort of
aesthetic of globalism the aesthetic of
corporations of trans noddle ISM light
capitalism you know to do to now that
you're doing late capitalism in your
trans nodal to not do a box to do
something that
that's distinctive and uses this all
over you know mirrored skin to do this
and around the time that this model was
proposed but put out there there was a
conference at UCLA in LA called Ford
there were two there was four days in
May and then four days in April and at
that time the LA architects are starting
to coalesce into a group called the
silvers they're trying to give
themselves a sense of cohesive identity
and what's really interesting is that
most the common thread in their work
tends to have a certain element of
anonymity to it in fact James Stirling
was a guest at that he was sort of their
special guest at the 1976 conference and
he said well you know it's kind of like
chic fashion packaging and there's some
streamlined styling and it's an attitude
based on the building type it's very
pragmatic and very economical David
Gebhard a Southern California
architectural historian who was also at
that conference said well again good
taste as fashion architecture
architecture is fantasy 1930s packaging
and that it could be built anywhere and
he he and I respectfully disagree with
him on this point he thought that this
could have been developed anywhere - but
I really feel that this this has a very
very intrinsic Los Angeles context even
the anonymity of it you know the fact
that it was a large firm that Tony
himself was anonymous and Cesar was you
know working for a big firm - back then
it makes sense that a globalist
aesthetic would come out of a place like
1960s Los Angeles where there was no
there there as people used to say all
the time so now that I've talked about
Cesar and Tony I'm just gonna run
through really quickly this is the part
where we breeze through some other
samples this is by Pei Cobb Freed and
the next few examples I'm going to show
are kind
the works that in architectural history
books get credit as being the first
either the first or the most significant
this is the John Hancock insurance
company by Pei Cobb Freed designed by
Henry Cobb and this is a very early
design 1967 anything from 67 or 68 is
really early Caesar and Tony do FAA and
Century City Medical Plaza one year
before and then it seems everybody jumps
on the bandwagon
one year later tallest building in New
England it's next to a Henry Hobson
Richardson Church in the Richard Sounion
Roman X style the narrow part is so it's
you know this faceted parallelogram it's
cold crystalline aesthetic and they you
know I think paid Cobb Freed had a
bigger budget than Caesar and Tony did
on most of their Los Angeles works IDs
Center by Johnson Bergy designed in 68
completed in 1972 57 stories the tallest
building in Minnesota with multiple
corner offices in a you know glassy eye
repetition I guess it's called and 32
corner offices over here and sort of a
birdcage effect on the mo Lian's
so this often gets called you know one
of one of the first but these are the
big examples the iconic examples
Pennzoil placed by Johnson Bergy
finished in 1975 the client did not want
another quote-unquote upturn cigar box
so when Philip and when John Burgie and
Philip were on the plane back John took
out a napkin took the box and lobbed it
off and put the second element next to
it and that's a that's a 10-foot space
between them and and then Pennzoil an
oil company can go into one building and
then just leased the other one out to
somebody else because a lot of oil
companies didn't want to share a one
building that wanted their own I just
kind of have this over here on the right
this is from a Gregory baddack book on
minimalist art one of his iconic books
that's Brian O Daugherty's pair from
1967 I sometimes get curious if
these architects actually saw some of
these works because it seems like
there's a strong resemblance at least
between those two Kevin Roche so this is
UN Plaza by Kevin Roche from 1975 again
there's not too many of these in New
York City but this is one of them the
the shaped faceted sculptural treatment
in this case with a smaller mold Ian's
module to make the building seem bigger
it's about four feet ten inches per
square across and there's two of these
buildings there's one behind it that you
could barely see the United Nations
headquarters is right across the street
it has glass of the same color and Kevin
actually worked on UN on on that so it's
kind of its intended to relate to the UN
in its coloring and it's the smoothness
of its curtain wall and it's red it
reads as a solid surface you know from a
distance you know as a lot of these of
these do here's this rather wild
alternate version for un Plaza that
kevin was going to do and he said his
logic was well most flags in the world
have red or blue in them and he was
working on he was working on red he was
working on developing red reflecting
mirror glass for this which would have
been just done just amazing I would have
loved to have seen that
so k OE and here's the interior of it so
the mirrored treatment continues on the
inside not not the interior this one
well since my unmade model but of this
so the mirrored treatment continues on
the inside this faceted this this
octagonal infinity what shelf for a vase
these octagonal columns and just
kaleidoscopic interior very much of the
late you know of late modernism and this
by kevin this is
earlier than UN this is designed in 1967
so again anything from 67 so Kevin is a
master in this this is college life
insurance company in Indianapolis
designed in 1967 and opened in January
of 1972 the idea was this insurance
company needed to expand so kevin
designed nine of these pyramids in case
they needed nine they did it so they did
need three and these are colossal it's
really hard to get a sense of a scale of
these by looking at the picture they are
giant and but their icons for
Indianapolis
these are today called the college life
pyramids they're rented out as premium
office spaces that's an I think that's
an artificial lake in in front of them
but just this idea of the shaped the
sculptural the you know and you know
using mere glass you know masterfully
which again Kevin originally developed
he's the he's the developer of it these
wonderful interiors inside inside the
building and it's really interesting
that as these buildings become more
hermetic on the outside the insides tend
to become more open plan and this is
referred to as an office landscape an
open plan office landscape in the
articles about this but it's interesting
that you know in the seventies yet
moreover the beginning of the open plan
simultaneously with the exterior you
know the more chromatic skin and you
could see the mo Lian's sort of
protruding in right there as well
other sarin in folks so Kevin Tony and
C's are all from Saarinen's office this
is Gunnar burr Kurt's he designs this in
1967 this is the Minneapolis Federal
Building this is a suspension structure
with mirrored glass so it's suspended
sort of
on the top and bracket it on the sides
and I knew somebody who worked in this
and they said when it got really windy
it would kind of swing which was a
problem but that's supposed to be a big
M for Minneapolis which is where it's
located this building here so there's
not too many of these in the Midwest but
early on there are this is one of the
very first buildings designed and
completed Helmut hok Hellmuth Obata
Kassebaum equitable life insurance a lot
of these buildings are for insurance
companies and so this was in
transformations in modern architecture
by Arthur Drexler Ammo Michelle from
1980 and Drexler pointed out the fact
that you know the simpler the form the
more effective these designs often are
Canada gets involved in the game early
ronan iredale suspension building West
Coast transmission company from 1969 and
this is the very early all mirrored
glass pavilion this is the earliest
mirrored glass sort of structure but
it's not really a building it's a
temporary pavilion by Arthur Erickson
for the Expo 70 Osaka Japan pavilion and
this is supposed to reference the
Canadian landscape it's supposed to be
simultaneously an ice glacier to
reference a mountain and the sky itself
so it's doing all kinds of things
this design system takes off in the
south of the US so where it's warmer
where you're on a 34th latitude right
this is BlueCross BlueShield bio Delon
associates from 1973 and that gets in
Chapel Hill North Carolina and it's just
large trapezoid you have those wild late
modern you know again just walking this
gentleman with his suitcase walking into
the corporate vortex here another shot
of it they had to do that they had this
building's 500 feet long and they had to
do Windtunnel tests on it for tornadoes
everybody was really nervous about the
shape another work by Blue Cross Blue
Shield in Maryland so I don't know why
Blue Cross Blue Shield is a health
insurance company in the
States I don't know why they got so into
this but they did some great buildings
so this is by Peterson and brick Bower
from 1972 and then you have these sort
of random office parks so a lot of the
buildings I've just talked about these
early ones were for insurance companies
health insurance insurance I still don't
know why this became such a big deal
with the insurance company initially but
you also have these random office parks
screens like the century Center Atlanta
from 1974 by 3d international sensory
center San Antonio 1972 also by 3d
International their primary designer was
hardwood tailor and he drew this out on
a napkin during lunch so it's two
buildings on napkins somebody's gotta do
a book just on buildings design on
napkins I think it'd be fantastic
peachtree plaza by John Portman and John
Portman will come up later this was the
tallest hotel building constructed when
it was completed in 1977 it's 73 stories
5000 windows all in PPG lhr so LeBrons
so this was this was made this was
constructed futuristic imagery Hyatt
Regency in Dallas Texas 1978 by lune a
door for Welton Beckett associates who
also did Capitol Records in Hollywood
and this was intended to be a Xanadu
like this little mini Wonderland it was
designed for convention goers and Lou
knew that convention goers go to
conventions to escape to be in another
world so you have a rotating cocktail
lounge up there and this grouping of
towers Campbell Center sent in by
Newhouse and Taylor in Dallas made with
real gold on the on the glass the
designers wanted me to know that when I
interviewed them there used to be a soap
opera 70s like Friday a Friday night so
proper on CBS called Dallas and in the
opening shots of Dallas the helicopter
flies over and they just show all these
mirrored glass buildings Hyatt Regency
and
over here so it was it's very photogenic
Paul Rudolph's city center 1 and city
center 2 completed in 1984 in Fort Worth
Paul Rudolph the man who had this done
was a man named Perry bass I'm sorry
Syd bass and he went to Harvey he went
to Yale I'm sorry and took classes and
Paul Rudolph's
arts you know art and architecture
building and and decided he wanted to
hire him to do something once he got
done with school
Rudolph's all these structures as
Autobots kind of like humanoid they were
just he didn't try to disguise their
bigness and he treated them as sort of
like with humanoid qualities having he
called the little bump-outs at the top
puppy-dog ears so some details it's the
sort of grid ISM these amazing sort of
escalators some of the best escalators
in the United States with this high-tech
imagery then we get to LA so this is
where I'm gonna bring it home this was
the first almere glass building
completed this is the siene building by
Langdon and Wilson and Langdon and
Wilson is a prototypical big la firm but
they're interested in making their
buildings disappear and integrating them
with the landscape the designer on this
was a man named Hans Mumper and he said
that the facade quote-unquote simply
wanted to be that way so it was just
very straightforward it's a design
that's easy to comprehend to like' or
dislike' now there was a silent partner
with Langdon Wilson him Emmett whemple
he was a landscape designer and all of
Langdon and Wilson's early buildings
tend to be mirrored and not they're not
all mirrored but the mirrored ones do
tend to be in these landscapes so
there's this very sort of prismatic you
know intense quality about this that
sort of
you know points to a sort of heightened
intensity of effect it's almost
hallucinogenic and you know but yet skin
deep at at the same time there it is in
an ad it was marketed extensively Sears
West Coast headquarters David Martin and
Ron Kalia so D for AC Martin John pasty
a this is done in 71 the art critic the
architecture critic for the LA Times
said of this building the building looks
like a glistening object that arrived
from a friendly and prosperous planet or
a giant ceremonial artifact left by a
technologically advanced civilization
and there's super studio so it seems
very similar more screens in Southern
California Kojima associates for Nissan
US headquarters from 1972 these work
very well in Southern California because
of the atmosphere Arco later worked by
Philo Jacobson in Long Beach and then in
Orange County so Cole centers developed
by a man named Don Cole who after seeing
the Langdon and Wilson CNA building
hires them to do 122 acres of mirrored
glass buildings and all of these are
very small Don Cole is also responsible
for developing a lot of the tilt-up
industrial buildings that Lewis vaults
shot if you're familiar with him
and all of these are sort of meant for
small businesses and they're set in the
landscape so you have silver buildings
this is in front of a fake lake called
Lake Elliott that's only 18 inches deep
and was clear it was cleaned four times
a year they were very proud of that at
the ten that was cleared and cleaned
four times a year
this is coal center block D this sort of
hallucinogenic infinite reflectivity
1978 this cube from 1980 zebra stripes
and my favorite gold so very unusual in
Orange County these are Orange County is
what we call a post-industrial
landscape to be sure and you have these
developments that tend to be like mini
metropolis is that just kind of pop up
all together and by 1991 when a lot of
these were made Orange County was the
third largest downtown quote-unquote in
California next to LA and San Francisco
in terms of office space there's three
cities in South Orange County Costa Mesa
Newport and herb Irvine and combined
they had 20 men 1 million square feet of
office space these buildings are these
are like mini metropolis --is that just
kind of pop up all at once with these
mirrored glass buildings and very you
know very much associated with the
service society vernacular not not
industry but consultants lawyers you
know people who make their their money
is professionals in the service industry
in buildings such as this just rather
you know not a masterpiece but very
basic but using a PPG Sollux 550
reflecting glass for these rather you
know hallucinogenic effects with the
atmosphere typical a shot of this
everybody in Orange County seems to
drive a Lexus or you know so you have
all these what are the Lex I is that the
plural of Lexus and next to it you tend
to have if you can if you don't want to
do that the soft landscape you do the
hard scape this is by Osama new Gucci
this is within the complex I'm showing
you called Segerstrom Center or South
Coast Plaza town center from 1979 to
1982 all done on preconception
pre-planned
the owner of this land talked to the
California Department of Transportation
to put a new freeway through his farm as
lima bean fields and so from that he
developed this in a giant mall called
South Coast Plaza just another shot of
Noguchi Gardens this is called a
California scenario Irvine Towers in
Irvine by AC Martin again this idea
the pop up kind of like a fake downtown
where even in the building on the right
it implies multiple buildings with these
very interesting hard scape features
this is a sculpture from 1982 called our
1986 by Jerome Kirk called avianna so
very much of the era now and in Orange
County Los Angeles was largely built out
by 1965 so Orange County was not it was
developing a lot in the 1970s in the
night by the 1980s it was the richest
County per capita in the United States
so there was a lot of development and
there's a lot of tech industry down
there too so they're really interested
in this slick tech aesthetic this was
for Xerox the copy company and that's
supposed to be a piece of paper coming
out of a copy machine programmatic
corporate this one by a designer for
Langdon and Wilson named Arthur V Strock
he's one of their really wonderful
designer who goes out on his own and
starts doing these buildings you know
just very this you know this won't be in
any architectural history books this is
Newport Irvine Center from 1981 but it's
very intact and it's very telling of the
era and the white mo Lian's are rather
catching very jazzy in buildings like
this just these anonymous little
buildings with you know shaped faceted
chamfers faceted minimalist sculptured
treatment and of course you know you're
dealing with high-tech if you get a bump
of red like that and then you get these
bigger scale examples in Orange County
floor this is 1.3 million square feet of
office space for an engineering company
by Welton Beckett the designers Karl
Schrute Fager designed from 1973 to 1977
and this is the this lower building is
for the workers and it's all open plan
1.3 million square feet of open plan and
this is for the executives right behind
it they wanted to be separate from
each other which is fine and mr. Fleur
said if you make it to the top
executives there you've really made it
that was the idea so and these wonderful
light fixtures in the front just
incredible incredible galactic imagery
and at the time this building was
finished this area of Orange County and
nothing else around it it was like a
mirage to see this off the 405 freeway
with nothing else it was like a dream it
was really really fascinating
there's the landscape behind it this is
very you know reflecting off the
building with this sunken cafeteria area
and it makes for these really
interesting sort of anonymous but
weirdly esthetic corporate landscapes
and there is the what these towers are
that's a 93 foot tall tower that keeps
the air conditioning equipment it's
aluminum and so that way the rest of the
roof lines are a smooth data there's no
AC equipment on the rest of the roof at
all you have it all in there the
Bonaventure so these are these are the
more baroque examples the Bonaventure
hotel so flora Bonaventure John Portman
this has been written of I'll go back to
it completed in 1977 by rooms this is
still the largest hotel in LA a by rooms
and this is the inside of it
Frederic Jamison if you're familiar with
him has written quite a lot about the
Bonaventure as one of the first
instances of postmodern hyperspace where
when you go inside the space the space
kind of is it's not a passive space
you're manipulated it's a fugue of
circles within circles it's easy to get
lost you sort of wander around this
brutalist landscape you shoot up these
glass elevators that are on the outside
with these views and then you go to a
rotating cocktail lounge where the floor
is moving so it's all about movement
it's all about manipulation the Crystal
Cathedral so these are the again these
are the baroque examples the big
examples Philip Johnson and John Bergy
this was a church for a televangelist
with 10,000 664 panes of glass
those vented louvers are intended to be
based off of a 1970s van because he
don't have an a/c system inside instead
you have this remarkable space which it
to Philip Johnson is gothic it's
skeletonization its verticality and it's
glass but it's also he saw it as kind of
a tent and a stage set because the
televangelist who commissioned this
Robert H Schuler was the first he had a
TV show a Christian show called the hour
of power and it was the first show to be
you know beamed in other countries a
Christian televangelist show the Oregon
player hits the keys and there's two
giant doors designed by NASA that open
up and you could stay in your car and
listen to it on the radio you don't even
have to get out of your car so it's very
drive up there's an early and Shuler
saying was come as you are in the family
car and you could stay there and there's
an earlier building on this by Nitra he
was really good friends with Richard
Neutra
he Nitra had his funeral service in the
earlier building before this was made
and this is you know Schiller was really
in the noid for his theory of bio
realism of connecting people with nature
as something healthy
so Schuler wanted this to be all glass
and all see-through
from top to bottom and it lets in 14% of
the light and so it's you know reflect
reflective on the outside and then clear
on the inside and the televangelists who
oversaw this got really into the design
and he compared it to people he said his
quote was I believe that a healthy
follower of Christ is emotionally open
and transparent and also a mirror in the
sense that others can see God's goodness
reflected in his or her life but to kind
of bring this full circle you know and
to show the other Me's work there's
Friedrichstrasse again Philip Johnson
who did this worked you know under
under nice so he's doing this as a sort
of you know later example of a mere
glass shoulder by the way it was a
Christian capitalist by his own
admittance so maybe it's no accident
that Phillip Johnson is referencing a
style associated with corporatism
Phillip Johnson tended to think things
through and but I think this is a really
sort of nice sort of expression of
referencing knees just a couple more
baroque examples the later word tends to
have some postmodern overtones
this is PPG place also by Philip Johnson
from 1984 and of course it's Victoria
Tower also a glass version of it and you
know Pittsburgh plate glass I'm
surprised I didn't design a headquarters
with their own glass you know 20 years
before I don't know why they waited so
long it's a detail of it and then this
later work here this is the largest the
tallest silicon glazing wall in the
world at the time it was created this is
fountain place by IM Pei 60 stories tall
450,000 square feet and one of those was
made not bolt that was the model that
was the rendering and there's the one
being made so they get bigger more
complex more elaborate just like
architecture tends to do as it goes on
this near glass skin finally sees it's
sort of grand finale in Hong Kong with
works by Paul Rudolph these are the you
know the more the most elaborate the you
know very very memorable designs in Asia
this is the bond center or Lippo Center
completed I think in 1988 I don't have
the year in front of me but designed
around 84 and completed in 88 and then
pays Hong Kong Ching I'm sorry
Bank of China Tower from 1990 so by the
night by 1990 you're starting to lose
the glass skin you're starting to Rhys
structure coming through once again but
getting some really you know memorable
works and there's this version of the
glass skin high-tech with Hong Kong
Shanghai Bank in the background to just
kind of show the two versions of
high-tech kind of converging now here's
this structuralism coming through here
we're gonna end with this and there was
no way I could get out of this lecture
right octave without talking about this
so this is this drawing is by man named
Charles slurred and slurred was a
protege of Tony lumsden his main student
and what this is is this giant of course
pyramid with it looks like he did a
cutout of Sterlings
simon late sixties simon's project and
just popped it in as a rendering you
could see sort of the the same
structural triangulation that we see in
the pay work but this was designed for
giorgio moroder the synth lord and
producer giorgio moroder
the story is this moroder saw this in
1992 done by slurred and this is in san
diego outside of san diego california
called the Miramar Metroplex from 1992
and as soon as Giorgio Moroder saw this
he cold called Charles slurred and he
says you need to meet me in Laguna Beach
right now we need to talk I want you to
design me a pyramid and so slurred said
okay you know what let let's me so
moroder wanted to build this pyramid
called Moroder sky and sort of you know
lost interest in the project and then
got reconnected with everybody in there
in the mid-2000s and so by the mid 2000s
slurred who's on the right here brought
in a much older Tony London to help him
and so this is what
Tony lumps dihn's last projects and
there's Giorgio Moroder right there
so Tony gets brought in I don't know I'm
curious to know what Tony thought about
it like okay very different and the idea
of this Marotta thought that the pyramid
embodied the high-tech character that he
was most interested in the idea of this
was you're going to have it was to be a
mega structure with living units
included like sort of constructed
off-site and then popped into the
pyramid and so this is about 2005 2006
so Giorgio Moroder had connected with
slurred in the 90s and then comes back
and they do this
so this pyramid was going to be to have
four point seven five million square
feet of development space maglev
elevators luxury condos at the upper
levels a five-star hotel plug-in
apartment nightly laser light shows and
it was supposed to be one kilometer tall
so obviously in moroder's shifted around
a different you know in the Middle East
asking if they were interested and you
know nobody was but it was all very very
early in the conceptual process but this
is probably the most over-the-top
reflective glass design one can conceive
that one knows of but ultimately it's
about the vernacular it's about the
simple designs it's about these designs
that are kind of forgotten that are
perhaps lesser-known like this one in
Orange County this is Mitsubishi Motors
sales of America by Del Deborah very and
Associates an architect that most people
probably have never even heard of from
1982 but it's wonderfully designed it's
overshadowed now by a new
quarters for Hyundai by Gensler but yet
it has these wonderfully considered
qualities with its prismatic s-- this
sort of future forward imagery these
reduce reflectivity this sculptural
quality and it is these where I think
the heart of this design system lies
with these forgotten smaller skill works
that are very vulnerable right now
a lot of this glass is not made anymore
so if too many pieces break they decide
to just reglazed the whole buildings you
know just reglaze the whole thing
because they don't want something that
looks like gaps with glass that's
slightly off a lot of these buildings
are for lease there's nobody in there
they think these are passe or you know
against the taste cycle so all the more
reason to try to understand and that was
the original impetus really of of trying
on my part of trying to understand these
four not just four inch County but
probably for an expanded area they're
very telling and very very memorable and
very evocative very sort of anonymous in
indeed but considered and as taste
cycles sort of evolve and you know
people get interested one hopes that the
better expressions of these examples
will not only be understood but but
perhaps preserved so thank you very much
thank you
[Applause]
hi um I just wondered why this your
first trip to Europe let alone in
England yeah I wonder if you've got any
might in a way of building to see like I
saw references to Willis Faber by Norman
Foster and and obviously all of Canary
Wharf and the buildings which aren't
even in Canary Wharf anymore the sort of
eminence I thought you want me to walk
around now
so I I want to see the the Richard
Rogers building here is it Lloyds and I
really want to see that I'm only going
to be in London for two more days I want
to see one poultry I'm interested one of
your colleagues Adam Furman just wrote a
wonderful book and I and it really got
me excited about Farrell's work and some
of the other works here so I would I
would love to see those but honestly
I've been so busy getting for this trip
and writing for this lecture I've even
thought about what I'm gonna see in
London yet I don't know so I'll try to
think about it tomorrow but I would
definitely like to see those that's the
unlike I the question of preservation at
the time that lots of the early
buildings were being designed as because
of course they're developing and these
materials kind of knew was there an idea
of how long they would last so was there
an idea of how long they would last and
to really
good point not that I know of I think
that a lot of materials tend to they
tend to give him a fifty year mark at
the most I do know that when mirror
glass first came out a lot of people
were very excited about it and they were
in Caesar Pelli talked about these
buildings as being very much in the now
very much of their of the present not
they he did not want to make mount
timeless monuments that doesn't mean he
doesn't want to preserve his buildings
he's definitely trying to keep them now
but he talked about you know the fact
that they reflect cloud so they always
change as something very shifting I do
know that people were very excited the
mirror glass was I don't think they were
thinking too far into the future because
mere glass was seen as futuristic in in
the present tense of 1971 but ironically
enough they weren't thinking about the
future of the material early Mir glass
had a lot of problems some of you may
know about the John Hancock Tower in
Boston the floor building which I showed
you in Irvine was also Libyans Ford
glass the same glass at the same time as
John Hancock and it all cracked on the
Sun on the East elevation because of the
heat so a lot of these very early
buildings did have problems so I think
they were I seriously doubt they were
thinking about the future in any in any
way shape or form and if they're working
for big firms they're probably just
thinking about economy yes can you talk
about a bit of the tension at the time
between the popularity and excitement of
mirror glass buildings at the time but
also I guess a sentiment that made its
presence felt in some of those that say
the seventies paranoia films about kind
of sinister Global's kind of anonymity
so I I just want to understand those on
the one hand there's a great excitement
but also this other kind of sinister
absolutely I mean there's a lot of these
buildings have a real and I do media
bank I I didn't you know I just sort of
skipped over it but there's a certain
paranoia
even in that image there's something a
little there's attention there's a in
that I think that people were really
interested in sort of the sci-fi
futuristic quality to this and in a lot
of futuristic aesthetics you know the
way that they're even presented when
they're positive there's a certain
degree of you know a paranoia or fear
that goes with it but it's seen it's
kind of exciting
you know in 2001 that's a there's a
beauty to 2001 but there's also
attention with the future a fear of the
future but it's gorgeous at the same
time so I think that the corporations
were really interested because it was
relatively cost efficient Tonys those
brown buildings I showed you on Wilshire
those three he was doing those for five
dollars a square foot for the glazing so
and the corporation solidus you know
what Charles Jencks is called slick tech
they saw the they were interested in the
high-tech aspects to it I think went a
little bit later when it started to fall
out of vogue then at a certain point Mir
glass design system turned people got
tired of it and maybe some of the later
designs weren't so thoughtful and people
really shifted away from its starting
about really well a mix of the a 1980
Venice architecture Biennale and the
AT&T building and then Aldo Rosie's
architects from the city put in the
English got a lot of other people
interested in stuff based off sound
Cataldo with punchouts you know but even
the buildings done in that our skins
they're they're thin they're they're
thin you know they're just using stone
but in its peak you know it was exciting
it was futuristic but it's there's a
subtle paranoia to it as well that's
undeniable
my question was about I was kind of
fascinated by your comparison of the
minimal artists and influence on
architecture and I I was thinking about
artists like Dan Graham and and suddenly
wondering if people like Donald Judd and
Dan Graham were influenced by the
architecture itself like if you look at
janati and Marfa and things like that
and it have you what are your thoughts
on kind of reading it backwards of how
the architecture goes goes into those
people's practices well there's there's
this - I think think about super studio
and the two that I showed super studio
Tony Smith and of course ARCA Graham all
have architecture backgrounds right off
the bat so the architect the the
minimalist some of the minimalists at
least sorcerer not the minimalist but
some of the the aesthetic concepts
concepts come from architecture so
already there's there's a threat of
architecture running through it in terms
of dan graham I I don't really remember
offhand when he starts his paintings I
think they're a little bit late like
they're there's works that are later I
believe does he do mirror glass skin
paintings he does - mirror glass
sculpture that's right okay I'm getting
him confused with someone else perhaps I
don't know how how much those later
minimalist artists are influenced by the
architecture I would have to go back put
it back put my art history cap back on
which I haven't done in a while but I
think it's a really good it's a really
good question
especially you know considering
considering their later work but I I
don't I don't know you know I don't know
I just know that Ceaser and Tony were
influenced by a variety of minimalist
sculptures including many that were
trained in architecture backgrounds and
I think it's a it's a good question to
finish because I this link between the
out scene of a lay on this architecture
is something that we discussed could be
a good topic to expand in the book we're
working on because as far as we know
there is not much that's specifically
written on on this specific moment so
yeah thank you thank you thank you
[Applause]
