the title of the lecture is makeup which
should be taken quite straight I mean
I'm talking about makeup or something
close to it I think probably sound like
many people I was introduced to the
problem of makeup very early in my life
and he needs the problem of the face my
family was in the theater it meant that
my mother and father were late to bed
after relaxing from getting back from
the theater and I was under strict
orders not to waken her early indeed my
nurse fortunately I had an extremely
English formal nurse and sure without
which I would now be in the back ward of
a psychiatric unit she was insistent on
kind of guarding the door and not
letting me knock on my mother's bedroom
door until 9 o'clock at 9:00 I would
knock urgently on the door and she would
say as if she didn't know who was there
the problem she had was always trying to
remember my name she would say who's
there so I would say Elise did as a
four-year-old mark
she would say well hang on a moment just
had me put my face on nightstand
terrified you know I would imagine what
she looks like
you know and how exactly you put your
face on like some kind of mask to go
back to last week so you can see there's
some investment in this topic finally
you'd go in and she seemed to have her
face made up of course
and she'd say why did you come so early
to which my feeling was I didn't they
waited till nine o'clock there's a kind
of coda to this story
which is when she was in her 80s or
indeed early 90s and occasionally I
would go and stay the night in her flat
I could hear in the morning struggle to
the bathroom where she used to start
this kind of tragic soliloquy to the
mirror you could imagine all to
graphically looking in the mirror and
then she would say what in God's name
have they done to you
what look at that she felt I think
materially I mean she wasn't desperately
observant about other people there's
some goes with the turf for being an
actress she was very observant like to
herself and I think she thought you know
there was no good reason to get old
there was no good reason for your face
and sewed blemishes the wrinkles
everything everything faded in this
phrase what have they done to you in a
sense I could take that as my motto for
the lecture what have they done to you
because I want to try and show apart for
anything else that they've done a lot
more to you than you think
the second thing is that at school and
usually I have to tell this kind of tale
I mean I almost feel I have to be
telling it the kind of slightly censored
way but I found because nowadays these
events that I'm about to describe would
undoubtedly mean that the school would
have been descended on by kind of SWAT
teams of social workers rescuing boys
whom they would imagine had been deeply
traumatized me above all for reasons
which are given moment on a Wednesday
afternoon at school weren't any lessons
it was what was called hobbies afternoon
and a bit like some students here having
to sign up for a course or a a unit you
looked at the sort of list of things you
could do as a hobby
there was woodwork forget it metalwork
forget it Boy Scouts forget it
so you went on with a sort of crushing
sense of destiny till they got to the
last one which was makeup so I signed up
for makeup the argument the obviously
the way of smuggling this through
whatever committee it was that looked
into what hobbies might be was the
school put on many dramatic performances
often of Shakespeare but I mean a range
of things and that required a lot of
boys to play the parts of girls I was
also somebody who I mean there's no
point trying to explain you'll just have
to accept it I was very underground
I was others I mean pretty naturally
short small and I was the kind of person
who is going to be inevitably a girl in
in plays I don't think it has had a kind
of major kind of erotic impact although
I do remember as an adolescent the
persona I found very attractive was the
kind of girl who played like the leading
boy in plays they were always quite sort
of raffish I mean I guess it's what in
opera is called trouser rolls and
they're beautiful like they're
Rosenkavalier
we got there so that in the first time
we learnt how to make up men and women
for ordinary plays and also to do a sort
of slightly more adventurous makeup you
know if you think of something I'm
Midsummer Night's Dream their affair is
and to do these kind of elaborate
makeups we went on into the second term
whereas boys Natalie remarked I seem to
be used as the model rubella was in my
turn and it was if we were going to play
women it would be a good idea if we
could move as women so we were so I mean
I'm sure there aren't any girls in the
room who were taught how to sit down as
a lady you put your calf against the
chair before you do anything and then I
can't remember now we had to do posture
by walking around the room with a book
on her head all this was to energy Thor
Carly takes this to be a girl
you know must be awful being together
then he became a double adventurous and
said we'll have we learned to walk like
a woman it only makes sense to teach us
how to me return to work in high heels
and if we're going to learn how to walk
in high heels it's just as well to learn
how to wear stockings this I must add I
can't remember around 1963 I think was
the invention of tights I mean it's like
a really crucial
historical movement but not recorded in
any history book it follows a bit like
that wonderful line in philip larkin
where he says sexual intercourse was
invented in 1963 which was too late for
me then I I mean I didn't become what
people now call uncomfortable but he
then moved on from saying well of course
you're gonna wear stockings and
high-heeled shoes you need to get used
to wearing a suspender belt so I
remember putting on this suspender belt
I just remember at the time some rather
absent-minded teacher other teacher came
into the room I mean - excitedly he in
hye-kyo shoots silk stockings and the
suspended on said oh sorry I didn't
realize you were teaching and as if
normally teachers were as a surrender
belt of course by now I mean if this
happened as I say you would have SWAT
teams of social workers landing by
helicopter on the rugged pitches and
kind of quarantine iing the whole school
it gave one a nod in a sense early
interest in kind of gender and body
before I tend to makeup I want to make
the point that there's no such thing as
a kind of natural faith people often
think you know people say I don't wear
makeup they may not a lot of people
don't but it would be it would be quite
false to think that the face you're
showing is the face unhhhh unmanipulated
I don't really have a lot of time to go
into it but it's very important to
recognize that the face is subject to
systemic alteration from about the age
of two anecdotally you will have often
seen parents walking with their children
correct their children don't put your
lips like that or don't turn up your
nose or don't spin with your eyes my
nurse always had this sort of terrible
statement if you make strange faces and
the wind changes you're stuck like that
forever
after a while we become as it were
self-correcting the adolescent has a
very strong sense of what the kind of
what's kind of wrong as they think with
their face I mean I think adolescents us
and it my memory at a boarding school
is you could be told till the end of
time if you have a spot on your face
don't touch it it's into me half the
people spent their entire adolescence in
front of the mirror squeezing their
spots it was reasonably disgusting but
I'm but you have to imagine that my
adolescence people are people's
identification with other people
changes their face and I mean that quite
literally they don't notice it because
you know as an adolescent body you're
still kind of like growing and you're
aware that you're becoming yourself but
you're often laying down the kind of
facial characteristics which enables
Freud to observe he says well in the
first half of your life you look more
and more like yourself but in the second
half you look more and more like your
family and that's not just a kind of
genetic
thing it's because when you identify
with someone you actually often identify
with aspects of how they look or how
they carry themselves what their typical
ways of being are what their typical
ways of being are one remarkable
evidence of that is that my partner was
giving tutorials at Goldsmiths mic
during the period of young British art
there's a woman who had a passion she
said I mean this may be all wrong
doesn't matter she said she thought that
all women at some point wanted to be a
horse I mean I don't think this is true
but my point is that's what she thought
and so her video consisted in getting
women to enact being a horse centric
face I have rarely seen such a
remarkable video I mean they did it
differently but so powerfully I mean the
hoarseness came out to the point where
you know you're just seeing a horse's
face now an identification lasts longer
than just pretend to be something for a
moment
for it says another point the human ego
is a graveyard of dead loves you know
you are your ego is a it's a graveyard
of all people that you've loved now if
you think of that in facial terms it's
utterly kind of remarkable so even while
you're an adolescent that things are
pinching pulling pushing your face you
are always already trying to to make
your face conform to something which are
now called
an image someone you know it
we know from sort of occasional
observation the priest Newman in the mid
19th century had in Oxford where he gave
sermons that people kind of crowded to
see he had a strange way of walking like
with a slight hump it was observed very
frequently that like all his young
students had the same hump they all kind
of caught it and dad lessly ended up
with it much much to the irritation of
their chiropractor so you have to
imagine a sort of pressure
I remember seeing evidence for this in a
gallery in Oxford where there was a an
exhibition which party was that of a
quite well-known French photographer he
had originally been in the French
military when and stationed in Algeria
during the war for independence of
Algeria the French authorities although
they thought they had for a while
control over Algiers began to think that
many of the explosions in the city came
from sort of outlying sort of Maghreb
villages and so they decided that all
villages must have identity cards and
this was imposed on a population which
was obviously half woman and therefore
intensely veiled
they were like brought out and the army
would order that they all took off their
veils he was then to photograph them
like for their identity card but he also
kept a copy these are the most
extraordinary photos of the face they
look as though everyone had been kind of
bystander to a sort of catastrophe I
mean to an atrocity
I mean doubtless because of the
humiliation and shock of taking off the
veil and they may not be available to
heaven but when you looked in a true
sense of the face you realized that the
face was not disciplined in the way that
our faces are you saw characteristics
you know where someone's lip came way
down obviously the family are very happy
that's my mother or something but the
population of women who were
photographed or massively exceeded like
public norms of how a face looks one way
of putting it is they looked genuinely
naked as opposed to nude I will come
back to the difference between the two
it was extraordinarily shocking my
argument at this point in a sense is
that even before we come to the question
of makeup Society has made you up in an
incredibly powerful way
that we don't even remotely understand I
think we catch sight of it
because the one photograph for
examination in a mirror which certainly
horrifies me is the sight of myself when
you it's like in a photo when you see
all these people including you they look
kind of normal but that one the Jew well
then what's that it kind of looks sort
of monstrousness the only time and I've
noticed it that the photograph that
someone says well actually I don't mind
that one of me I quite like it it's
because it doesn't look leave them at
all I mean it looks very stylized and in
a sense successfully posed so what we
tend to like it the idea of portraiture
is the reverse of what we look like to
ourselves now it's a kind of all prelude
to talking about makeup as such although
almost whole hordes of students refer to
Baudelaires
essay on the painter of modern life the
analysis of sketches by monsieur geese
of the Illustrated London Times his
quick sketch essentially in Paris
which also gives rise to the sort of an
account of the sensibility of that
finger we call the Flannery you never
seem to get any account because the paps
is towards the end of the the SA of the
two sections on woman and makeup so it's
a very important starting point in the
19th century at least of thinking about
makeup but less starts really by saying
that you know in terms of representing
the city in modernity I mean if that's a
pompous sociological way of putting it a
central figure is what he calls woman
now let's be clear he explicitly in a
way says that he is not talking about
women I mean he makes a distinction in a
sense which was actually made by 70s
feminism between a certain image and
like a reality as opposed to the reality
he's interested in woman essentially car
image and so it's what you might call
the figure of woman who is so him in the
city part of like that mysterious
element which is completely magical and
tantalizing
she is I mean he says neither Benkelman
ie classical statuary nor Raphael can
help us here he's concerned with this
image which is spellbinding what it is
compatible with is clothing and jewelry
whatever considered all together with
the body as part of the sort of the
display of this figure the woman it's a
moment we might pause when we're talking
like as the woman has image it it gives
a kind of key a simple key into this
mysterious word in English called look
we know you know quite simply that you
can say you can use the word look as a
verb as he looked
she looked meaning something roughly
equivalent to seeing but we also use it
and when we come to fashion it's
essential and you need to make up we can
talk about a look a look how do you get
from seeing to the idea of a look I mean
insane woman as an image he's saying it
is in one way or another a look
and fashion magazines refer to you know
the look
this season is whatever it's not as
complicated but if you kind of see it's
almost to me like it can be a noun but
it's like a verb in what people who know
about grammar called the middle voice I
don't know if people here know anything
about the middle voice in English we
just use an active and a passive you
know what's remarkable is how many like
young people and older people think that
this kind of exhausts the world you know
surely either you do something or it's
done to you
I mean active and passage though it's a
sort of fundamental polarity so like one
fine day if you're ever learning ancient
Greek you turn over the page and there's
active and passive of those called
voices in the analysis of the verb
there's another voice commonly called
the middle voice you can read Braille
about on this
I couldn't get my hair like I said me
for a while couldn't learn it I mean I
couldn't learn you know how it
conjugated because my mind is is
excluding it from any reality you know
I'm still thinking there's either active
about what's this do what are the green
tea drinks you know why they making it
so why they making homework so difficult
what's the matter with them I guess in
French
you capture a flavor of it with a
reflexive verb the translation was not
very helpful in when you're learning
Greek you use Luo as the kind of verb
that but like you use a mo in Latin it's
perfectly regular so it suffices to
teach people and the translation the
grammar gave us Luo meaning I loose
passive I am loosed and then it would
say middle I loose for myself you know I
was had a bad I mean why or if you mean
it why can't you say it so it's like
reflexive in that sense
this image a look the sort of the whole
question there is fundamental to
Baudelaire he doesn't actually think
that it's an erotic thing I may or may
not be but it's tantalizing you can't
get out of your head but it's not just
like the body it's it's the fashion and
their release he goes on to praise make
up central to Biddle is praise of make
up is to say the natural is always awful
he really has a whole hatred of the 18th
century for liking everything that's
natural and ascribing benevolence to
nature you know the beauty would be
simple and natural Edie cetera et cetera
tons of Brusilov evidence except the
very amiable story that Louis the 15th
was such a supporter of the natural dirt
if his mistress
wanted to get rid of him she put on
makeup and he would flee and leave her
alone so much did he despised Borden
oppose makeup for Butler anything good
in the world
comes from being artificial only
artifice art belongs to artifice in that
sense beauty belongs to artifice
everything is artificial and we should
praise that you can see from this it's
not surprising that for him he praised
his makeup he doesn't have a lot of
technical terminology or anything indeed
much to say but like he praises the rice
flour on someone's face as also Rouge
he's for some reason not so keen on
eyelining
but kind of there you go so this is all
in service of the image or as an image a
lure in a sense even we might say aura
all artificial and good for that I mean
good for that reason we'll come back to
the question of aura
I think probably I mean let me just give
you a passage
this is really just to give you a flavor
at one moment we see bathed in the
diffused light of the auditorium even by
being at the Opera a group of young
women of the highest social circles the
brightness reflected in their eyes in
their jewelry and on their shoulders
framed in their boxes resplendent as
portraits ie image some display their
precocious charms with aristocratic
nonchalance others in all innocence
their boyish busts are biting their fans
and have a faraway look in their eyes or
a fix their their postures are
theatrical and solemn like the play or
opera they are pretending to listen to
now I think that makes the point that it
is like a studied kind of image it
doesn't have to be ecstatic or happy or
whatever it can be quite melancholy now
it's very difficult and I'm sure I
shan't succeed in being able to begin to
analyze you know what's going on here
I've said it's an image but that's not
kind of clear enough
if you look at a lot of perfectly
ordinary sore Sunday newspaper fashion
photography and it's obviously an
attempt to genuinely advertise the
clothes and also the model there's
something which I've learned is that the
essence of the photo is usually an
enigmatic gesture the the whole figure
and the clothing and the makeup of
everything about the model is all
gathered together in a kind of singular
I'm obviously using the word gesture in
a somewhat expanded sense but as though
the thing that's done might be very
attractive but you look you you you
wouldn't know why you wouldn't you
wouldn't be able to say oh I find this
particularly you know attractive with
those no indeed you can say that the
competition between a lot of fashion
photographers is to make it to make the
gesture by which I mean the whole body
and the clothing whatever the whole
gesture more and more enigmatic as
though there's something about an aura
which is enigmatic
you don't know or you shouldn't know why
you're looking at it
you don't know it might stick in your
mind but you don't know why it is the
invocation of a certain aura or even
mystery so the the makeup the model and
the clothing are all in a sense props of
an undisclosed gesture being what I call
the whole thing now I mean in a sense
that notion of the image it's it's like
the problem of makeup why do people wear
it you know why is it used is really
about an identification or not some
people wouldn't want to but of
transforming our given physical face
which we've already worked on a vast
amount in our lifetime to make our face
go in the direction of an image even if
it's the image of the family but lots of
others as well and makeup kind of
assists in that process that's how to do
the clothes
it's like taking sort of a body and a
face and always make it sort of
two-dimensional I mean here somewhere
you know is buried the feminist
objection to woman as an object but I
think the case is is very complex and
still not understood both layer also
makes the remark that I mean as as the
woman is like the woman is sort of
turning the art in the sense of being
turned into an image he says actually
you can see that by if a woman is
wearing tights which you see they look
sculptural and I think that's right
there's all the world of difference to
go back to my childhood traumas over
legs taste in a stocking it kind of
looks more sculptural or rather image of
the sculptural it's not directly it's
control now I want to turn very briefly
I haven't gotten that much longer I mean
I thought when I was preparing these
lectures that I ought to have rather
more knowledge about contemporary makeup
than I possess which is pretty much zero
I went and hung out like in suffrages
and liberties and Harvey Nichols
it was quite difficult because like you
can't just look about I would have been
asked to move on a number of things
struck me which I think are relevant
when people go to buy makeup they're
given and like let's say it's eye
coloring they're given an array of
colors definitely in sometimes presented
as this season's colours and is
obviously a coordination between eye
color lipstick etc and even down to kind
of foundation or whatever you see that
in practical terms when you watch young
women having their face done by a sort
of makeup consultant in the shop I think
I guess you can go in and have a free
makeup if I don't know if you buy
something and there you hear these very
authoritative statements by the makeup
artist say well you with your coloring
you know you need her whatever now the
odd thing is that the the myth obviously
is that the types of colors you have the
range is fitted like for some faces and
non other faces whatever
according to mysterious things cool
things like your coloring
but it's kind of not you can see in so
far as the makeup artists have a
definite if some more simple-minded
skill it but it's perfectly what they do
if you watch them is kind visible they
experience the color range as being to
use a server architecture attend the
kind of genres of a look you kind of
have to make it consistent often if any
you know if the customer dares to try
and put in a word of protest actually I
don't like that you know it's gonna go
perfectly with what you're putting on
it's like there's really fascist hair
salons where you say no I'm afraid if
you get like this I mean you better
believe it it will within that you see
the operation of what you might call the
normalization within the generic let's
step back for a moment
I mean it's long ago being pointed out
by brilliantly by Kong GM that the idea
of the normal in say biology from the
beginning was not only in a sense in a
naive sense a statistical normal it
carried with it unknown right
so the range of the generic at one level
yes is to do is what sort of basic type
you might sort someone into but within
that it's a way of reframing the face
which is normal for that particular
color scheme if I might make you know
it's the point so the generic is not
just an average in any sense any more
niches in architecture the generic is
it's these bands of color which give you
the key to the sort of basic type of
makeup even again it puts you in to like
a short brown and then corrects you
I mean drools YouTube let me put it this
way if you have a society in which it's
incredibly common to wear makeup
you will experience there as being less
totally different places because they
will have I mean it's as if we we want a
a words here that allows us to speak of
modeling through color I mean also color
schemes when I say that you know you
probably know where spends the most
money per capita on I make up the same
country that spends the most money on
cosmetic surgery of the eye and I can't
spot anyone here but it's obviously
around infinitely that's quite strange I
mean or not according to how you kind of
put the question yeah
strikes me make up companies what
positive religiously campaigning for the
sale rather than kind of encouraging
everyone to take it off and have all
this year's color so it's about the
artificial in Bellaire but I'm
suggesting in a way that make up only
continues what we might call the
artificiality of our lives which is so
often changed and corrected our faith I
want to end I shall take you long I'm
sorry I've ever run a bit I want to link
this back
strangely enough to book which has
probably never been used in the service
of outlining a theory of makeup which is
Homer The Odyssey let's ask a few
questions of Homer first question we to
ask is what do gods look like well
actually they don't have a particular
body they're able to change all the time
think like as a seducer all the many
guises if that's the right word the
deuce employees
what is remarkable is that physical
descriptions of the gods stresses that
they have an aura a kind of radiance
strangely enough so I don't think anyone
has sort of pursued it this is also the
term taken over by Christianity what
characterize Christianity as a
monotheism is not so much the promise of
eternal life because frankly quite a lot
of religion to promise that actually
even paganism in a sense I mean you know
you don't have to go further later to
see the promise of the immortality of
the soul or what's particular about
Christianity and of course it's not
there in Judaism is the resurrection of
the body now
people began soon to worry about the
river I mean they're told
yeah it's the resurrection of the body
and it's your real body you know you're
not you're not resurrected as a sort of
I don't know kind of Christian
tamagotchi she real body but if you take
that seriously
next question people ask is well if you
die at 19 when you're resurrected are
you 90 isn't that a bit unfair when
someone had the great fortune to die at
25 as a result it it turned in the eye
of eternity it's 25 or evermore I mean
wouldn't you be pissed off if you had to
live till 90 on earth and then when you
come to yeah you've got the good news is
you you know you've gone to heaven
you know the bad news is he's gonna need
some walking sticks you think I'm maybe
joking or not I read in August him he
actually says you know one oh I believe
one of the congregation had the problem
what happens if you're a cannibal and
you'd eaten someone else I mean do you
resurrect two bodies or is it one very
large one so all the practical questions
about the resurrection of the body you
know are there you can still see them
around 20 years ago there was enormous
outrage because it turned out that
hospitals had been doing its
sermons without parental consent on the
bodies of dead babies and what was
strange about this is that it was in
Liverpool I mean a Catholic City where
the upset was far greater than anywhere
else you know it was clearly based on a
a set of fantasies which is you know if
my body's been used by the NHS kind of
how do I get to be perfect in heaven
there's probably a real problem so the
gods have an aura sometimes they have to
kind of lend something of that aura to a
human most famously Odysseus is washed
up towards the end of the his travels on
a country cool fine sure he is speed in
the sea he's utterly drenched by water
areas salt in his hair he just obviously
looks so he didn't say it Herman didn't
say it like a real mess near the beach
is the princess Nausicaa and her
companions they've come to do their
walking Pallas Athena comes down and
kind of is concerned she kind of looks
after the interests of Odysseus
she makes sure that his kind of loins
are covered up with leaves and then she
sprinkles something on him people have
argued argued nog you like what what is
it some people have thought you know it
it's to make Odysseus invisible we're
not a state to receive company so we're
told is it makes him look radiant gives
him kind of aura it's not invisible
what is it the Greeks I think is
carriers for which in one way or another
we get charity but I think more to the
point grace
somewhere and it's not in the first
English translation I checked on that
there jamuns oh man
but somewhere I've seen quoted that one
early English translation of Homer
translated it by the word glamour I
think of a 16th century person
this is glamour and whether or not I'm
right I mean and I will try to hunt and
the exact quotation it corresponds to a
lot of what people I mean it's
extraordinary that the word glamour is
used for so much of classical antiquity
I mean it's just unbelievable once
you've noticed it you notice it all the
time in books
I saw the Iliad the other day referred
to as the glamour of war which in some
sense that's what M was writing so you
can see here the the glamour in a way
ties in with the question of makeup it's
not to make you in a kind of high street
sense beautiful it's to possess an aura
or an allure and that's why the left
sort of refers to this I mean it's an
image it's a fantasy
so the gods have it often people give
very vague descriptions of gods but say
they they have either what will
translate as a radiance or or whatever
but we're adding in glamour so it may
well be that contemporary uses for the
German camera are merely taking up
something which has kind of lasted for
an incredible time in a sense it's
supposed to last the other way when the
human is maybe turned into like an
animal the animal nonetheless kind of
has a radiance you may know the Opera
17th 18th 17th century opera eel
Callisto where Zeus has seduced a young
woman and then told by his wife to get
rid of her he gets rid of her by making
her as Callisto
into the constellation of the little
bear or as I think the
seventeenth-century knows what it's like
making her a star and it ends where Zeus
leads her up the fish the first
performance was in the Vatican you have
the thought of all these ancient
Cardinals watching this extraordinarily
erotic opera and so as he leads her up
they sing to each other but they only
use one word each all the way up into
the sky
Zeus things vieni vieni and she sings
back vengo vengo okay i'll in there
[Applause]
