not an architect means a lot so I'm
going to be talking a little bit about
what Ava's touched upon the idea of
creativity creativity and art and
culture and design and also the sense of
play and sense of fun and whimsy that I
create experiences so I'm gonna go
through a little bit of a presentation a
little bit about me I've been at Google
now for about eight and a half years and
most of my time has been spent working
on products really at the edge of
creativity art culture design and I'm
gonna speak a little bit about my work
some of the things that I've worked on
but also a little bit about the
philosophy behind how it's done and what
I think has resonated and also maybe
some of the failures that came along the
way so actually this is something that
he was talking about the creative lab so
TR glow leads the lab in Australia she's
an incredible person and I actually
heard her say this on a talk on a
podcast and then I spoke to her about it
last time she was in London she's a
creative lead and she said that she
considers her role to be that of a
gardener rather than a conductor
somebody who's sitting and nurturing and
giving time and energy to ideas to
people to synthesise to conversations to
cups of coffee rather than someone who's
sitting in front of an orchestra and
telling people what to do and making
sure that everybody works in unison and
according to a particular format and
this really really resonated with me
because I have worked extensively with
museums with curators artists the
directors of cultural institutions but
also on the other side with
technologists creative coders people who
think in a very different and perhaps
more linear fashion everybody that I've
worked with comes with a completely
different timelines had a priority set
of deadlines
and often our rule is really to sit and
to think about how we can nurture ideas
nurture people coming together and to do
it in a way that ends up hopefully with
something incredible a flower coming
obviously out at the end of it but very
often nothing happens you wait one year
you wait three years and then something
comes to life and it's usually
completely unrelated to what we had
expected to happen so this is a thought
that I kind of have been sitting on the
last couple of days as I've been
thinking about this conversation and I
hope that it's a conversation please
feel free to interrupt raise her hand
and obviously we can talk at the end if
you have questions I'm going to show a
lot of videos and I'm going to try to go
quickly
but because we're talking about tea I
wanted to show a clip of this video from
a project that is actually from was
launched of the Sydney biennial last
year I was also shown at South by
Southwest and I think it's a really
beautiful example of a collaboration
that is meaningful and obviously uses
technology these bears
is an old piece from my great mom taught
me how to the beating anything on
YouTube right yeah you better
yeah it's just not showing on the screen
it's that
so I'll talk a little bit about the what
I'm going to show so it's actually an
augmented reality experience it was
designed in collaboration with artists
like AI weiwei
with the UNHCR by my mother one of the
most precious things in my life
why
[Music]
[Music]
my name is Ammar I escaped war from
South Sudan
[Music]
John King he traveled bombs at you he
didn't back down all an attorney a toy
Jame a heart behind do my heart go
structured so much stable boy wadi araba
lien on your hip wok is here on Jaden
I'm gonna stop there I have a lot of
videos I'm not sure how I'm going to
manage this changing the screen so I
might need your help but so the reason
I'm showing you this is because it's a
very physical experience you have to be
in the room you have to be there but
obviously it transports you to a
different place a different time and you
have an interactive experience you can
actually point your phone towards a
person that you want to speak and you
can hear their story in a way that
actually would possibly not happen in
any other format you wouldn't come face
to face with any of these people and
it's a really gentle way of using
technology I think to create that
dialogue I think we're gonna have this
problem again but I'm just gonna keep
going because there's a lot of videos so
what is technology I think technology
for me is really the tool I think it the
the the goal of it is not to be the
solution it's not to be the driver of
creativity but it really often is just a
source of creating a little bit of magic
opening up new doors adding an
exponential view on a certain moment a
piece of data and a problem in a way
that wouldn't be possible without it and
really the goal of bringing technology
into creative projects is to open up
doors in a way that the expert in the
room might not have seen or known about
before so I excuse the little faces but
really this is like a little bit of what
I was thinking I think um
so you have the gardener's at the bottom
and that's how I see us so that's how I
see the creative lab at Google that's
how I see Google arts and culture the
team that runs it and then really you
build on the work of the experts
curators architects scientists they have
the vision they have the ideas and for
us to push the boundaries of the stories
that they want to tell for us to push
the boundaries of who has access to
their stories in their work is really to
bring in our tools to bring in
developers to bring in creative coders
and to bring people in who think in very
different ways who have very different
perspectives where there's often
complete tension or often just a block
and information and to see where we can
take that to access new audiences really
at the end of the day at Google we think
about access we want everyone to have
access to information we want everyone
to see these stories we don't want
things
be limited to people because of their
interests or where they come from and
that's really where we think we can
really push boundaries and an add value
so I'm gonna go through a little bit of
my work at Google arts and culture I'll
tell you a little bit about the platform
how many people know what Google arts
and culture is or the Cultural Institute
okay
so quickly it's an online platform it
was really founded with a goal of
creating access to the world's cultural
information online and at its core it's
a storytelling platform we work with
about 2,000 cultural institutions in 80
countries and we help to digitize their
collections we take really
high-resolution photography we capture
Google Street View in order to bring
these experiences to life in a
360-degree format and increasingly we're
using more complicated technologies
things like photogrammetry laser
scanning to create immersive experiences
we also have a lab in Paris where we
work with a team of creative coders to
help to push really the boundaries of
where tech and art meet so using things
like artificial intelligence machine
learning as tools thinking about
augmented reality virtual reality and
and really exploring ways in which we
can take cultural stories collections
and the work of artists designers into a
space that probably hasn't existed
before so what I'm going to do is go
through a bunch of stories which all
have videos and so I'm not I'm just
gonna
[Music]
so this is a collaboration that we've
done with sci-arc we have an architect
on our team an archaeologist on a team
sorry and his entire role is to look at
the idea of the preservation of heritage
at risk so anything from culture under
attack from of course war you know
extremist attacks to environmental
degradation climate change even tourism
so this is a project which we worked on
with sci-arc which I'm sure a few of you
are familiar with where we worked across
25 sites and 18 countries around the
world and we're still this is an ongoing
project it's been about three years and
it's ongoing and the goal was really to
lend our technologies to document these
sites obviously using things like laser
scanning photogrammetry but what was
unique at the end of it and which really
came about with an ongoing dialogue with
sci-arc but also developers in the space
is that all of the data was eventually
made open-source so that anyone around
the world could download it and create
their own augmented reality experience
for example on their phone so I'll show
you the video
[Music]
so I would I would check it out I would
download the app and what was actually
very moving on this particular project
is like right after we captured began
which you saw the temples with the dots
around them
that was the photos taken around the
actual temple complex there was an
earthquake and a lot of that was
destroyed and so we have now online a VR
experience we can go through it in an
interactive way and one of the things I
will say is that okay lost my slides
again need someone to come but one of
the things that it's very nice if you
just press command ok on this particular
sort of experience one of the things
that is very resonant is that you do
have these physical places that
obviously all of us would want to go to
if we could go to Petra we'd want to go
to Petra if you wanted to if you could
go to the Met you would but it is often
very difficult for people to make that
and when places are destroyed there's
you know this kind of greater divide
between what it is what the world is and
what we want to experience and so this
is one I think for us one of the most
important things that we actually do
with our work the next thing I want to
talk to you about is a project that we
did with a designer as Devlin she's
British I'm sure some of you know her
work she you know she's known as a
theater set designer she's worked with
people like Kanye West and Beyonce knew
to on designing their stages and their
concerts and we ended up working with
her with the London Design Festival over
a period of three years
to create a physical experience which
eventually came to life in Trafalgar
Square this project was quite special
and unique because we ended up coming up
with a concept for this particular
project about two and a half years ago
in a partnership with the serpentine
galleries they we had this playful idea
where the creative technologist to use a
giant cache of 19th century poetry to
create an interactive experience so
anyone could give a word to this AI
algorithm
and get a poem back and this idea
developed at the point where as was
walking through Trafalgar Square one
night with John Sorel
who founded the London Design Festival
and she said you know there's these four
lines they've been here for 150 years
what if they could talk what would they
say and so we ended up bringing that
poetic discourse to Trafalgar Square for
anyone from the public to comment to say
there's a fifth line now in Trafalgar
Square give it a word give it the word
that you would want it to say if it
could speak and get a poem back and have
this kind of amazing conversation anyone
could access this you could just put in
a word online via the London Design
Festival app and it ended up being this
really unique interactive experience
it's an artistic piece it doesn't have
you know resonance beyond or above that
but it used machine learning in in a
unique way
[Music]
monster reason nelson gratitude orang
reconciliation
[Music]
okay let's see this the the control tab
trick
come on tab okay I think I need to
escape not working I need you here that
one okay got it I think I'm good got it
now for the rest of time okay so the
next one uh Wayne McGregor any of you
familiar with his work so he's the
choreographer he's the resident
choreographer at the Royal Opera House
he also runs his own studio studio Wayne
McGregor and he has been working with us
again for many years we actually started
off looking at his archive and saying
how can we document 25 years of your
career take the photos take videos and
take the stories of your career and
bring it online and share it with
audiences to know what you represent as
a choreographer as an artist but when
doesn't sort of settle for just
storytelling and so he was pushing the
idea for a long time of what we could
take forward with his archive and we
ended up with this idea for what we
called a living archive we looked at all
of the videos from the 25 years of his
career and we ended up creating a
machine learning experiment which has
ended up being a tool which he's been
using for choreography so we've analyzed
thousands and thousands of hours of
video from his past performances and
created a tool which he can use and
which his dancers can interact with in
order to create basically predictive
text for dancing and not only does it
look at his past choreography it also
looks at the individual dancers their
movements their style their bodies and
gives them individual cues for how to
interact with with the tool so there's
more to come on this but we have the
first performance in LA in July
one of the things that's run through all
my practices been a relationship with
technology
I'm fascinated in in how a I might
actually develop the conversation around
what is choreography who has to make
choreography what the potentials are
currently being and I guess that's how
we started to work with Google Google
arts of course you lab we bring artists
curators together with engineers and
creative technologists to experiment the
intersection of art and technology I am
a creative career here at the lab I've
been involved in the machine learning
and interface as well so when we started
working with Wayne we were really
interested about a movement prediction
we found a research paper which was
about and writing prediction and we
think what if we you that for predicting
dance movement
we use the archive from Wayne to train
the algorithm so they can use this data
to generate when I'm with those dancers
normally who I'm asking them to do
through their own creativity is make
iterative versions of an idea that I
might have proposed well this tool does
for each little moment is do four
hundred thousand iterations of that yes
the the canvas is way way bigger
we had to gift the archive and it was a
huge archive you know thousands of hours
of video to be analyzed what this tool
allows us to do is go okay I'm starting
with this phrase I'd like the machine
learning tool the AI to invent the next
phrase but in the style of Jordan or in
a style of Jess and then you can get
combinations of those and then it's
learning all the time and feeding back
and so this iterative version gives you
all of these new possibilities you
couldn't have imagined but there is um
there is uh this is very unique it's
something we've never done before we
never thought of dance in this way and
we've never thought of movement in this
way and nothing like this has actually
been creative but this is a great
example of somebody like we in coming
and forcing us to push our boundaries
and forcing us to think in a way that we
would never have thought of we don't
think about dancers and their bodies and
how they move it would never have
occurred to us that yeah I could create
a new form of dance for someone like
Wayne but what I think is really
beautiful about this one is that it
leaves room for interpretation it's
obviously the way that he does
choreography but the dancers take it and
make it their own and there's something
quite beautiful about the dialogue
between the Machine and the human in
this particular example and I think
that's gonna probably manifest a little
bit more and more with creativity with
arts and with culture as we start to see
kind of this melding of what technology
can do to support and to hopefully grow
and embellish practice without obviously
changing the the vision of whatever the
practitioner or artist is this is an
architecture project very specific so
actually originated the idea came from
the serpentine galleries as an
institution they work very well with us
I think one of the reasons is they
they're not a traditional museum they
don't have a collection so they're
constantly trying to push their own
boundaries and to think of it
differently and to create experiences
that haven't been created before this is
the first year that they wanted to
create an augmented reality pavilion
supervillian that Saturn device and that
wasn't in the physical space so we
worked very closely with David Adjaye
who's on the board of the serpentine to
put out an open call for artists and
architects around the world to submit an
idea for an AR pavilion and Yaqoob
Stinson ended up winning the prize as an
artist and and I'll show you the video
we had a judging committee that included
everyone from Virgil hablo to David
agile people from Google obviously Hans
Ulrich Obrist so it was a very unique
way of looking at for us especially what
is architecture for us to allow it to be
defined in a way that we were nervous to
do to be honest before and to have an
artist come in he's not an architect to
create this it's a physical experience
you actually have to go to Hyde Park in
order to have the experience so it is
very interactive with the elements of
the park and yet it doesn't exist in a
physical form
[Music]
the deep listener is a response to an
open call called augmented architecture
by the serpentine galleries through
collaboration with Google arts and
culture it's an application on your
phone and you can download and it allows
you to listen to species in the park
through AR as you walk through it in
ways that you otherwise can't hear on
this trail you're encountering five
different locations and its location
have different iconic species in the
park on as the Planetree one hour that's
one hour reads parakeets and as a shirt
blue damselflies the most interesting
one I think is the London plain tree and
they were a cross bred to create this
buck that's very strong and absorbing
pollutants in the air these parrots and
I park the parakeets or probably escaped
from captivity in the 90s there are many
different stories of where these parrots
come from but now they're all over the
park and they have these very strong
bird calls there have been many
different you know projects in
collaboration with Google Cultural
Institute and these of cars is the first
time that we're going into the part I
think it's wonderful to see here how
Jakob code scenes and really shows are
such a poetic potential within an
experience with augmented reality when
you arrive at a location and the deep
listener you're then moving through 30
metres of different audio layers and the
different layers have different depths
of listening like you can listen to the
deep earth breathing of a tree or the
roots and the back of the wind
architecture has the potential to tell
incredible stories about our world and
our times deep listener talks about not
just understanding the plant life the
species the ecology pollution our
fragility on the planet but also brings
us into deep narratives about roots
about the kind of meaning and evolution
of biologies and forms that are around
us it's very exciting so I'm gonna stop
there so one of the questions I think
many of you may have I've had this is
what does it mean to experience
something
that on your phone so it's that's a big
screen it's beautiful you hear the sound
when you're in the park and it's around
you and then you just have your phone
and this thing there is a disconnect and
I think it's nothing to think about it's
it this is beautiful and immersive and
it is its own thing but it's in a new
form
I think of thinking about what is
architecture what is experience where
are we how do you place yourself and I
think we also found that quite difficult
to think through is you know where is
the line between an art walk and a piece
of technology that you're experiencing
and so I don't know if it's actually
still up but like if if you have the
chance I think I would recommend that
you then you go
so Vermeer this actually as another
project we did with a team of architects
we ended up getting there's I think 34
known artworks by Vermeer and we ended
up digitizing all of them in high
resolution it just felt like too special
of a collection to just put online and a
list with you know the names of the
artworks and letting people zoom into
them and so we ended up working to
create what you see on the left which is
a building which you can project with
your phone onto the floor and then step
inside and work walk through using your
phone and augmented reality the goal of
this was to try something new of course
and also to honor the fact that you'll
never see these 34 artworks in the same
place in fact I believe one of them went
missing after this and so there is this
experience that you probably would never
have it is a museum experience and it's
actually kind of thrilling to do it
because you go into this building and
you can see kind of the ceiling so the
ceiling of that is you know you would
see the building here of this room as
you look through it we've developed
another one since then on color where
we've just created our collection by
color so there's 7 million artworks on
our platform now each of those come from
a cultural institution around the world
all of them have complete museum level
quality metadata but there's never a way
of seeing everything at once so this was
a way
thinking a little bit out of the box of
allowing people to see something in a
way that felt like there was scale and
the art works when you see them you know
download the app I will show a scale and
then this is actually the fun thing I'm
gonna show I'm gonna show you very
quickly um everyone was Paul Smith the
fashion designer so he loves color he's
inspired by paintings by color we've
worked with him quite a bit over the
years and thinking about craftsmanship
and celebrating British fashion and
design and we thought we'd do something
quite fun with him so we think a lot in
terms of data how paintings are tagged
how museums would describe them but what
about what probably most of you creative
people think about when you look at an
artwork is the feeling you have when
you're when you're looking at it and he
loves the idea of colors so we actually
applied machine learning to all of the
seven million artworks to allow anyone
to maybe take a picture of I don't know
your red trousers uploaded on to the
platform and get back all of the
artworks on the platform that matched
the color palette of that that image so
I'll show you a little bit quickly too
so since I might not be describing it
completely articulately so you can see a
little bit of what the tool is like
you couldn't find inspiration in
anything my dad was really helpful to me
because when I was 11 and he bought me
my first camera a Kodak retina and 36
exposures were very very precious so you
have to really think about the picture
and I think I just trained my eyes to
look and see
I find that weaving around on the bike
really really works because you've got
the opportunity to stop really quickly
take a picture if you can train your
mind just to look and see you'll find
things anywhere the thing about our
pallet and for somebody who loves color
like me it's just so useful to look
through a whole collection of paintings
or photography or anything where people
have used certain colors together I
can't believe the enormous selection of
artwork which is available and that's
really helpful
I used color mostly as a punctuation
mark the art of color was really
essential for me because I was designing
clothes which is so simple that you
needed the surprise and you needed the
color Henri Matisse was another person
who worked a lot in color and he was
absolutely genius of putting colors
together so you've got blue and white
together and they look fresh the port
orange and red together they fight my
approaches oh I saw a great painting and
I just love the colors in it so I just
took the colors and then that became an
issue on which we called the artist
tribe and that came just by looking as
to painting at the Tate Modern as a
fashion designer our palette can help me
working with my staff so what we'd
probably do is start off with the colors
that I've selected from that season and
then through the just look at those
colors and then see what gets thrown up
that can be so influence on how we
design
the thing is about funding inspiration
in world today's that is looking and
seeing it's all there if you wanted you
just got you train your eyes to see it
palate for those of you don't know Paul
Smith also has like a massive collection
of just things just objects and that's
that's one of the things that set us off
so you see it in the room behind him
just millions of things inspire him okay
do we do I still is everyone still with
me should I keep going okay cuz I I sold
people speak for an hour and a half at a
time and I do not want to be that person
okay
I'll keep going so I'm going to talk
very briefly about impact so we've
talked about art culture you know
creativity from that perspective museums
but what about impact so obviously
Google is a massive company and has over
the years deployed its technologies to
do many different things one of the
things I'm very interested in right now
and getting involved with is the
sustainability work that we do and it's
actually incredible to think about the
platforms that are available in the
scale of impact that is possible so I'm
going to just walk you through a couple
of examples the first one is the project
we announced in July this year at the
Copenhagen fashion summit we're working
with Stella McCartney and creating a
tool on the cloud Google cloud which
will hopefully allow for any fashion
designer and your in the world to go
online and to be able to map both their
carbon emissions footprint as well as
the water the wastewater creation based
on their choices
so what we're envisioning is some sort
of map which will be you know really
applicable to anywhere in the world and
we're starting off with two fabrics
cotton and viscose so right now fashion
accounts for about 20 percent of
wastewater creation around the world and
10 percent of carbon emissions it's
massive cotton is the most widely used
fabric cotton fibers and about 25% of
all garments and viscose is following
but growing quickly so those are the two
materials that we've chosen and our goal
is to really create a database that
anyone can access that'll allow people
to be able to track if they can figure
out where their raw materials are coming
from to really measure the impact and to
think about how they're sourcing and
making responsible choices and if
they're you know if they can also help
the communities that they're sourcing
from
if they can afford to do so to improve
their practices and to operate in a way
that's more sustainable this project was
actually inspired by global forest watch
which is one of my favorite projects
ever that Google has done and it was
actually in launched in 2014 so it uses
the Google Earth engine which was
founded in about 2010 does anyone know
what Google Earth engine is ok so just
for those who don't
it's a massive database of everything
related to our planet
things like forest density flooding
water levels disease natural disaster it
allows you to go anywhere in the world
and track using Google Earth the levels
and the impact of each of these metrics
online with data that's regularly
updated from sources that are vetted by
the earth engine team from around the
world
so forest watch was actually launched
basically to look at the world's forests
and you know I actually wrote it down
here because I thought it was so
incredible I think it used a network the
the earth engine used a network of
cloud-based service to process 650,000
images across 10,000 computers working
in parallel in order to create the
global forest map it would have taken a
solo computer 15 years to do the job so
it's just an incredible piece of
engineering and computing that you know
probably at the time no other platform
could have done and it's now used by
organizations around the world in order
to attract all kinds of things obviously
sourcing of raw materials but also all
kinds of governments NGOs you know and
regular people to see the state of our
world and what's happening with it so I
just recommend checking it out I think
it's in its really special and it has
been the inspiration for what we're
doing now with fashion and
sustainability I want to show you this
video since most of you knew what it was
another thing I'll just show you quickly
is the time-lapse so this is really
beautiful I would check it out this you
could go anywhere in the world and look
at the last 35 years by metric so you
could look at it literally by water
levels by forestation you know desert of
vacation and and the number
just mind-boggling 15 million satellite
images to create these maps over 35
years of history so the reason I I
actually wanted to show you this is that
it's not Google you know Google provides
a technology in the computing power but
the images actually are from NASA
satellites and they hadn't been
available for like 30 years before the
earth engine was created and this was an
incredible way of taking those images
and bringing them online and allowing
them to be useful in a different way
there's multiple partners that come from
very different parts of the world that
are working on these things and that
become the advisors and that become the
drivers for what these products
eventually are and in this case of
course it's also the US Geological
Survey the European Sentinel programs
that are constantly mapping and this
data is updated I think every 15 to 16
days which is unbelievable
so again I think an example of of course
it's creative it's actually so beautiful
and nice you could just look at all of
these forever but it comes over time it
comes with partnerships and it really
comes with institutions with very
different perspectives coming together
so the last thing I will just throw up
there is I don't know if any of you have
heard of this program but it's it's run
by Google org artificial intelligence
for social good so this is an ongoing
challenge anyone around the world as
welcome to apply and of course
artificial intelligence as a tool can be
used for a million different things but
everyone can't think of all of the
solutions and the problems the problems
will always come from experts the
solutions likewise will come from
conversation and collaboration so this
is another example still quite small of
thinking about opening up the doors to
other people's ideas you know what can I
do what do you want I to do even if you
don't really know what's possible it's
the same question we throw out to others
we have a machine learning residency
program where we say you might not ever
have used machine learning before but if
you have an idea that involves data that
involves creativity and you want to come
to us our coders can actually work with
you and think about what's possible and
how so that's basically it I mean I
think that I I want to come back to the
idea of gardening
I love it I love the idea of just
thinking about being patient and being
still it's something that I I don't do
none of us do enough and sitting on
ideas sitting on a cup of coffee and
finding space and time and clearing your
head a little bit to really think about
not what you might want but what might
be possible thank you
[Applause]
innocent way but maybe one of the most
interesting things and maybe before we
even openly ask the questions in the
floor is what have been some of the most
difficult conversations in terms of the
kind of politics associated with some of
its practices the energy consumption of
its computation machines and
understanding the kind of political
correctness that we need to have and
that you're speaking of show him behave
and you're part of the company three
weeks ago we had his dealer giving here
lecture and talking about some difficult
moments not the difficult conversations
because I mean I was downloading and I'm
like and I've been at peak Google one of
my entire life
because I
see that they think in many ways in the
way which some of these algorithms work
but I'm very much interested in what are
the difficult moments special resistance
liquid isn't within the Google culture
all that the project then you are in
country and if you can share any of
those with us yeah for sure so I can say
very openly that often you know things
have changed and evolved and museums in
particular now much more open to sharing
they see the value in you know not
having all of their artworks have
watermarks or you know faces in the way
when they're online the highest
resolution image of most of these
artworks is now online because they were
open to it so there has been an
evolution there is an understanding of
course that at the end of the day you
are protecting your assets you know the
the artworks for Museum are really their
assets in their wealth and opening it up
is I think for good reason quite scary
and not only is thinking evolved of
course circumstances are evolved with
everyone having a phone and being able
to take a photo in a museum and
uploading it so taking ownership back I
think has been a big part of it so if
you search for starry night online you
will actually see in the knowledge panel
on the right the MoMA's image of the
starry night which is the highest
resolution version of that image but the
full description of the artwork from the
curator at the MoMA and then you can
click on a button and go into the moment
so it's also handing back control and
power I think in an online space because
we all operate now on multiple platforms
back to these institutions when we take
photography of these artworks the
copyright belongs to the museum and the
cultural institution but there will
always be concerns the other concern
I've encountered as curator is being
worried about us creating a funny you
know fun humorous YouTube video with the
curator and putting them with a couple
of YouTube influencers from LA and
suddenly you're throwing them off and
the director is worried and you've
changed the narrative of their entire
messaging and and we're pushing
boundaries and then it'll always be a
point where there's tension and I've
also learned myself personally to
develop that respect and to understand
you know if somebody has been working on
medieval manuscripts for their entire
career I have no right to tell them
really
of the day how this should be
represented online I can only give them
ideas through inspiration their way but
it is theirs that their journey to go on
in their story to tell at the end of the
day so that happens constantly and it's
not always easy and sometimes we drop
things entirely we've dropped entire
projects and that's where things also
take time because you're trying to find
space with each other especially when
each institution in each project is
different I think that you know on the
bigger story of like you know what when
we think about things like
sustainability and carbon I think that
you know Google has done a lot now to
really be completely sustainable data a
neutral carbon neutral as an
organization and work is still ongoing
but I don't think you know anyone in the
world has figured out a solution and I
think that's an ongoing journey and I
think criticism and conversation are
always important both outside and inside
because if you don't have those
conversations you don't make progress
and you also don't make change I'm not
an architect but I'm well aware I'm in
the architecture Association I'm really
interested to anyone who is an architect
in the room what opportunities and
possibilities attract them most what
technology and potentially Google can
offer them that haven't been explored
yet
yeah well anyhow but I guess yeah the
question is how to how to pitch a
project to Google it's for me the big
question and there were some invitations
during your your talk but yeah I have
ideas and I would like to discuss them
after but but yeah I think unless you I
mean I have never found an invitation
for Google to submit a project right now
today I'm happy I learned that there is
open invitation I mean there's probably
no one way of tracking all of that stuff
because there's so much going on and
there's so much noise obviously I would
say from the arts and culture team we
work with any cultural institution
anywhere in the world so if your project
is through the architecture Association
for example that's you know that's an
open conversation that we're always
happy to have for these sorts of
projects these challenges
it's obviously email me now but I would
say just follow on social media because
you will see stuff going up but I
totally agree there's just so much
information out there it's really hard
to keep track of when these
opportunities come up sure but maybe you
could share a bit about what is your
cultural process like how do you select
the project huh how does it come so we
would literally work with any cultural
institution anywhere and we really push
boundaries in terms of how to capture
you know we we got Street View from
Kabul up last year with a collaboration
with the turquoise mountain foundation
which was something that took a very
long time to manifest we have you know
literally I'm track with just today
launched a project in Kenya we're
looking a lot more at Southeast Asia
Africa we want this to be non-western
centric but the goal is that anybody any
cultural institution that comes to us is
welcome to work with us and as a
baseline we provide digitization the
Street View and I think a little bit of
the point that I was trying to make is
the things that go a bit further the
creative projects that push the
boundaries beyond just that that's what
always takes time and conversation and
never blueprint and here I have this you
know idea let's do it
it's much more something that I think
evolves in a way that's quite organic
and it might not be the most efficient
way it might not be the most scalable
way but it's the way that we found works
in order to have things that resonate
stand alone and not part of you know
just a collective of many
[Music]
I have a few questions actually I was
writing down quite a lot of notes but
first just to answer the question before
about the architect in a way as being
here I am studying here and just a very
brief comment when you say start
gardening I did a brief last year about
gardening and I feel the image you chose
is kind of the harvesting part of
gardening and it's the cotton so the
very kind of water intensive so I feel
it has quite meaningful connotation
about harvesting about the hub quite a
lot of things the first question was
quite blunt but is there such thing as
free lunch
in general like by this I mean it seems
that this google art is the nice part of
google it a the charity side or people
kind of doing art projects or cultural
project but we all know about Google's
human rights censorship data breach hate
speech energy consumption and so on so
yeah I was wondering what's your stance
or what's your ethical stance on that
sorry the second question was I was
reading the UNESCO kind of heritage
shortlist so I was wondering how you go
through your shortlist when you 3d scan
or photograph your places
okay and the third question was kind of
what is the on a more maybe
philosophical side this idea of art
infrastructure used as a generic
gentrification or virtual colonialism or
how could you kind of yeah I have
respond to this somehow right so so
first so on the first question yes arts
and culture is not charity it's actually
we're not-for-profit team but we're an
engineering team and we're part of
Google search so we actually think that
bringing higher
content to the internet from the
cultural space service value to
everybody search results everywhere and
we also know that cultural institutions
are not for profits and/or necessarily
are the resources to do that so it
really is part of that goal of yes it
makes search better it makes it
higher-quality it makes the images that
surface for you and our users you know
better and that matters to us as a
search company for sure and that's
something that we're gonna continue to
build on in terms of what else it
provides I think we also benefit from
these partnerships from these
conversations we never get to push
technologies in the ways that we do with
artists with curators with people who
are coming from a very different
perspective so it actually helps us to
think about technologies in a very
different way and because things are
constantly changing it allows us to have
these brief conversations which we call
experiments in a way that we wouldn't be
able to do if we were just thinking
about building products all the time so
I guess that would answer high-level
your first question it is free it is not
for profit we don't work with commercial
institutions and we don't monitor as a
platform at all and that's because we
don't want to isolate cultural partners
who wouldn't be willing to share their
data with us otherwise and there's a
very clear reason for that what's your
second question I should have got a pen
[Music]
yeah so actually so ironically we think
of this as open access right we're
opening up access to culture from around
the world
so less about shutting down doors but
actually allowing for people to walk
inside to walk down the halls of the
Tate or the National Gallery of course
these are institutions that have existed
for many years by opening up those doors
we feel like we'll be allowing a
conversation between them and people who
might actually live in London would be
intimidated to go inside frankly and a
lot of the content that we create that
tone of it is actually very different
from what you'd see as a tone in on a
museum website or catalog
we definitely strive to make it
accessible to make it open and to shift
the dynamics of how you perceive it and
as I was saying earlier it's not just
the big museums anyone can work with us
we did a project on fashion a few years
ago we worked with everyone from the
British Fashion Council in the V&A and
the MoMA and the Met but also a tiny
sorry collective in India a street
fashion institution from Tokyo and so
actually we strive to allow these
institutions to sit side by side and to
tell the story of textile fabric
movement whatever it is in a way that
they wouldn't do in a regular way and to
allow those voices to come up hopefully
in a way that isn't going to change the
entire industry but allows for a
conversation that is possible in the
virtual space last question
[Music]
and there being one engine or what does
that mean so what what say yeah so we
don't notice with all of the
institutions on it so we actually the
truth is we think of ourselves as a
platform and we think of technology like
I said as a tool at the end of the day
the experts are the museum's the
cultural institutions they tell their
stories they write out the words they
give us the images they tell us what to
capture and they take you through the
journey so although you know it seems
like it's all hosted on one platform
we're developing the technologies that
are evolving but it's very much their
voice and at the end of the day anyone
who wants to take stuff down can take it
down any time the reason is caution is
because I've been thinking about cotton
a lot in that picture I've been thinking
about how much water cotton uses and I
think that that's you know that's that's
the direction that we're going in is
thinking a bit more deeply about things
that of course appear very beautiful but
holds so much more behind them I
actually want to continue pretty much
from that question and so the things you
presented a whole quite interesting
project so beautiful but they are quite
equalized because of the way they're
presented as well and accessible as well
to the public so this kind of common
canvas which all of a sudden makes
everything of the same value or
commercial kind of access that's the
first question for me how do you see
that in a way did this you know we lot
of people in the videos we know we know
how they usually speak and then they
come across almost like a little
advertisement as well then the art world
as well itself it's accessed almost like
a product rather than actually in this
actual content and connectivity so this
kind of Miss placement or replacement
depending on the point of view how you
would see that and just to follow their
up a little bit as well into the same
directness before obviously this is kind
of a philanthropic kind of
exercise for Google so you said you
don't work with corporates but obviously
you are one of the deep ik is to
cooperate actually in the world
so wouldn't that's a personal question
to you as an individual not as a company
like how you see this position as
philanthropy like donating money rather
than actually paying the fair share in
different societies actually whilst
being there through taxes and things lad
so these things could grow bottom up
rather than being commissioned by Google
as a big corporation so two questions I
would encourage you to download to the
app or to go online and actually read
because I do think that like yes I've
shown you lots of videos cuz we didn't
have time and so if you think they're
all coming across in a similar vein it's
because of course there's a particular
color and whatever branding but really
the point of it is to delve into the
stories in the content and to think
about you know how unique each
institution is and what's coming across
the other thing that I think is really
important to think about is that this
isn't the only way you can access any of
these institutions or people for sure
you can go to the serpentine web site
you can check out the National Gallery
social media account you can also go and
so it's not meant to be representative
to everyone in the world of what any one
particular institution is and that's not
at all the point of it and so if there
is a particular kind of energy coming
across its not meant to be the only
representation of it to your second
question I think that I think that all
of the ways that we can use technology
to bring to the arts into the cultural
space and projects that celebrate
sustainability are important like I said
I don't think that's the only way to do
it and I think that this is a way that
we are being able to create a platform
that anyone can access to use if they
choose to and of course not use it they
choose not to our investment is in the
technology of it that's what we know
that's how we work and that's something
that we've worked over many years it's
been seven years now working with
institutions to provide you know by
choice a platform which they can choose
to engage with or not
and I think that from our perspective
it's not charity it's really allowing
one more tool for them to engage with
should they want to do so and we don't
see it as in fact all of our projects
are partnerships it's not a sponsorship
it's not a funding it's very much a
collaboration and you know since you
know these people you talk to any of
them they would really tell you about
the process of conversation that goes
into each of these initiatives I I have
a observation and a question maybe at
the end so I wanted the founding team of
Biennale in India and South India in
Kochi and the coaching was raspbian Ali
and in 2010 or 11 with your with your
former colleagues in fact before you
joined Google art and culture we were at
a two-year dialogue to get them to come
and capture the Biennale because we felt
that it was important that audiences
around the world could experience this
this art event that was happening which
we were nonprofit and took a long time
and we were the first biennial in the
world that Google art and culture came
and they sent their cameras to and and
it took about it took a year after that
and it launched a year later and and you
can still go on Google's website walk
through the biennial which is a really a
great asset to this little nonprofit
that they're kind of needed the needed
to kind of share this information but I
wanted to just pick up on what you said
and I think that also what this
gentleman said about the kind of
seemingly altruistic nature of this and
you know being that it is the largest
company in the world and so on and so
part of the part of the the you know
it's a search and advertising company
essentially and I guess part of the
function of maps and Gmail and all these
are the great things that you're doing
come out of the profits from search and
advertising and then go into all these
great things that we use like maps in
Gmail all for free so there's a free
lunch and and I suppose that the the art
and culture aspect to what you do is a
sort of continuation of that which is
that you're investing in two areas two
make them you know organize the world's
information and so on but it's not free
and and there is a price and so the
question I'll end with I mean I just
want to because I think that I want it
sort of just give a balanced observation
to say that we are an organization that
approach Google were extremely lucky to
be able to work with you
we've done lots of work with you over
the last 10 years I'm sure millions and
millions of people have experienced this
art festival in Kerala because of Google
art and culture but we also realize that
it's not completely altruistic we're
extremely grateful and I think it's
really complicated because I think if
you used Gmail if you used maps then you
know this is just another one of your
products as it were but a question to
finish would be that would you advocate
or do you see a future where some of
these assets as you've called them the
the monetization of the viewership of
these assets would somehow feed back
into some of these smaller organizations
or let's say you know if you've had a
million pageviews of a reconstruction
site somewhere you know where they don't
have funds to fix it then maybe some of
those funds I don't know how you would
compute it but could perhaps filter back
into these organizations right so just
to make the point again we don't want it
as a platform so there's no advertising
and so there's no way of tracking that
because we don't actually make money off
of the arts and cultural platform so I
mean just your specific question and in
terms of how we Series up so I'm not
here to speak on behalf of every single
product area but I will say that like it
is separate and it's not monetized and
what we provide is really like I said
tools and technologies and time and
partnership that helped to elevate these
stories in you know really with an
optimistic optimistic view on what we
can do to to showcase things and I I do
think kind of conflating doesn't
necessarily help the story of what it
means to be able to do that
or can we have someone new yes welcome
to the AAA as kind of expecting a bit of
that and and I've got two very very
close friends that work for creative
labs one of them you know and yeah they
have Morel confliction 'he's about
working for this massive organization
and one of them is the nicest most moral
person I know and the truth is with with
massive reach you have a bit more of an
audience to talk to so for me that the
idea of accessibility can can actually
be beneficial and I understand
skepticism but also this isn't Google
here standing here shouting at you this
is someone who works for Google and
people that work in these institutions
don't necessarily completely reflect to
all of those those those bad things that
those companies have them have done in
the past so I just kind of wanted to
kind of apologize not on behalf of other
people but I just think that maybe they
miss some of the things I was trying to
say no I mean there's also part of me
that hates Google deeply but you're not
Google you know and I'm not gonna make
you feel uncomfortable thank you for
coming here basic thank you and yeah I
think there's one thing I'd like to say
is that I think if there was a way of
making the AA's archive seen by more
people in a deep way why wouldn't we
want that like Google's gonna be there
whether we like you or not I think so
yeah I'm not it's complicated I admit
but that's been nice about it that's
that's it really not much of a question
I have a question on awareness
how do people discover the platform or
learn about it and are they marketing
efforts to kind of broaden its appeal
yeah I mean the biggest way I think that
you'd end up finding it is if you if you
search online for one of these
institutions and it'll always pop up in
the knowledge panel is something that
you could access to learn more about
their collection social media we often
link it back to a story or an artifact
that is related to that you know the
doodle or an anniversary there'll be a
link on the Google homepage and then of
course our partners so through the
institutions that we work with we really
work to push out the stories that we've
worked on with them so that's kind of I
think the biggest sources of traffic and
then you of course have PR and all sorts
of other things topic but I was really
intrigued by what happens inside we've
spoken what about the audiences but what
about the the teams inside so you said
that sometimes these collaborations with
creative spark surprises and new things
which then feed back and enrich the
engineers so Google's huge does that
happen a lot how does that happen yeah
it does happen a lot and it ends up
being actually like a lot of like
relationship building and
person-to-person conversations where you
will have you know the curator coming to
our lab in Paris and sitting with our
team of creative coders and having a
conversation that sometimes goes on for
a few months and really brainstorming on
on where each party is coming from in
order to kind of come up with something
different so with Wayne for example he
did spend a lot of time kind
going through his own archive and saying
well this is kind of what I want and
then working with our team of coders to
see what was possible but also they then
went off and had a few other ideas and
played around and did a bit of coding on
the side to come up with things that
maybe added to the conversation that
they were having
so it's a very ongoing dialogue not
necessarily because it's a big company
as I was trying to say earlier but but
in theory they will see the final
product and it does often happen that
somebody gets interested in being
involved for whatever reason with a
particular creative so you'll see very
often you know we work our Creative Lab
teams for example end up working with
museums and artists so there is often
quite a lot of crossover it's not just
one team that works on art and culture
in fact there's multiple teams that had
these relationships met go down
particular paths and often that's
because relationships exists and
somebody kind of you know get struck by
the idea that they want to work with
machine learning and they are you know a
designer and ended up meeting another
team at Google and that becomes its own
story and collaboration a lot of it is
serendipity to be honest because it's
such a big it's it's a massive
organization and there's things that
just kind of come up over time and a lot
of it is you know that the topical area
is Stella McCartney of course is a you
know represents contemporary British
heritage in fashion but you know because
of her interest in her work and
sustainability has become a partner for
this very different project so that's a
little bit of how it works it's a lot
more you know I wouldn't use the word
chaotic but unexpected then you might
imagine it to be quite often
I know there are more questions but this
is why we always have a reception after
each lecture so I will invite you to ask
the question when we actually stand up
but I loved I forgot your name what was
your name
Schrute oh I loved his proposal no like
this moment in which Sam you're like
wait what if we suddenly take over no
and we make eminent domain of Google and
suddenly we're able to make all the
different parts of other companies like
something that ultimately produces this
kind of do goodness that the Google
Cultural project seems to be right in
the way in which you're talking about
you know you express yourself the way in
which you disseminate information and I
think those are very interesting moments
and and and spaces of reflection in
which we try to reimagine that so
reconfigure the world anew and probably
well I always like to think that I'm
someone who likes to resist and to be in
the in the site of the agitator and I
started my question was like like
warming up for what was in a certain way
to come I'm also always a big fan of
those spaces that even when they become
institutionalized they still behave and
they still try to find the spaces of
resistance and those spaces of
difference and and do the spaces of
innovation even if that is a term that
obviously carries many many problematic
implications you were talking about the
doodle at some point and I remember once
I was in San Francisco in in a bar I
just entered to have dinner and I met
next to me was the woman who actually
was in charge of designing the doodles
and I and for a second I always desired
I could design not that doodle just for
a month to see if I could change for a
second the mind of someone just by
changing that to the independent if that
was of Google of that I knew how many
people were always confronted with that
and and I think here is almost a
difficult question that we have also as
architects how far we're willing to go
to participate in specific structures to
actually change some of the issues that
that does in society we want to to shape
and to address and and to
move but this is why we invited you to
come here as part of our experimental
methods symposium and and to actually
see some of the experiments that Google
is doing in register with cultural and
different institutions and to do that
from an institution like the a a that
the started as a kind of alternative I
can in the edge almost garage like code
writing in this case architectural
education platform that now has become
as well an institution that other
individuals see and feel that it is a
kind of established a force of good and
evil in equal forms and so I think that
is very interesting to identify what is
the ethical and the source of an
institution and to make sure that that
is that we are constantly reminded in
everything we do that actually there is
something more important than the scale
the size and and the problematic issues
that we constantly engage as we try to
have larger audiences and a bigger
impact and and and ultimately not to shy
away from that but to make sure that we
are constantly reminding ourselves and I
think many of us reminded ourselves of
that and and you also reminded us of
what is that that can happen when
institution is really trying to to
really bring us together in a different
form thank you sir
