and welcome back to the open Seminole
time the planet which is part of the
public program of the architectural
Association this evening we have a wide
range of expertise at the table with us
on my right is Professor Ian Savage
who's professor
Palio biology at the University of
Leicester and the convener of the
Anthropocene working group which is
gathering all the evidence to submit to
the International stratigraphic
Commission in order to certify when we
are we have dr. Katherine Russell who
was a colleague of young and lecture and
in sedimentology also University of
Leicester
who's gonna guide us into the larger
stratigraphic implications tonight then
we have Charlie chronic who's a senior
program adviser at Greenpeace and one of
the initiators of a project at federal
agency which I'm one of the principals
has done which is condemned Museum of
oil and we have Hilary coops and script
a terrorist
we apologize because Emily culture from
sensible I cannot be with us this
evening the theme this evening is time
and the question is really when are we
[Music]
the question is really not an easy one
to answer it's not one where we are
simply trying to synchronize our
activities among the very complex
globalization forces but we are trying
to deceive me to understand how the
question that was put forward in the
year 2000 by the Nobel Prize winner Paul
Crutzen
about the fact that we're no longer
within the
structures and processes of the Holocene
but we are in the Anthropocene has
consequences across a number of
boundaries disciplinary boundaries
social boundaries and creative
boundaries and mostly material
boundaries so interested in this how
this question of when we are we've seen
from a number of practices and this is
really got to do with the architecture
of this question that is the way through
which we can understand the construction
of a common meaning of the relationship
between people and their material basis
seems to us to be in the condition of
upheaval exactly at the moment when we
think we can master it so well through
technology and so the question is really
for us a double one on one side we know
that we have crossed into a new
geological epoch science is overwhelming
but we also know that that moment is one
of complete dismantlement of everything
that we thought we knew about
computation in the distinction between
nature and culture and the distinctions
between nature and culture only part of
this so the evening is structured really
around the intrusion of the Anthropocene
into our guests lives and we will
started a joint presentation by young in
cash stream which basically gives the
tone of where we are but before that I
would really like to ask you and to give
us a quick recount of how you started in
society to start considering how the
policies of the Anthropocene that comes
from outside could affect something
called stratigraphy Commission of the
Geological Society of London and we're
the only Commission of the Geological
Society which has a privilege of a free
lunch with wine when we speak so the
conversation can get quite adventurous
even with our ideas which then seemed
the science fiction quite a blondish and
coming from outside of geology you know
so you know the it's it's a nice setting
to develop ideas to publish them as
ideas and then to see what kind of
bricks come back at you and that's
exactly what happened with the
Anthropocene you know they put together
the idea extraordinarily 21 out of 22
working conservative traditional
bureaucratic geologists agreed that the
idea with what was worth pursuing and so
we've been pursuing it ever since you
know is the Anthropocene real and if so
what should we do about it but it really
started among that company of colleagues
in rocks from the outside from the idea
come from the outside and I think that
and was being used not by geologists but
as a geological term and there was the
you know the clash the opposition and we
had to do something about it either say
the Anthropocene is nonsense don't use
it in geologically or if it's not
nonsense how do we cope with it
and it's really that second but it's not
nonsense how do we cope with it that
we're now dealing with both geologically
and there is a part of that which is you
know I think we should slide by tonight
but also the you know as you said the
the Anthropocene does change the world
we live in you know at a planetary scale
and they'd be a bureaucratic part has an
importance because it's a stamp of you
know some kind of approval so a bit nice
to have that but regardless of that you
know it's the underlying reality which
is changing now year by year which is
geologists we're not used to millionaire
by millionaire yes
New Year by you not so much so the when
are we from a geological bureaucratic
point of view is a crucial one because
you're allowed you normally to deal with
things that are not now but because
you're dealing with something that is
now the question was question it's still
up for grabs the Anthropocene is still
controversial because it is so new so
young so different and it's not finished
it is it is a trajectory we're not so
used to dealing with ongoing
trajectories with in geological
nomenclature of the time scale which is
four and a half billion years in
duration
I guess we can move into it okay yeah
good that's it
okay so this is an introduction to the
rock side of things in a way it's the
architecture of time so quite useful to
have you these ideas you know Catherine
Mata gasps pardon and others of us have
been working on for about 10 years and
this is one side of it you know this is
that the the geology it is immensely
bureaucratic and it is part of a
hierarchical timescale of units from the
the the the the the blue one at left
hand end which is an a on through to an
era a period and then we have this
pattern of epochs and ages all of which
take decades to do find evidence for
define and the idea is that at the top
of that there is a new unit not yet
formal and it may not become formal for
some time which is the Anthropocene
that's one way of looking at it this is
probably rather clear away there is a
horizontal line which represents about
20,000 years of the Holocene you could
say that that is the world that humans
grow up into the vertical line is the
Anthropocene
it's our logo we've chosen because it
represents just one part of the un--
prophecy and this is something that we
had thought was not yet here an
incipient and in the last year or two
we've begun to think it's is happening
rather more quickly than we thought and
are already becoming here it's derived
from these three diagrams made by
climbing party eight one of our
colleagues who took a fifteen thousand
year timeline and looked at the rates of
change in population in carbon dioxide
and at the bottom in methane across that
time and so through that time even
through from the last ice age into the
current interglacial and here - stayed
more or less the same and then it climbs
up in the last century or so and that
climb the difference from the Hollett
from the horizontal to vertical in the
rate of change is what we are calling
the Anthropocene you take it at an even
bigger scale with just 1,000 years it's
still clear as this very well the rise
in co2 values from about 280 to you know
in excess of 400 ppm the top one is the
rise in values and the bottom one is
again the rate of change things are
moving very quickly that is one of the
aspects of the Anthropocene and of
course they're moving quickly because
we've changed the landscape that's
you minor but significant part of it and
also because we've burnt humongous
amounts of oil coal and gas within
something that's been called the great
acceleration population of
industrialization and globalization so
within one human lifetime things have
begun to change and they've changed
things have always changed that's a
truism that is often burrow not brought
up in climate denial circles and yes
they have they've changed for that shows
four hundred thousand years which
changed for in excess of three million
years on a very regular and predictable
metronomic scale with a very
well-defined bottom glacial phase and
top interglacial phase we've been at the
top for 10,000 years
and that top who now has a new top which
is completely new territory in terms of
the Earth's atmosphere and therefore the
climate humans have been around for most
of that time they've been influencing
the earth system for an excess of 50,000
years
detective Lee
but within something that has been
effectively sustainable if you want to
put it in those terms the change in the
last 70 years is the difference that
amount of co2 that has been put out is
about a trillion tons that's hanging in
the air and that trillion tons is a
equivalent of a layer about a meter
thick almost exactly of our exhaust
gases if you like which is growing at a
rate of about a millimeter every
fortnight you know that is the reality
you know of of those graphs you know so
overhead height for a child right now
and of course that again if we take this
twenty thousand years scale of of going
from the Pleistocene glacial times into
interglacial times the Holocene and
we've begun to go up vertically and of
course the big question is how far will
we go how much carbon will be emit and
therefore how hot will the world get
whatever it will go it's going to stay
there for an awful long time so the
Anthropocene is we know on the vertical
part of a long step without is going to
be around for tens of thousands of years
of that here's the bit which we've
always called incipient until just
recently temperatures just begun to rise
that is normal to be expected it's been
happening with such a provocation for a
you know all through geology and sea
level is also beginning to rise this is
ultra Institute geologically 20
centimeters rise from the sanctuary is
nothing but it's now going up it said
the 2.9 millimeters a year feature and
promising disease graphs go out of date
paper coming out this month says it's
now in excess of 4 millimeters a year
over the last a half decade or so so
things are moving and of course again
the projections you know offer us to go
to a world which is going to have less
spice and we'll see you know within
centuries and millennia and probably
within decades to sanctuaries these bits
of landscape the purple bits are the
ones that are going to become go from
land to being sea and again it's it's an
ongoing process
climate is say it's it's a tiny part of
the Anthropocene the Anthropocene is the
whole earth system which includes
everything you know that is physical and
biological and chemical as well as
climatic and here's one example the
growth of minerals of Earth time there's
a graph of 6 billion years including the
four-and-a-half billion since
information the earth the graph is a
rise in minerals going from interstellar
dust just a few up to meteorites a few
hundred and earth a few thousand
oxidized from June a half billion years
ago about five thousand the number of
minerals the basic building blocks of a
planet what happens now well we making
minerals and we know we're making them
different kinds of garnet metals alloys
and things like that
synthetic minerals how are these
altering the planetary picture there's
another one aluminium enough we've made
enough now to coat the US of A in a bit
of Canada in aluminium foil you know so
these are being made on a planetary
scale and we thought a few years ago
that maybe we've kind of doubled the
amount of minerals of the Earth's
surface you know up to that that kind of
spike the Anthropocene spike of minerals
and then came one of our colleagues Bob
Hazen a proper mineralogist who did the
job properly a couple of years ago and
this is now the result of the diagram
you can see at the bottom is all of our
history the vertical line in the spike
to now in excess no of two hundred
thousand minerals crystalline inorganic
compounds which I knew
is again part of the new system it's
science fiction but it's it's it's real
here's one of the the types of new
mineral well rather mineral oil you know
composition fixed within certain limits
it's one that is now working on its
plastics a new form of Earth material
which we're making in large enough
amounts to loosely coat the earth in
cling film so something like this now is
average earth plastic this is more or
less if you average all plastic ever
made out it's something like this much
of it is invisible to our eyes so this
this kind of thing these kind of fibers
and microfibers again very newly
recognized this was not a scientific
phenomenon when we started work on the
Anthropocene in about 2008 2009 this was
not on the radar about three four years
ago it you know it became part of
mainstream science and we have to fight
with it the wait you know climate is
around us but the Anthropocene has a
weight as well and again John and Ann
Saphir and others are involved in trying
to weigh the Anthropocene way London is
one of our current projects here's the
kind of figures you know so if you take
all the stuff we mined and again it's
been growing since the mid 20th century
it's currently something like a third of
a trillion tons of year the stuff
produced you know unused and thrown out
and discarded just in mining
part of that one part of that is
concrete you know so it is a you know
the most popular Anthropocene Rock as it
were
again currently the total production of
that is about a half a trillion tons
that's enough to make a full-scale
replica earth about two millimeters
thick make sure or have a kilogram per
square meter of the Earth's surface put
all of that together again we had ago
and this included a she was again John
and Ann Saphir involved in this project
of trying to weigh the human enterprise
everything we've done made thrown away
modified turned over it's about thirty
trillion tons and cities urban areas of
built ground is about half of that and
that equates to about fifty kilos per
square meters of the Earth's surface
land and sea remove the dog and then you
can move but that a bag of sand and it's
placed us so we are literally ankle-deep
in Anthropocene stuff on earth on
average
and again this is certain way to be
measured again this is the kind of
lateral urban stratigraphy that you know
it's being carried out here which is in
effect it's the geology we're building
decade by decade and it's a super bit of
science of course that is growing other
things are no disappearing one part of
it again is life life itself the total
weight of living things on earth was
calculated again just in the last year
or so at about 500 billion tons of
carbon equivalent you multiply that up
to tissue that becomes about two and a
half trillion tons and that is again in
that estimate the authors said that is
probably half of the the if you like the
weight of living things on earth before
humans got in on the act so mainly by
cutting down trees we've reduced the
amount from living material on earth by
about half we've modified that again
this is part of the modification you
know other types of life is shrunk we
have grown so let's say off all
vertebrates on earth we are now
something about a third of all weight of
animals on earth most of the other
two-thirds is the animals that we keep -
with about less than 5% per lesson three
percent being the wild animals of Earth
and the things in internet documentaries
and some of those animals again in 50 70
years we've modified the Anthropocene
chicken remarkably has grown in weight
about fourfold and in size about two
fold
simply
by selective breeding within again 50 70
years it's a new Morphin species it's
also by far the most abundant bird on
earth in the standing crop about 21
billion turnover about every six weeks
on that again part of that is again this
Anthropocene make changing the chemistry
of the earth so nitrogen and phosphorus
are being piled in in the part of the
removal again of that is things like
insects again a new bit of science again
published just a couple of years ago the
the wonderful entomological Society of
raffled in Germany measured the weight
of flying insects over 27 years and they
reduced by something approaching 80
percent that is a logarithmic diagram at
the top it would be really stretched out
if it was true scale so again this is
part of the description of the
Anthropocene and again part of that
another part of the description is these
extra chemicals so the insects are
probably not liking the new kinds of
organic compounds which again appear in
the sea on land in soils and lake
sediments from roughly 1950 pretty much
everywhere on earth
now what's driving that again we will
you know here from here about you know
the financial instruments technical
instruments one idea that we quite like
in society the Technosphere which is all
of our technology all of our things our
factories plus our societies first
humans are caught up in a new system
which is buddied off the biosphere and
like the biosphere has its own dynamics
which we are part of that we are not
sure if we can control
it's an idea of we don't understand it
but we think it's quite interesting and
useful and part of the the the the
Technosphere makes things it makes new
biologically made shapes in different
forms repeatedly you know so you know if
the number of living biological species
on earth is now something like eight or
nine billion still the number of
TechKnow species is now in excess of
probably a few hundred million
many of them my untidy garage and home
these are things of course which are now
present under the fossils the techno
fossils of the future and again the
fictional anthropomorphic all species to
involve it now takes years and decades
for techno species to evolve from one
kind to another so we're clearly
breaking into something new
this again tell me the more wood called
the hyper object something bigger than
we can cope with and comprehend of the
Anthropocene is something new we have no
idea where it's going so I think it's
probably time to have the closing sunset
on this particular field with a
promising country up in the sky okay
thank you for your patience with all
this geology stuff thank you thank you
a quick question
from the Technosphere I think that the
concept as you said we don't fully
understand and from our perspective
within disciplines of making it really
is bad because as we say many times here
from within the form making practices
and building engineer architecture it
looks like something that we do but
there is in Peters work clear
distinction from the outset it's a
self-regulating part of their system so
it does us and this is the baffling part
because there can be maybe have a few
words about that tip and the fact that
the Technosphere regulates itself and
that it's part of the earth system
because I think this is a central
element about transfers of agency that
we all puzzled when
conceiving of the Anthropocene can you
tell us more about that the Technosphere
I think it's useful because the
classical idea is that we're humans we
decide we make things and therefore
things happen so we are in the driving
seat and you had to be locked into
rather complicated institutions which
largely guide what we do and we have
many forces acting on us just as animal
and plant species are caught within the
bone ecosystems and they have limited
degrees of freedom so the biosphere has
its own dynamics built on all of these
things and the Technosphere has its own
dynamics built on all of these
interactions and so the idea of agency
is is I think crucial what is I think
useful is if the Technosphere gives us
an idea of if it will help us work out
the degrees of freedom that we really
have to evolve to financial instruments
you know to change the ways of
production to change patterns of
investment and all these things because
it is the the money is driving geology
clearly and then again that is a novelty
you know that has never happened before
in
but it's the Technosphere driving the
money and is that is the question I
haven't answer to that
that's a five-pointed
a key element in the practices that you
operate with the hypothesis to count
some initiatives as an activist are
quite obvious no you come from a
long-standing tradition of but it seems
from us looking at your work even though
it's in proximity it seems that
something radically different is
appearing and so that I'm interesting
the transformation of your activism can
you tell us first a few words about what
is it you do and what is it that you do
within Greenpeace because I think that
would give them the tone about the shift
experience it's a good thing that you're
not expecting me to answer the question
that Yann just asked about because I
don't think I could do that so hello
everybody I'm Charlie cronic I work at
Greenpeace which is the McDonald's of
the environment movement okay let's be
really clear about this we are a
multinational we exist across cultural
all kinds of cultural and political and
geological boundaries and just like any
multinational the implication is that
your product is the same wherever you go
but the reality is Greenpeace in China
Greenpeace in Brazil particularly now
Greenpeace in the UK Greenpeace in the
u.s. they're all radically different
things actually just with the same brand
and what I do is I operate as a kind of
almost a boutique within the Greenpeace
world in that the kind of activism that
I do is engaging with financial
institutions so I think that the history
of the interaction of the activists with
finance is it's pretty short and it's
not very glorious and I think it started
out probably in the mid 90s up to say
about to the financial crisis in 2008
we're an environmentalist
you know you brand them any way you like
it could be Greenpeace it could be
frenzy
could be an unnamed entity would come up
to a financial institution or a
representative of it and say basically
shout at them say you don't believe any
of the things that I believe you don't
know or feel any of the things that I
know but if you did you'd behave
completely differently those people who
represent the financial institutions
generally who are perfectly generally
not entirely but generally a perfectly
reasonable human beings look at that
that activist who's got in their face
and go you're right I have no idea what
you're talking about but far more
significant than that is none of the
decisions that I have to make on a
day-to-day basis are based on any of the
things that you have just said to me and
so no matter how I feel about them
personally I can't act in the way you
would like me to the activist gets very
sad disheartened and goes away and rinse
and repeat and you do this you know
every few years and that is still going
on and I'm sure if any of you all of you
are imaginative and spent some time in
London over the you know since between
Eastern and now you know experience you
know proximity extinction rebellion
fantastic people who are doing more or
less the same thing and they're doing it
beautifully and creatively in a very
distributed way you could argue that the
change in the context has changed the
way people respond to that kind of
engagement but I think the biggest thing
that I would take away from what Young
has said and what he's shown us is that
I think to a large extent environmental
activism and kind of all social
to visit to a certain extent is based on
what you know I would describes the
deficit model if you knew as much as I
knew you being a big decision making
institution and me being me or you the
big distance the big institutions would
behave differently I think the thing we
have learned or if you felt what I felt
very differently I think the thing that
we've learned overwhelmingly certainly
in the last three or four years but
probably in the last ten to fifteen is
that the deficit model is well and truly
dead if it ever existed it certainly
doesn't exist anymore and in fact
evidence you know I mean there was an
extraordinary amount of evidence in
Indians presentation yet that evidence
has absolutely no bearing on the
decision-making of pretty much all the
institutions that are have created the
Technosphere that have created the
economic system you know that we live
under and the responses to it the
institutional responses to it such as
you know austerity or quantitative
easing or any of the any of the ways
that institutions respond to that it has
nothing to do with evidence it has
everything to do with the values beliefs
and and the kind of the codes that they
need to perpetuate the institutions that
they're currently in so as an activist
you have a choice are you buck you have
loads of choices I had a choice I could
continue to try to explain to people
while I why I was right and what they
were wrong or why Yan was right and why
they were
making the decision to make or you try
to intervene in ways that are within the
tiny frames of decision that they make
so I'll give you a really really
concrete example about when I started
doing this kind of work in about 2008
there were a set of preconceptions
around the oil industry and I spent a
lot of time thinking about oil because
it's a really good proxy for the way we
think about the Technosphere it's it
says this is short-lived you know
industry it's barely had any history at
all the geological time it took to
create the product compared to the time
that its you know taken to exploit the
product is so extraordinarily
insignificant it's as if it never
happened
so in 2008 there was a very clear set of
beliefs and instant in financial
institutions about about the oil
industry one is that the demand for oil
would always grow that that would always
be true there were nothing would change
that that the amount of oil we had was
limited and was rapidly being depleted
probably anybody in here old enough to
remember Peak Oil
remember transition towns when we
thought we're gonna run out of corn
flakes and totnes was gonna pull down
the shutters and you know we were all
gonna have our own currency to totnes
pound that that demand would there for
financial eyes endlessly the exploration
of oil the most technically
environmentally challenged in places and
that that none of the social license in
other words the political and cultural
institutions that dependent on oil would
ever turn their backs on that and
therefore there would be no limit to the
amount of money or political or cultural
capital that would be expended on
getting more
the ground it's now 2009 to almost 2020
and we have literally more oil than we
know what to do with that
the amazing technocratic the taxes fear
Technosphere have learned or just begun
to exploit the ways that mean that
virtually we have you know dozens of
times more in orders of magnitude more
fossil fuels generally but oil and gas
particularly to cook the climate beyond
habitable limit several times over that
the alternatives you know the
technological not so much the Scioscia
that the technical alternatives to oil
are not only affordable they are
imminent and and very very very nearly
with us and we haven't even begun to
talk about plastics but I mean if you
talk about the overwhelming use of oil
as a transport fuel or as a create and
gas is a creator of heat weather spacey
process either combustion for driving
all of those things can be replaced by
other things and yet since the signing
of the Paris agreement this amazing
thing in 2015 that was gonna limit that
was we strive to keep global average
temperature increase below two degrees
in this year is 1.5 as possible 33
financial institutions around the world
have given the fossil fuel industry oil
and gas industry one point nine trillion
dollars between the end of 2015 and the
end of 2018 to expand the supply of
fossil fuels know why in any rational
institution would you do such a thing I
mean it is the definition of madness it
is taking a you know a resource which
has been in really scarce apply you know
money for things like health education
social care and pouring it into an
industry a set of institutions bless you
that we will never ever be able to
exploit
and a few years ago some really really
smart people who used they all used to
work in the financial industry it
started a little outfit called carbon
tracker just around the corner here in
London and they they calculated the and
continued to calculate the amount of
capital investment that's going into
into oil and gas and fossil fuels
generally against temperature rise and
they've their modeling it really
precisely it's now down to the industry
and even the company level of the amount
of capital expenditure that is beyond
one point five or even to you know two
degrees even with the most generous
assumptions and it pretty much means
that every every company in that
business in the world will in the next
you know between now and 2030 will
basically either have to transform or
cease to exist so you know the question
and and they also posited this idea that
if as a financial actor you continue to
pour money into these industries by 2030
which is very soon you would be we would
be facing what are called you know
stranded assets in other words that you
know in conventional economic terms
these things would no longer you
couldn't monetize them anymore and all
the money you put into them would be
would be wasted and this is where we
come back to the deficit model these are
really rational people all of them
worked in the financial industry before
and they said here is transition risk
when the world finally realizes that
climate change is gonna send us to hell
in a handcart all of those assets will
be wasted you will have lost all that
money and every financial actor looked
at it when there's absolutely no
transition risk at all they if your
incentives are every three to four
months if you're a fund manager if
you're a banker and your assumption is
that your loans have to be paid within
three to five years you look out over
that period of time for your incentives
or your your remuneration you go there's
no risk there's absolutely no risk
so the money continues to flow at the
most extraordinary and accelerating
rates
the real risk of course as has been
highlighted just so dramatically by all
those slides is the risk of a failure to
transition the risk that nobody talks
about because all rational people who
believe in the deficit model will go
will they look at that presentation all
that go obviously there will be the
transition and very real risk is that
the transition never happens and that
there is a you know we get to the point
at which on the rapid more vertically
ascending scale that you know natural
systems can cohabit with the changes in
the technical and and social investments
that we've made mostly based on fossil
fuels and so what I've spent the last
ten years doing is going into financial
institutions and talking not possibly in
quite as much detail but recategorize in
there it's not is the transition risk
that these guys face by failing to be
it's the game you know financial musical
chairs if you can be you know the last
person in an industry and the first one
to get out before the curtain the market
decides to turn you will have made your
billions yield made your nut you know
and as they say in 2008 IBG ybg I'll be
gone you'll be gone who cares the
reality is that nobody escapes this
particular round of casino capitalism
and the reality is that it's not that
there will be a financial collapse that
will make the financial collapse of 2008
seem literally of an insignificant blip
and it's been an interesting progression
over that decade when
when I first started doing it that first
set of assumptions held we have now
nobody in the financial just to be
really clear almost no one in the
financial world that I have ever met
it's a climate skeptic now almost none
of them believe that the preconceptions
of endless demands constricted supply
endless money and the social license are
going to be available they just believe
they will be the ones who get out and I
think that that is that is that's the
challenge that we currently face is how
do you transform a cognitive belief and
an understanding that the problem is
existential with a day to day set of
decisions that seem perfectly plausible
within their current frame of reference
so that's that's basically what I do is
I sow seeds of doubt bigger and bigger
and bigger seeds of doubt we start out
with seeds we've moved into saplings
we're now kind of in the into industrial
forestry levels of doubt amongst the
financial system to to accelerate that
transformation but it won't operate in
isolation it won't be because we will
not be saved by markets all right
climate change is the biggest market
failures weren't you know the Nicholas
Stern said in 2007 in that big report
the challenge is to create a kind some
kind of synthesis where there is enough
I think bluntly speaking hesitancy in
the financial markets combined with a
level of terror that comes from the loss
of political and social license that the
the incipient because we're experiencing
it now if you go to Delhi if you go to
California if you go to Sydney the you
know the biosphere is responding in real
time now to what the Technosphere is
created and I think that that's it's the
combination of those different elements
but the reason that I focused on finance
for all this time has been that between
now and 2008 that's been the system that
governance is focused on to the pretty
much exclusion of all others so if
you're rational actor which I guess I
hope
that some activists are it's not
necessarily a good thing to be it's just
what I've chosen to be is that you you
choose to try to intervene and and
Monkeywrench the system that attracts
the most attention from the other
powerful institutions in the world and I
guess the final thing I would say I've
never heard the expression the great
acceleration before but I'm so glad I
have because I was born in 1955 so I
basically have lived through pretty much
all of the great acceleration and now I
know all I'm so tired
about the what you saying is that
there's obviously a step beyond the
light we're unlikely yeah well more
knowledge will lead to independent
decisions and what we're seeing here is
that it's what you basically set up in
spite of all the evidence there is one
major cognitive failure which is also
possible
and I think this is a really interesting
moment because on one side Yanni's
pushing a complete life and scientific
model of having to convince your
colleagues about the antipas in order to
rubber started and you arch is telling
us yet you know even though you rubber
stamp that the guys have no incentives
to change so we are seeing here a very
interesting bifurcation of quality of
the Anthropocene that on one side is
pushing so much more science more
thinking activism is changing and on the
other side
it all looks without an output you
mentioned that maybe that needs to be a
major shift what is happening in this
country where the combination of finance
and geology in that what happened
yesterday with the ban on fracking which
is a clear
conflagration I would say between among
scientific evidence and the political
campaign well you can no longer
distinguish one from the other and I
find those moments becoming more and
more frequent in our lives so my
question now is for Kathleen you are
young scientists and how do you go about
starting your sentiment career in such
uncertainty about science in such an
uncertain condition because it's not
that we need
evidence it's overwhelming but still
nothing happens so how do you go about
that so yeah there are several
challenges the does the the longevity of
the work that happens you know whereas
some of my colleagues who have been in
academia for quite some time they may
have planned their careers on decade or
kind of timescales I'm planning mine
within a decade because within ten years
you know we're going to see a very
different kind of environment and so
there's that challenge
there's also what's gonna get funded and
that's kind of got to fit with a popular
vein of you know we can make a
difference we can make things change we
can make things happen and so
but then that and so so that that
element of finding funding as a
sedimentology so there are two places
that you can find funding one is with
oil and increasingly so the other one is
with plastics plastics being the new
sedimentary component that we created
and spreads into pretty much every
millimetre in its path
how did you make the decision to go with
plastic instead of oil well when I did
my PhD I was actually involved in more
formal galata so I worked on river
deposits which have become rocks so they
are no longer wet and many of the
largest oil reservoirs around the world
actually within those deposits and
within those rocks it's actually not as
not as simple as stick a pole in the
ground and worry about and actually
there is a complex interaction of where
there is porous material and non porous
materials so you have to understand in a
very complex way how to draw that
material out and some of those rocks are
intensely complicated and so my work was
doing my PhD was actually to try to find
a way to maximize the efficiency of an
oily active well therefore to save on
the carbon I've actually
[Music]
having to drill multiple wells and
explore for a new site so it's actually
to to maximize the efficiency of already
existing reservoirs particularly some of
Australia but I won't go into that but
essentially there's that angle and there
are green angles but ultimately you are
being funded by people whose moms don't
necessarily align with yours yeah I mean
I I've met many people who work for oil
companies who are wonderful people but
yeah so then it kind of came to what
where else can I get funding where else
can I can I work and very quickly
plastics became quite fascinating
because they are unlike anything else
that exists so much of what we learn and
work on a set of metrologist is based in
quartz or limestone very would cost
elastic so this is mud sand clays and
quartz or limestone which is kind of
shells and in the Bahamas that kind of
thing and so we're trying to work out
how these typically predictive methods
within particular cities acrostics which
is where I work in knots basically how
these can be transferred to common
problems and my PhD was kind of in
predicting where the sand and the mud
was within rivers and I used a lot of
modern systems to do that
so then could I not apply the material
from that I learned through predicting
positions of sand and murder to
predicting positions of plastic and that
to me seemed like way more in line with
what I wanted to do what plant needed
and work there is actually being done as
much as it needs to be there's an awful
lot of emphasis on ocean cleanup and so
by focusing on rivers there's actually
quite quite an interesting set of from
open research there so that's kind of
how I wound up in the very first Landsat
image of Texas there's no dammed
modified in its canal can you tell us
[Music]
rivers want to do one thing and we're
making them do another I kind of try to
avoid the term Mississippi River now and
I prefer Mississippi canal because it is
so boxed in and it's so
it's completely different to how the
river naturally wants to behave I don't
know if you've seen the fiscal apps that
published in 1947 where you can see all
the beautiful meander loops all over the
Mississippi that's historic now that
doesn't work in that manner anymore so
what the river wants to be doing is
transporting sediment which is now
blocked by dams downstream which is now
a shipping area for transferring
commodities have been down Mississippi
just as an example so it's therefore
been deepened and it's therefore dredged
and it's no longer natural sediment
and with the sediments under there as
well will be plastics and so the even
the sediment as a basic isn't it natural
anymore but then ultimately what you end
up with this same Mississippi Delta it
starts to sink because the natural
systems rely on on input from that
natural system to maintain what it is
that they are trying to exist as so that
blue Mississippi don't it doesn't have
enough sediment coming in to anymore and
it's starting to sink the validity
therefore what we learn in the rock
record and what we bring into the modern
is it's very interesting question and I
think that there are elements that are
valid where the landscape hasn't been
modified to the extent that it might
have been in say the Mississippi so
there are places in the Amazon where the
rivers are still behaving naturally you
know we can actually we can apply those
models to work out where they will where
plastics will def deposit and where we
can go to clean up there were also
rivers where we can apply those models
anyone and interestingly when we try to
interpret the rock record to bring
models into the modern and to try to
work out well therefore how can we how
can we work out where things are
supposed to be based on what we know
about how rivers should believe from the
past the anthropogenic alterations
aren't necessarily hooked up in all that
much detail in some cases they are but
not all the time so there is that very
strange disparity between the relevance
of what we've learned from geology but
that is a disconnect gap and ultimately
flow dynamics by the same once we
understand that new sediment which is
what I'm trying to work on with
understanding the plastic we should be
able to generate a new such predictive
models and predict a future geologic
record
is some very much like one of the many
students of architecture that would say
this is my plan and this is how it will
end up and then some one of their
colleagues who say that wait a minute
that prediction is no longer valid so I
mean the fact that you're not
considering this shift in the model and
still holding on to all the principles
of physics and aerodynamics and you need
to understand something that is
drastically modified but at the same
time we just heard from Charlie actually
the plastic just received an enormous
incentive in funding actually to
multiply the plastic factories in the
last three years and we've seen more and
more plastic factories so there's a EM
interest in this condition where from
one side you're thinking I need to do
the plastic because so I can I can do
some good but the more evidence that you
are bringing it seems that the more its
screams for that is regard way what is
the ethical condition as a young
scientist in that
condition we see it in architecture when
we say 30 trillion tons is the amount of
stuff that we have here people look at
us but wait unless it's in pounds really
interesting this condition that you're
describing of a model that needs to be
recalibrated but the principle of more
knowledge leads to better action is the
one that I see being fractured here and
it seems to me fractured around the very
notion of when are we
yeah so trying to take
if we can work out where plastics are
underneath the river so essentially the
estimations for the amount of plastic
that reaches the ocean by rivers is is
insanely varied I think it's something
like four point six to fifteen point six
I think it's once a year like we don't
really have any idea and the only stuff
that we see is what floats and
everything else that travels by
suspension or by rolling and on the
bottom we don't see you and there was a
lot of interest in marine queena
and people are working on that and there
isn't much interest in terrestrial
systems and that could be largely
political because it's within someone's
you know area of the council and so it's
up to them it's their whose
responsibilities if it's on land and so
yes of course are gonna be certain
alliances of how to trying to work out
if somebody is going to go ahead and do
that or not and the more information
that can be gleaned from it yeah it can
do one of two things that can make
everyone go and hide in a hole because
of that go it's too bad I can't it's too
bad now I can't deal with that or it can
trigger people trigger action and as of
yet we don't know which one is gonna
happen
I still naively have faith in humanity
perhaps and so I'm going to try and what
we've kind of found so far is that if
you are building a sedimentary structure
at the bottom of a river it will build
over the plastic because it's lighter
and so it sits underneath it so even if
all we learn and are able to share with
people that if you want to clean a
prover you're going to have to dig
through the sediment to get the plastic
out and after a flood oven you will find
that the the materials that are on the
banks that will end up back in the river
so clean up after every flood that kind
of thing
even if that's all we end up with that
is something that the locals can do that
is something that people who are climate
conscious or environmentally conscious
can take on board and do I am NOT
relying on big industries but then if
there's enough of a signal if someone
for example goes understand cleaning up
and realizes that they buy all of that
stuff they might change their attitude
there's a completely different
discussion to be had about countries
that are not as well developed because
in many cases that plastic underpins
their economy and they cannot afford
stuff that is not made of plastic in in
some cases and of course that's the
whole medical element and there's food
element with fertilizer and that kind of
thing so I think if we were to stop
making plastic and from petroleum there
was about two billion people within a
year would suffer
in some of the answer slides the areas
that are subject to sea-level rise we
indicated and I'm really interested in
this formalism but it seems we are in
deep trouble but at the same time
everything that we have managed to do so
badly in the last 30 years so quickly
building the transition from rural to
urban humanity think of China building
on the estuary on the north coast we saw
in the Mekong Delta we saw all of that
is urban construction and so we know
that we have to redo everything that
we've done in the last 30 years but in a
better way
unfortunately there's no second go at
first urbanization but we can talk about
that it seems to me that what you're
describing the land base River
structures are these structures that we
will have to rely upon in order to
rebuild all of our coastal cities it's
where we have the primary sources of
construction sand dredged all the
industry for cement production are
exactly in those areas that have now
been so deeply modified and so I I think
that is an enormous coalition potential
within your kind of work and the kind of
work of the that the students here are
going to be doing actually in reality
know their careers will all be about how
to rebuild those elements
see a lot of interesting connections
between your new way of thinking and the
new infrastructures that we will have to
be put in place and you even just the
factories of I'm not talking about where
we will put the hospitals and the
schools and the homes but just a basic
structures to build our architectures
come from there what least used to come
from there in the Auris in the architect
very basis of architecture the bricks is
sedimentology
so I'm really interested in your shift
of perspective and how you're dealing
with babe pragmatic way the same we have
to do this in order to achieve that I
think it's a really interesting element
but I wanted to say this because it
seems to me that and then your attitude
of being straightforward looking at the
contemporary forms of transformation the
planet encounters Hilary's work in a
peculiar way because Hilary you are
dealing in your work from say a
completely different entry point with a
similar relationship between an
imaginary of the rational and an
imaginary of the irrational behavior so
can you tell us
you're a little bit about your beautiful
plans to reconnect the consciousness
from money to stuff very quickly so that
we can nothing tie presentation because
at some point again we'll have to go and
rush for a train I would like to have a
conversation I'm gonna come back to you
for the longer one when you said you use
the word trajectory in your you know
presentation and I thought that was so
interesting this trajectory implies as
an endpoint and whereas the momentum is
what we were really getting with the
Technosphere it has momentum in it and
and I thought and then again with you
and you you um you almost assume that
actually there is no and there is no
trajectory no one out there is actually
actually working on a trajectory where
they say whew this big energetic release
I'm gonna ride that and come out on top
and I think that's a bit naive I
actually think that those people who are
working in finance often understand that
when things collapse the wealthy do land
on top so I do think there are a few
land on top strategists out there where
you can have a you know for example the
one defector from the Paris Accord is
really Russia and you know Saudi Arabia
is so talented you know playing because
if you imagine what's gonna happen
there'll be this new private ocean up at
the Arctic Circle with all the refugee
fish up there and if he can just flog
dictators their shadows around this it's
it's a viable trajectory you can you
know you can even accelerate such a
trajectory now this is unrealistic we
know utter chaos we know the tundra will
melt but I just wanted to put in that
dark mode my work is really I feel very
fragile in the world and very intent
that we actually get something going
regardless of who wins or who I feel we
need to find a way for people like Saudi
Arabia and Putin to make money from
saving the world so that has been my how
do you navigate all the fields of sacred
cows in finance without disturbing them
yes that's my metaphor sojust but going
on I just want to when you talk about
the architecture of the question of when
I think this is really the strata also
measure the accumulation of time you
know they're like notches on the ruler
when you plunge it in and and when you
dig in you turn those notches but it's
you know in architecture we see troy is
down there underneath the modern set of
the modern settlement and that's that
accumulation is quite an interesting
thing but it's also I I thought the
question the real question I would pose
is what is life done with its time you
know that rather than where when are we
the Anthropocene that a Copernican
decentering of us it's almost like we
have to act a bit fast now and say yes
it's the Anthropocene how do we now D
Center ourselves and see it in another
way so we can say what is life done with
its time and I spend all that years and
years thinking about how do you how do
you measure what life is done because
the species they come they go they all
go extinct it feels so slippery you know
and then one realizes that there's
actually these five scales these forms
that really endure when you get these
forms they're there to the end the
species come and go their lifetimes are
little blips but across them they
instantiate these five scales they're
really absolute scales of complexities
or as a sculptor this was a shocking
thing to me and I I got building on that
so that is indeed the transversal where
I comment things like finance and this
this this set of organs with momentum
that we've accumulated because the thing
about these things is we've accumulated
them finance is it's like Byzantine law
you know it's it's this mass it doesn't
have a vernacular there's no way for
granny to actually see what her pension
is doing there's no visual language to
describe at Martin wolf and the FT does
these wonderful articles where he tries
to inter narrate finance and it's this
this swamp with these predators and it's
all opaque and visual so so so the
question of what life does with its time
I would argue that you have viruses you
have bacteria you have cells with
organelles and
have multicellular organisms they came
one after a time they are absolutely one
is more complex than the other
we know easily that the organelles of a
cell are bacteria originally and despite
the etymological smoothing we can see in
language control metaphor we can say we
put utterances together to make words we
put words together to make sentences and
thus this is a quite a nice control
group to test the theory of nesting that
we put these things together to make
more complex things which brings us to
say so what are these leaps well there's
an itch just like Darwin said when
you're on this island and you're a
little bird and you've got your little
beak that flower where the nectar is
down that deep is invisible to you
because you can't get to it you don't
have the apparatus to access that
experience of the nectar and thus but
then slowly over time one error leads to
another and my God if I can't just drink
that nectar and that's speciation that's
how we exploit this new niche so I argue
that that between the scales there's a
scalar niche not a horizontal ecological
niche but actually a level where the
pileup starts to press against the next
scale of formality so when you have some
sum and I say that the specific place
that's for the architect very
interesting is that the very specific
place where this community of cells
start you know they're having they're
moving in and out of each other there's
proximity little architectures and
things form and well that's how this
very specific auto vent that's how it's
not an evolutionary thing it's an
elaboration or anything but this is how
the scalar palette goal gets pierced and
you have suddenly you have the first
tiny little multicellular organism
that's toppled on rasa it's the first
one it can pray all these little the
last scale and and I argue that humanity
is exactly pressed against a scale or
niche and we start to exploit it with
our satellite etc etc but we lack the
the means of establishing a real
traction on it so to me when I see the
things like finance and I spend a lot of
time just understanding France because
it's such a potential that the thing
about finance is its glorious
no you can store up this accumulation
and you don't have to sit on it as a bag
of gold granny can put this out there
and in the idea form she sees whatever
she invested in employing her grandchild
in a productive way and building
something excellent so finance is this
utopian ability to me a king I used the
violets whenever just some you know
stomach that is able to process this and
use that for the lack of a pancreas and
the lack of a kidney it's limited so my
argument is that we actually needing to
elaborate and formalize do kind of
Justinian aesthetic names and
architectures to allow us to go into
someplace and understand finance
together and see the investment that see
how these things work so that's my only
saying is busier architects so
connecting
an idea of life and an environment for
life that is really the winning idea
well it seems to me that what we are
describing at the planetary level is
nothing to do with that nothing to do
with what with the distinction between
life and the environment for life I
think that what you hear is the
conditions through which scalar
approaches are no longer tenable the
planet eats itself system it it
metabolizes sunlight and life is the
planet is not at the level of any scalar
condition it's simultaneously but it's
transversed
by the planetary system so I don't
really get your point of humans pressing
up on the next level of scale if you
look so very much like what a small
cellular community is accomplishing what
is interesting in the discussion is that
you bring in this idea of scale and
scales in the plural while if you look
at the entire work of know what ending
in the lingo you call earth system we
should call it Gaia you start
understanding that that's it is really
the entity that is good that is
challenged
if what do you mean the unjust scaler
the planet itself scalar understanding
of life where there's an adaptation of
life forms to an environment and maybe a
coil Maxima which can describe is a
coevolution of the two what we are
describing in the terms of yarn is the
planet is alive what we are doing to the
planet is that we one part of life is
now creating a component of the planet
that is not recycling it's not that it's
creating a scale a difference the
Technosphere is something complex and
because it cuts across that preconceived
notion of the scales why would you deny
that all of these that why would you
eliminate unless you're I mean a
humanist struggles with this notion but
why couldn't you accept a Copernican
decentering of human that we don't the
Sun doesn't go around us actually we are
a momentum and the question is really do
we manage to get traction on that level
of formality or do we just fail like so
many such attempts have unless it's only
having five times in history all of life
you know in tagging there was an
oxidation moment but there multiple
revolutions that have changed it next
week we'll discuss that more in detail
with Timlin the but it seems to me that
the discussion that you bring to the
table is one of scale and I want to
position that because even young started
with
a beautiful diagram that is dividing
time in scales there's the Aeons all the
way to the current age at the same time
every single one of you and is 750 every
single one of you is describing how
being acting now in acting on an entire
time scale coincide so the scales have
been modeled we are now and then this
deep time our action or our inaction
because
shares elements of all of those because
we colleges for conservative and we
cover the Louis community so we say it's
a release but other things that can
quickly you and so the other side of the
frame of reference abstain or process
you know one of these days the
Technosphere hormones products behaves
so we said to try and deal that
pragmatically and therefore to
apparently the answer that through
ignorance will create the least number
of ways amongst our colonies but in
terms of the scales new you've got the
the bacteria
the viruses to the microbes and so on on
the five big extinctions referring to
I'm not done this was simply referring
to there are five scales of complexity
in life that's what life has done with
its time and I think we're stuck in a
moment where we're so you know the the
point of time it's really what do you do
with your time that's what we measure
when we look at the biological record
we're saying that's what you're
measuring what has life done with its
time let's produce these new materials
plastics life as a phenomenon
which is suggestive whatever is
happening now is different and
interesting hard to fit within those
stories try as we might to box so you're
saying that the punctuated equilibrium
where where it wipes out and creates
this open space for art forms and
mutations to actually get traction on
the changed conditions that you think
this moment is a change
the technology factor
[Music]
question yes would you join me in
thanking and once again yes David
[Applause]
