good evening everyone and thank you for
coming this evening to tonight's lecture
which is titled looking for clues in the
rubble of Raqqa had the most precise air
campaign in history left require the
most destroyed city in modern times
tonight's talk is part of our ongoing
collaboration between the architectural
Association and Amnesty International
and I'm delighted to be able to
introduce tonight's speakers who will be
talking about such an important topic
questioning whether destroying a city is
necessary is it necessary Act in order
to liberate it and who decides an on
walk basis and how much destruction is
necessary or acceptable to understand
the scale of devastation in Raqqa I
encourage you to visit the exhibition
next door in the a a gallery that
rethinks the traditional written report
and uses photographs 3d reconstructions
and dashcam footage to show us the true
extent of destruction by the us-led
coalition this reconstruction is crucial
to understand what happened and utilizes
a multidisciplinary methodology
involving field investigations of strike
sites and witness interviews combined
with remote sensing and a satellite
imagery analysis project called strike
tracker which involved the participation
of thousands of online volunteers to
review over a hundred and thirty
thousand frames of buildings throughout
the battle so to quickly introduce
tonight's speakers Donatella Rivera is
Amnesty International senior crisis
response advisor and she led the Riccar
investigation and milena Marin is
Amnesty International senior advisor
from their evidence lab who led the
strike tracker project and they'll tell
us more about their work on the specific
project in tonight's talk and once that
once they finish their presentation
we'll break out into a discussion
they'll be moderated by John Palma Cena
and annsofi runs go from diploma unit
four and also who are confirmed as a
territorial agency and I encourage you
all to stick around after the talk we'll
have some drinks to continue the
conversation more informally and give
you a chance to see the exhibition next
door so without any further ado please
join me in welcoming Donatella and
Melina today
[Applause]
so is this working it is thank you
so raka this is what happened raka is a
medium-sized city in Syria in the
Northeast about three hundred thousand
inhabitants and the us-led coalition
that was made up of three countries it
was made up of 74 country but three
countries that took part in the military
operation in the summer of 2017 in an
operation that lasted four months and
one week this much of Raqqa was
destroyed it's about eleven thousand
buildings that were destroyed or damaged
there are more buildings that were
damaged that those that show up on the
satellite imagery because some of the
buildings that were damaged by artillery
don't show up on that so the number of
civilian casualties that we have that
are reported are over 1,600 that is a
conservative figures is really we're
only really looking at the the number of
of cases the we for which we have quite
a lot of information so this is what it
looks today but civilians live there in
those buildings that look like a pile of
rubble now now this is some of the
declarations that were made by coalition
officials notably the coalition
commander general Townsend there has
never been a more precise air campaign
in the history of armed conflict
contrast that declaration with this and
and you can see immediately that it
wasn't all that precise at the same time
the same general Townsend said we shoot
every boat we find if you want to get
out of Raqqa right now you've got to
build a punch or raft there is really no
pride to take in saying we shoot every
boat we find because at that time the
river was really the only way out of
Raqqa given that Isis that was
controlling the city at
most exit routes and the coalition had
bombed the bridges so people could only
get out of Raqqa by taking boats across
the river and many were indeed killed by
bombardments by the coalition so
something else that coalition officials
said was there in five months
they meaning his colleagues the US
Marines because even though there were
three countries that were participating
the overwhelming majority of the
airstrikes were carried out by US forces
and a hundred percent of the artillery
strikes were carried out by US forces in
five months they fired thirty thousand
artillery rounds more than any other
marine artillery battalion or any marine
or army battalion since the Vietnam War
again there is no pride to take in this
because artillery is a battlefield
weapon it shouldn't be used in urban
areas where there are civilians and at
the time there were civilians in every
neighborhood of Raqqa the military base
from where those launches were happening
was about 16 17 kilometers to the north
of Raqqa that's where the US Marines
were firing into the city to give you an
idea of how inaccurate artillery is
every artillery shell has a margin of
error of more than 100 meters so this is
what it is if you fire an artillery
shell you can fire more or less within
that in a city where the difference of
10 meters will make the difference
between a house full of civilians and
the house full of Isis fighters or a
legitimate military target a hundred
meters is a risk that is absolutely
unacceptable even in war not everything
is allowed I mean I hear often but you
know what could you
do you know they had to get rid of Isis
you know wasn't that the price worth
paying
there are laws that must be respected in
war and the question really is was all
that couldn't should have been done done
by the by the coalition forces
remembering that we are talking about
countries that have the best equipped
most well resourced armies in the world
[Music]
so we set about investigating the impact
of that devastating war on the civilian
population I first traveled to Raqqa
during the war but I was working from
outside the city speaking to people who
were coming out of Raqqa managing to
escape those who could and then I went
back immediately after the war at the
beginning of 2018 one of the biggest
challenges to do the field work and that
field work was done over five separate
visits spending several months
altogether during which I carried out
field investigation at 200 different
more than 200 sites of coalition strikes
and interviewed more than 400 survivors
and witnesses one of the biggest
challenges at the beginning was that
there was no communication in Raqqa
there was no phone network no internet
so the only way of finding people was
walking up and down these streets and
knocking on every door looking for
people the other biggest and bigger
steel challenge was the fact that Raqqa
was the most contaminated city in in
modern times according to the D miners
who were who were there and and the D
miners from the UN and other de Mining
organization that were assessing the
level of contamination both by mines and
improvised explosive devices IDs as well
as those were laid by Isis to prevent
the population from
to prevent the troops from coming in the
local fighters who were who were
fighting against Isis and from
unexploded ordnance that had been
dropped by coalition forces those were
all over as you can see this is one of
the big MK bombs used by the coalition
they were kind of like all over in the
streets and then there were those that
had been dropped by the coalition and
repurposed by Isis fighters and turned
into into IEDs normally when I go to a
place after a conflict one of the first
thing I do is very much looking in the
rubble because munitions leave pieces
and often those species have serial
numbers on so it's very important to
find those in Raqqa that was that was a
challenge because the rubble was so
heavily contaminated I did do a bit of
that to the extent that it was possible
in places that had already been cleared
and and so it was useful because it was
finding pieces of munition that were
telling us what we needed to corroborate
the narrative of the witnesses
testimonies are important but
testimonies can be a hundred percent
true a hundred percent false and
everything in between so it's very
important to corroborate them with
material evidence so one of the things
that I did because I couldn't dig too
much in the rubble was going around
scrap yards because people will take
heavy pieces of metals that are of no
use to scrap yard and sell them because
they obviously need the income and so I
found lots of artillery shells like this
one and I found pieces like this which
took several weeks and the analysis of
many military experts to work out what
it was I knew it was something important
because I found lots of them in the in
the scrap yards
so then the question is what happened
how did it happen and when did it happen
so there were testimonies of people who
told us about having being either
sheltering in their own homes or in
whatever place they could find because a
lot of people had been forced to leave
their homes and and because of the
shifting front lines and they were
sheltering in other buildings such as
the building that you see in this photo
where 32 civilians from four different
families were killed now in putting
together the material evidence from the
building what the building what a
building like this tells me that this
could not have been an artillery strike
this was an air strike the testimonies
of people who survived there were only
three survivors from from this
particular strike testimonies of of
other people who lived around there and
then satellite imagery and that is
milena we'll talk more in details about
the enormous amount of work that we did
with satellite imagery but for example
on a on a building like this the three
survivors two adults and a child one
adult was so badly traumatized that she
said you know I just I don't know the
date the child is a child and he's 12
and he's never been to school any kind
of read and write and he doesn't do
dates and the man gave me a date and I
said are you sure and he said yes of
course how would I forget I lost my wife
and my children the reality is that
especially in situation of conflict
where people have gone through
tremendous trauma as well as events
having happened at a time when they had
other priorities than remembering the
day like trying to keep their kids safe
often people remembered in my neuters
detail what time of the day it was other
stuff that was happened
but not necessarily the date so here the
one person who thought you remembered
the date was out by five weeks and
that's very common so that's where
analysis of satellite imagery is
massively important and then there was
the work of the first responders team
who have been exhuming the body speak
and both taking bodies from the from the
rubble from the from the building sites
where so much rubble came and and buried
the bodies that it could not be done by
the relatives at the time and as well as
exhuming bodies that people had buried
in gardens and parks around the city
because they could no longer reach the
cemetery was beyond the front line so
they also had their own records of how
many bodies they pulled from which
building site and so from all of this
the conclusions that that we draw are
that the coalition did not do all that
it could and should have done to spare
civilians they could have chosen
different munitions they should not have
used artillery and when it comes to air
deliver munition they should have had
better surveillance we heard from the
forces on the ground that sometime air
strikes would come in within 10 15
minutes or even less of those air
strikes having been called meaning the
very little time and effort was being
put in to verify the targets hence not
surprising that so many civilians were
were killed the coalition until now has
only admitted roughly 10 percent of the
of the most conservative estimate that
we have for the number of casualties
even that 10 percent are for the
majority cases that Amnesty
International are submitted to them and
the others are cases that air wars the
organization with whom we also partnered
for this investigation submitted to them
so we NGOs have been doing the work that
the Coalition has not done
we did an initial smaller sample last
year we submitted it to the coalition
they criticize their work said that our
methodology is flawed and we don't
understand the reality of war but after
six weeks they admitted all those
casualties
we've now investigated a much much
greater number of cases 641 to be
precise and so on the one hand the
coalition will not be able to dismiss
that as being isolated cases a few
individual incidents and on the other
hand this has shown that it is possible
to carry out those investigations in
Raqqa at the moment it's not always the
case that it's possible to do so in a
post-war theater it is possible in Raqqa
and the Coalition should do so it should
do so for three reasons
essentially one is because it should
want to it should be interested in
learning from the mistakes of Raqqa so
that the same mistakes are not repeated
in another conflict it should do so as a
basis to provide reparation to the
families of those who were killed and to
those who like this little girl was left
maimed she lost her mother and three
sisters and she herself lost a leg and
it should do so as a basis to help
people who've lost their homes and their
businesses as well as other places such
as the school which are still in the
state as you see and to help the
families who've lost their homes and
livelihoods so that their kids can go to
school instead of being forced to go
scavenges to to help feed the family so
I'll stop here and hand over to milena
he'll talk about the more remote aspect
of the investigation can you hear me
so as a method I said like I haven't
been on the ground but I was part of a
team of open-source investigators or
remote investigators supporting from
from the office
from London so what we did we wanted to
go beyond what is possible humanly
possible by a single person so the
Nutella is a superhuman but even she
can't do absolutely everything so we
needed really all hands on deck to
provide that scale that would really
make the coalition go from saying you
know even even when they deal
acknowledged cases of civilian
casualties they kept saying that is an
isolated case we wanted to demonstrate
that it's a pattern and that it happened
throughout the battle throughout the
city so really to do that we needed to
achieve a scale that again was not
possible from even a person definitely
not a team we needed much more than that
one thing that we wanted to analyze at
scale was satellite imagery precisely to
be able to corroborate the time of
testimonies but also to understand the
scale of destruction to understand the
mechanisms of the war and the timeline
of the war to do that we are we have
been using a technology called micro
tasking so this is a type of
crowdsourcing and I'll show you in a
minute how it works we have an amnesty a
platform called amnesty decoders where
we use this kind of technology to scale
up research to support investigators
that go on the field with really the
power of the numbers and the data so
micro tasking is taking a large task
like in this case a satellite image
splitting it into small or micro tasks
and distribute these small tasks over
the internet to many many people so as I
said is a type of crowdsourcing that
helps you analyze data that you already
have so you may know crowdsourcing of
soliciting information but this is where
we already have the information the
information is way too much for us to
analyze the satellite image has
thousands of buildings and we can't look
at every single building ourselves to
identify when it was destroyed so that's
why we appeal to the crowd we have been
using this technology for for a while
now this is the first time we're looking
at timeline of satellite images but
before we have analyzed when villages in
Darfur were burned
we analyzed online violence against
women on Twitter we looked at all
spirits in the Niger Delta so we have an
established methodology to engage
members of the public to really work
with us very deeply on research so
instead of maybe signing a petition
online now they have the ability to
really be part of our research team and
help us generate useful data so I talked
a little bit about this past project so
in the context of Raqqa we launched a
project called strike tracker that was
aiming to track every single building in
Raqqa that was destroyed to determine
when it was destroyed and that was a
part of the multi-lane investigation
that resulted in the work we're
presenting today
we also had a team of students trained
students that scoured the internet to
find any video related to to Raqqa and
geo-located we had we partnered with air
wars that collected in real-time any
social media reports and again that was
verification corroborated so this is the
structure chorus as a part of it so what
people did who participated in strike
tracker they looked at a timeline of
satellite images so that's an animation
of how it worked they were looking at a
specific building and had to scroll
through a timeline of images to find
when that building was destroyed and
they had to mark before and after
destruction so although you may think
that you know working on rock or working
on satellite images requires expertise
we made sure that this project was so
simple for anybody to use that he really
didn't require much expertise he
required a device that had access to
Internet he required some patience and
willingness to learn we gave people a
tutorial as they started so in ten
minutes they were up and running and
able to analyze satellite images at
scale we had over 3,000 people from
around the world doing this task
together they analyzed over 2 million
image chips they they contributed they
contributed the equivalent of over one
year of work so just to give you a sense
of what happened with that data so we
were able to map the mechanisms of
destruction of the city we could see how
it was taken from outside to the inside
and let this play once again you can see
from the beginning so we used we use
this data as I said to understand to
understand how the war unfolded but also
to corroborate those testimonies we
mapped 11,000 buildings that were
destroyed and of course not in every
single building we could find
allegations of civilian casualties we
have mapped all the cases where we did
find civilian casualties so you can see
in black you have cases that have been
verified
mostly with field investigations and the
gray ones are cases that we haven't yet
managed to corroborate hundred-percent
but they have very credible reports from
social media reports that you know have
more than one person or one
organizations reporting from the ground
this is has been in collaboration with
our colleagues from from our wars in
Syrian archive so these these cases here
you have on the map over 350 cases and
in total the Nutella has said already
that we verified
we estimate 1,600 victims out of which
we have names for a thousand 28 and here
are a screenshot of the platform that
you can see in the exhibition out of
thousands 28 named victims we have 280
named children out of the name children
these are 0 to 17 50 are under 2 year
old so really this is this is a
testimony of what happened we managed to
not just
you know collect collect all the data
but I also show it in a compelling way
so in the exhibition you can see really
the mix and I think it's it's not
happening very often even in Amnesty but
even outside amnesty to have that
combination of investigation with remote
analysis and and with presentation that
is really compelling we use 360 stories
you have VR headsets in the exhibition
we use dashcam footage and really what
we want to do is show people the stories
of the victims in Raqqa
and and hopefully to take action we
still want to pressure the coalition to
change that as anatella said we want
them to acknowledge to casualties and
provide reparations to people on the
ground so if you guys have a chance
please visit the platform our also take
action help us build that pressure to
help the coalition change
[Applause]
good we've been very disciplined we've
tried to be sharp and short so we're at
your disposal for entire architecture
Association thank you thank you thank
you for bringing this work here because
obviously this is a school that is
preoccupied with building and you're
showing us how destruction is part and
parcel of that practice and we had a
previously previously we were discussing
how many of these children should were
killed by the buildings falling on them
and so it was the architecture killing
many of these children and their
families and two questions the first one
has to do with that slide that you had
up Donatella where you said no
communication in Raqqa and it's it is
very striking to see that the most
looked at City at that moment from
outside had no communication inside do
you think that bringing your work back
to the city will somehow help a new form
of communication in view of a possible
reconstruction also even mourning
condition that is the first question so
question about mourning and what kind of
communication but second one is really
familiar the disparity
it seems to me about visibility is very
similar in my mind to that that we have
in contemporary discussions about
climate change where we have a lot of
information it's under our own eyes but
we don't act it's not that this is
something that happened behind the
scenes
it happened on live television but still
it has to be any the work
amnesty to some come back to say the
other cities and say look what has
happened in that moment when you were
not completely paying attention so the
question is whether your work on
crowdsourcing could be in your mind
anticipated not only in the aftermath of
such a destruction but somehow during
crisis or even to prevent crisis so your
first question on communication I mean
now there is some communication in back
are there is a little bit I mean the
phone picks up here and there in some
places this is very recent and there are
there are internet cafes that function
around the city they are satellites so
people can go by and check their
messages it's not it's not strong enough
to have voice calls but it's possible to
have whatsapp messages and stuff so in
that respect now it's improved now what
we plan to do the platform is being
translated so it will be available in
Arabic hopefully in the next couple of
weeks and it's specifically aimed so
that people in Raqqa who want to send
additional information or new
information they can do so because the
idea is for example for many of the
victims we don't have photographs in
some cases you know we've we've checked
with the families they don't have them
because because everything was destroyed
but so yeah the idea is to is to sort of
give back some ownership to people of
Raqqa in in a way also with this also I
think it's important to explain why
there was little as it was happening
little information that was coming out
and that is whereas the rest of Syria
has been in anyway it's been dubbed the
YouTube war because things happen and
they're up on YouTube within 10 minutes
Raqqa was very much an exception because
Isis did not allow people to use their
mobile phone there was hardly any
internet and if anybody was caught
filming stuff or taking photos and
sending out they risk being killed so
the amount of information that was
available before the war in during the
war was very little because of that and
then for a long period because
everything was destroyed and it was
nobody's priority including the
coalition because you know you can put a
mouth stop and and presto you know you
can restore communication pretty quickly
so it took a long time it took
essentially a year before people started
to have internet and so and so it was
clearly not not considered a priority so
just very quickly under on the issue of
visibility my friend Jonathan Gray was a
lecturer at the King's College
University he studied the decoders
program and the whole crowd sourcing
initiative we have in the way we involve
people in analyzing evidence of human
rights validations and he coined this
term dates are witnessing so it's it's a
form of witnessing remotely through data
so that's what we're asking people from
around the world by giving their time
participating in this project they are
somehow witnesses to the atrocities and
they help us process and understand the
information of course we're doing that
post post war so we we are analyzing the
satellite images once once the conflict
is over the Nutella has been there
during during the war and very often our
amnesty with the with a crisis response
team that is going to be established at
Amnesty were quicker to get in the field
but the evidence is still especially
satellite images we very often can
access them on
afterwards but I want to see is that the
availability of satellite images changed
dramatically in the past 10 years the
one to say that 10 years ago this kind
of this kind of analysis would have been
impossible because there were no images
and if there was maybe there was one
single image over the city during the
whole war now we have we have companies
that image the world every single place
on earth every day the so that means
that the temporal resolution has
increased dramatically the spatial
resolution so the extent to which we can
distinguish features on the ground is
still lagging for those images that have
very high temporal resolution so the
images that are available every day are
at a resolution that is 15 meters per
pixel so that means in every pixel on
the satellite image we see 50 meters on
the ground there are the highest
resolution available right now is 30
centimeters per pixel so that again for
every pixel in the image we see that
centimeters on the ground which is the
distance between our shoulders I don't
know that we'll have any time soon much
higher spatial resolution because that
would have huge implications in privacy
at least not commercially available we
know that there's technical capability
to take better images but they won't be
available for us but all that to say
that it changed dramatically in the past
10 years it will change going forward
there's so many satellite imagery
companies now that are emerging it's not
anymore the domain of the two giants
Airbus in digital globe now we have
companies like planets and all sorts of
other small startups that are really
making satellite images available and
then it will be commonly shown how fast
we can process the data and again
there's an escalation of technology we
are using a combination of crowdsourcing
and also we're experimenting with
artificial intelligence so ways to train
algorithms to detect these things
automatically and may be supported by by
people so hopefully we'll get somewhere
sometimes there where we can we can see
these things happening
in real time but we're not hundred
percent there yet and the best we can do
now is engage thousands of people and do
it really quickly we couldn't do that
before we could not have done an
analysis of an entire city 11,000
buildings 2 million satellite images in
in few weeks now we can I just wanted to
add on on exactly what change somebody
was here in the audience is a former
colleague 10 years ago exactly when the
war in in Gaza happened though and then
when there was incredible destruction in
Gaza there was no satellite imagery
available the walls but it was not it
was locked we couldn't buy it so there
was one available and it was the
universe at and and there and and you
know it was from that angle on that day
and there was there's nothing else how
much things have changed in 10 years
there are now many more companies they
want to sell their stuff and so the
number of places at what time it's
locked there it's much easier to obtain
and who knows maybe I don't know 10
years down the line whoa you know we'll
have our own satellite it's now also
much much cheaper I mean I remember even
just sort of four or five years ago
often I had to beg for satellite images
like you know you can have one but not
two because it was it was much more
expensive now it's a lot cheaper
I mean satellite imagery doesn't solve
everything
being able to go to the ground and and
do the field investigation is crucial
but satellite imagery doesn't lie and
you can prove things that before people
would say yes but but maybe not but you
know who says that and it happened
before or they you know now you know the
availability of satellite imagery allow
us to say well know that you know that
doesn't lie and also again you know
volunteers did an enormous amount of
tasks and then for those tasks where we
needed to verify we have trained analyst
too but we you know we had that first
swoop that we yeah that allowed us to
scale up the project one last question
before we
possibly flown the bombing was done with
the help so to say of very complex
technology both visioning technology and
targeting technology to the extent that
one could easily imagine that this is
highly robotized bombing of Raqqa to
what extent do you think that the
experience that you had on the ground in
Raqqa is one not of the somehow
insertion of technology as a possibility
of limiting collateral effects of war
but one of augmentation of the
collateral effects do you think that
they you given your enormous experience
in this kind of scenarios is there
something that is changing there and
because that's the general narrative
that computers would allow to make
better decisions at war it seems that
what you're showing us here is the
opposite yes no basically what happened
in Raqqa which is what happens way too
often in conflict is that and there are
much more sophisticated weapons than
those that were used for the most part
in Raqqa what was used mostly in Raqqa
was cheap old stuff which is what I find
in most conflicts artillery artillery is
very cheap but it costs a lot in human
life because it goes and it takes out
whatever in an area so it shouldn't be
used in cities it too often is it was
used massively more than anywhere else
in Raqqa and and the result is what we
saw when it came to air delivered
munitions again those are precise but
you know precision munitions are only as
precise as your intelligence and it is
possible these days and for some time
already
to strike a target a legitimate military
target even moving a guy on a motorbike
going fast without causing very much
collateral damage at all I mean I've
seen cases where you know the driver is
struck the people sitting in the
backseat of the car are not hurt
those munitions are more expensive and
they are more labor-intensive because if
you want to take out this you've got to
use ammunition that these expenses
that's very high precision and you've
got to put your manpower or womanpower
to kind of hone in on that target
precisely and maybe it moves so at the
right time if you want to do what they
have done in Raqqa for the most part you
just say you know take out the whole
building and that's my saying I'm saying
that that's why you have that's why you
have this just to finish for the most
part I mean I've seen from the stuff
that I've collected in Raqqa
they also used smaller impact radius
munition Hellfire and and other stuff
but mostly it was just great big MK
family bombs which are vintage in terms
of in terms of what's available and they
are much cheaper and you know not much
to worry about you just take out entire
buildings and but then again the cost is
high so the technology that is available
was certainly not used very much in
Raqqa if it had combined with the
resources time and and and man and woman
power to observe the targets and to
verify the target they could have spared
many many lives you can never have a war
without casualties I mean I wish there
could but I haven't come across one yet
but there was a lot of reckless there
was a lot of reckless
[Music]
bombardments in Raqqa are the questions
from the floor
I have to step out in about less than 10
minutes so ask me the question and then
when I go milena will respond to
questions about her and maybe I'll take
two or three at a time okay
I was wondering like can you see this
project not only kind of finding
accountability for raka itself but also
in a way with the proving that we are
observing through satellite imagery and
observing these cases all the time it's
also possibly a preventative measure to
show that you know if you do commit some
sort of like war crimes or whatever in
this case we'll will this kind of you
know be something that then would be in
the minds of these military people
making the decisions anyway yeah
shall I take another couple and
maybe also with regards to all this the
way the research is done now what is the
future for witness testimonies what is
its legal and if not ok so prevention
yes
I mean the idea is that all our work is
always aimed at you know the idea is
that the perpetrators and especially the
perpetrators who say that they don't
want to perpetrate human rights that
they want to respect human rights is
that they should learn from from what's
gone wrong because obviously if sixteen
hundred people were killed in four
months in what was supposed to be the
most precise air campaign ever waged in
history that means that something has
gone wrong if entire buildings were
taken out with 30 people 20 people 25
people in something's gone wrong so we
very much hope that by putting this very
detailed information this is strong
evidence that they will take note and
learn and not repeat the same practices
especially that it is perfectly possible
to avoid such recklessness the material
is there the the methodology is what was
problematic and certainly the fact that
if we look specifically at satellite
imagery satellite imagery as I said
doesn't lie and therefore you know the
coalition may come back and say many
thing but one thing that it cannot say
is those buildings were not destroyed
during our military operation there was
nobody else who had airplanes so there
was only them who are there power
anything that was destroyed by air power
is them and the
satellite imageries there to show
conduct act as a deterrent was certainly
very much hope so
testimonies if you go to the platform
every single case that we investigated
has testimony testimony is crucial as I
said testimonies can be a hundred
percent through a hundred percent false
and everything in between so a testimony
by itself is what it is a testimony a
testimony that is corroborated with
other testimonies of other people who
had nothing to do with it that is
corroborated by pieces of munitions by
the battle damage assessment that tells
us that yes people said it was an
artillery or an air strike and indeed it
is because we can see from the pattern
of destruction and this saw that
munition because we find pieces of it
and all of that and the satellite
imagery that corroborate that yes it did
happen when when people said it happened
so as always it's the combination of the
two a testimony on its own is a
testimony and can be interpreted and
disputed and discussed forever after a
testimony with material evidence
acquires a different kind of strength
the material evidence without any
testimony is also insufficient because I
know that the building was bombed I find
the piece of munition but I have no idea
as to you know what happened there so
you really need the to and that's why I
think you already know you don't know
that I don't like working from a
distance investigating a situation where
I cannot go and and do the field
investigation but the best investigation
is one where you combine the field with
the remote and it's not always possible
either because we have no access to the
field or because we have access to the
field and and you know it's about
something that happened on a particular
day and the satellite imagery doesn't
help us because it was cloudy and it
seemed you
you can't see or it wasn't available but
when you manage to have both together
the remote and the field it's where you
have the best chance of having a very
solid solid findings so this is a repeat
but I'm just curious one thing was said
about going into this by I'm I'm just
curious about what was said earlier
about they within wore a there are laws
to be respected and obviously amnesties
work has been going on for a long long
time and when you look at what not just
this situation but there's situations
that are going on right across the
Middle East and further at the moment do
you think that is the case it has it got
any better with the work that's been
done can you see it getting any better
well I I don't know that we can see it
going any better it's it's the dilemma
of human rights work right we think that
every time we work on a conflict it must
be a deterrent for the next conflict but
that doesn't necessarily translate into
evidence so the fact that we worked on
genocides in the past didn't necessarily
stop the regime ja massacre in Myanmar
just a few months ago what we can do is
really be there very early on in the
conflict and start showing the world
what's happening I think there's still a
need for human rights investigations and
organizations to go there and show the
evidence and galvanized international
you know advocacy put pressure on
international organizations and States
to intervene early on but unfortunately
we've seen that the fact that we worked
and documented conflicts in the past was
no deterrent for human rights abuses or
abuses to happen really at scale but but
really the best we can do is put this
evidence out there I was early on as
possible now obviously we're talking
about a conflict that happened two years
ago and it took us this much time to get
here but as we're developing these
methodologies and don't forget that
these are really new methodologies we
didn't have satellite images at all ten
years ago we didn't have the technology
we have right now even two years ago so
amnesty as an organization is really
scaling up in in learning how to use
technology learning how to involve
thousands of people around the world
learning how to use algorithms to do
this work much quicker and we can only
hope that by being there quickly and by
putting all the evidence out there you
know other other words unfolding as a
conflict is unfolding we can change
things as they happen and and of course
it's it's it's our ability to engage and
and really have millions behind us
because States won't listen to just
unless international but they will
listen when we have millions of people
behind us and then our ability to do
international advocacy based on the
evidence we we show here
[Music]
it's more of an observation than a
question but you understand and approve
of the objective of the study in terms
of the accountability of the bombing in
which this country participated but I
think you'd be more effective if there
was just a couple of lines about the
fact that the war had been going on and
there was considerable destruction and
civilian loss in Raqqa prior to the 2017
campaign so it's just really an
observation I think you'd be slightly
more effective particularly in for a
like in the AAA where you know it's not
somewhere that maybe everyone knows what
happened in the war so I just think it
would be yeah it would be more effective
if there was a little few lines about
the nature of both physical destruction
and civilian losses in the several
rounds of fighting prior to the air
bombardment
I can give her a brief background why we
focused on June to October 2017 so
before that Raqqa was declared the
capital of Isis and it has been so for a
couple of years the war indeed
Fighting's inside Raqqa and Isis was
targeted but what we've seen from June
to October was a completely deliberate
campaign
that included bombing over 11,000
buildings so we looked at satellite
imagery and we could see in the
destruction here and there and it was
like your normal level of destruction in
conflict but it's absolutely nothing
compared to what we've seen between June
and October so the international
coalition that by the u.s. there was UK
and France were major partners in the
coalition but also 30 other countries
got together and decided to rout Isis
out of the city and the only way they
saw to do that was to bombard entirely
the city and and destroy at least 11,000
buildings at the end of the war Isis was
given a free passage out of the city
that wasn't afforded to civilians that
were trapped during the war in the city
because there all the escapes were so we
chose this period and we focused on this
period because it was the most intense
destruction I think you're right maybe
were missing a little bit of the
background and how we got here but
really it was you know we could have we
could have looked a year back but really
that's when that's when everything
unfolded and that's when we could see
the mass civilian casualties that we
could see mass destruction and so on I
was just wondering about the claim of
the most precise airstrike because from
what Donatella had explained this
question is that was that all the
weaponry was vintage so how could I even
begin to make that claim in the first
place why was that even said because
it's completely false that's what we're
trying to show with this project we're
trying to show there's a huge gap
between the rhetoric and what the
coalition has been saying during the war
and the reality that we uncovered
through this complex investigation in
the field using remote analysis and so
on so they can they can go about and say
whatever they want it doesn't have to be
true and we know what era we live in
right people don't say true stuff
so it's really our job to hold them to
the words and to check every single
thing they say and check that against
reality so the whole the whole work and
the whole platform we called it rhetoric
versus reality because we could see how
their words just don't match up to what
we found and it's important for us to
use their own rhetoric and really turn
it around and show what really happened
sorry but it just um it seems that with
the kind of condition of no
communication was something that they
were relying on though that they could
just do this and no one was able to
report it yeah absolutely Donatella
mentioned in the in her presentation
that we went there we also gathered all
the social media reports the coalition
kept consistently saying that all our
claims are not credible without ever
having set foot on the grounds they have
not been there or if they have been
there they have not been talking to
witnesses so really yep they were they
were relying on nobody questioning what
they are saying but of course we're here
to question every single word there's I
thank you for the talk my questions
about the UK government specifically
given it's implicated and in this
coalition and how is their response been
to your work and how is communication
between the government understand the
government in general with with regards
to this specifically but also in general
when it comes to war crimes that the UK
is implicated
so the we've been we've been in touch
with most members of the coalition in
particular US UK in France in US has led
most of the bombardments in in Raqqa a
hundred percent of the artillery strikes
and about eighty to ninety percent of
the air delivered munitions they have
changed their narrative as we confronted
them so at the end at the very end of
the war they said nearly no casualties
and as we put out reports they started
slowly acknowledging here in their one
case or the other in total until now
they acknowledge 159 casualties out of
1600 that we estimate so that's ten
percent
then they have as I said slowly every
month people without a casualty reports
with the reports they assess and the
ones that they deem credible and the
ones that they deem not credible so
we've been able to move them a little
bit and they have a certain level of
transparency which is nowhere nearly
what we want them to have but like a
little bit the UK instead is completely
non transparent they have I think they
said that across Syria since the
beginning of the war they had one
civilian casualty so I leave it at that
because I don't know what else to say
and then how can how can that be
possible you know that in all the
military campaign they've been involved
in Syria with all the weapons they
dropped one single civilian casualty so
there's no transparency there's no
accountability there's no response I
have a question if there are so many if
there are more than 30 countries
intervening why were there such old type
of weaponry used and if that's the case
who's who's paying for those weapons and
why is why is that methodology being
used I mean certainly they could have
used something a lot better if there are
30 countries intervening to get rid of
Isis I've understood that some people
have blamed the outbreak or the
intensification of the war in Syria
partially due to a series of droughts in
northeastern Syria I wonder in the
future of amnesty and their use of
remote sensing could you see that
intensification of sort of climate
related situations that could cause
conflict could be of interest in terms
of prediction or witnessing what was
happening so just answering your
question first yes the the Coalition is
a massive international coalition of
states fighting Isis in Syria they're
about to wind down now you know if
you've all heard that tram declare
victory in Syria they defeated Isis no
more need for the coalition so they are
there starting to wind down I mean where
we'll see what what happens in the
future I don't think it's a problem of
having resources of course
all the states put together in
particular the US you know they are not
poor state and they invest a lot in
military capability how they choose to
spend those money it's it's we have no
insight into that you know how they
choose which how much money to allocate
to a war in a very densely populated
environment like Syria and how they
prioritize you know munitions over
civilians or people on the ground versus
civilians and so on so that's that's
really not something we have insight in
we can just see what's happened then we
can put the evidence in front of them
and ask those questions and we are
asking those questions but they have an
answer because it just seems a bit
striking that 30 countries would work
together to try and get rid of a small
such as Isis but at the same time have
so many procedures like the UN you know
the Syrian government and everybody else
was so much in telling so many drawings
and it's just surprising that they would
use such a methodology to just whisk
away so many people just for the sake of
doesn't necessarily have so much power
and doesn't even want to have power in a
place that won't be useful to them such
as Raqqa yes I said it's really hard for
us it's all military tactics and how
these decisions are taken is even that
it's it's not transparent and if you
ever I want to ask a state how they take
military decision they will tell us top
secret and they will not reveal this
kind of information but you know it's as
I said we can analyze what happened we
cannot analyze how those decisions were
taken just because we don't have any
access into into it but yeah that's that
the conclusion is absurd and they're
they should have done they should have
done massively different going to the
change into how amnesty will work the
intersection of climate and climate
related conflicts we are starting to do
that in our in our team so they said
today and I are part of the crisis
response team Adam is international so
we have a combination of researchers
such as the Nutella they deploy onto the
ground very
quickly and I think I can travel at a
minutes notice I think she has a bag all
packed and if you are asked her to go
into Syria tomorrow and I betcha she's
ready to go and we have seven
researchers like like heard that deploy
to the ground they are not specialized
on any particular region or thematic
area now we're starting to have some
somatic focuses one of the thematic
focuses are all people in war and
conflict we're trying to understand what
happens to the elderly in conflict and
another big time attic area is climate
related conflict we have put out one of
the first reports but we're expanding
that capability into the teams who try
to understand that that link we also
have Aramis ta new secretary general his
name is commune I do and it comes from
Greenpeace so he comes with this huge
kind of climate agenda interest and that
means as well the organization is
changing and shifting a little bit
towards that and and of course it's the
topic of the day now how climate change
impacts anything
and of course conflicts are related to
climate change added more questions and
then one last question Molina which is a
if I may so a personal question and that
is how do you feel in presenting your
work in London about a conflict that was
mainly aimed at Isis as if it will be in
Syria but it's actually a group of
Londoners in Raqqa how do you feel about
that how do you think that your work is
responded to by populations in London
that have been recently radicalized well
that's a that's a tough question I'm
wondering sebacean
so yesterday Saturday we had
[Music]
somebody who fought in Syria coming to
the exhibition a soldier that was
fighting with the Syrian defense forces
that were the forces on the ground
Kurdish led forces supported by military
by apartments by the USA so this were
the guys calling in the bombardments
they were on the ground fighting Isis
Isis was around the corner they would
call and say drop drop a bomb over this
building and it was it was interesting
to have him there and hear his
perspective from the ground of course we
disagreed military tactics but I don't
know if somebody that that was
radicalized fighting on the other side
on the Isis side would ever be
interested in something like this
because of course civilians were not
their priorities and you know we're
targeting this whole piece of work but
the u.s. coalition because we would
expect them to act differently and we
would expect them to have accountability
I don't know that we can ever call
accountability for Isis because yeah
they are not the state there's no
accountability measures there's yeah so
I think we are presenting the work of
course here in London to start with we
are sections around the world that are
interested in picking up the exhibition
and taking it around the world and also
we have the platform online that is
available anywhere around the world so
while there's a local component and
we're here with you talking today we're
hoping to impact audiences globally he's
done I mean thank you million and of
course
[Applause]
before we all go and have drinks in the
joining room I just wanted to remind you
that the next talk is on the 8th of May
and we'll look at the destruction and
reconstruction in Syria and there'll be
two Syrian architects here to talk with
us and then on the 29th of May there's
another talk about herbicide and Syria
as part of this program and the final
event is on the 8th of June which will
be a training workshop looking at some
of the techniques amnesty uses and you
have to sign up for that by emailing
milena so please stick around and you
talk to milena and Donatello we'll be
back in a few minutes thank you
[Applause]
