okay good afternoon almost evening my
name is Hamed host Ravi together with
Platon Esaias be will be moderating
today's talk they're very pleased to
have thousand and Hani with us as series
of programs in conjunction with the
exhibition that we are running next or
about warning wrapper and disruption in
Syria so this is the second talk in the
four talks that we're gonna have two
more is on the list today's discussion
would be a particular investigation on
serious destruction and reconstruction
strategies which will it will be
explained by a joint presentation by
sarsen and Hani and then probably we can
open up the session to to Q&A and more
engagement from the public just to give
you heads up about our guests and to
introduce them I think it's good to know
that both of them or graduate from UCL
per-pom planning and development and
building and this both talk about
planning and development with
distinction they have a joint
initiatives called second which is
dealing with the housing as let's say
form an entry point of active
participation in the reconstruction of
Syria this is something that we will
discuss more during the Q&A the agency
of housing some sort of space that we
can probably participation with the
locals can can be helpful in order to
bypass some sort of state oriented state
dominated area of post-conflict
urbanization I'm very curious to know
more about your strategies and your
ideas about that
son Abu zina then she's an architect
Syrian architect and urban development
practitioner she co-founded also people
which is studio established in 2013 in
Syria that addresses the conflict
related urban challenges through our
alternative localized practices also as
I mentioned you have this collaboration
with this research which hopefully will
be online if I'm not wrong as some sort
of pedagogical tool that in a way
educates the people and reaches the
wider public for self-made housing
perhaps and localized strategies for for
habitation in Syria something that we
will learn more today honey
also is co-founder of classes to use an
architectural design and visualization
service firm that has been working on a
range of projects including urban
regeneration housing and public service
projects he also co-founded cube team
architects a local firm in Damascus
based in Damascus that won national
awards for urban development an
infrastructure project proposal way
Damascus when its municipality and
governance again just to more clarify
where this presentation lies within the
wide range of activities that our two
guests are currently involved with is as
far as I understood it is somewhere in
between in progress project that will be
that is you know we aided with the
French organization or not
I think very Colombia's eu-funded
project based in France yes that will be
online with an online tool for
communication and also education and
then probably we extend the discussion
towards the activities and the practices
of second in order to implement ideas
within that platform later with data in
white honey and thousand - taken on
stage please thank you so good evening
everyone and thanks for the introduction
we both are Syrian architects who
studied architecture in Syria and then
we did our postgraduate studies here in
the UK and we've been jointly
researching on the reconstruction the
destruction and the reconstruction of
Syrian as Hamid mentioned we're
developing a curriculum that's the
online training tool on urbanization of
Syria and reconstruction and the
conflict context it is going to be
online but unfortunately in the first
stage is only for Syrian students who
don't have access to universities
perhaps on later stages that's would be
it would be open to the public and our
presentation today is our notes from the
collective work that we do through
developing the curriculum but through
working also on the housing project our
joint initiative in Syria and other
research that we do with different
organizations
well Syria is no longer the hot topic in
the news most people think that the war
is over in there with the government
recapturing most of the areas that were
previously lost to the rebels and with
the reconstruction starting in there not
just through the coping mechanisms that
people are developing on the ground
rehabilitating their houses finding
shelter here and there but also with
large-scale reconstruction projects led
by the sharing of
with the participation of UN agencies
and international organizations even if
not under the term reconstruction as we
all know the international community
that you and the US are holding
reconstruction fund as a leverage in
Syria still organizations are
participating through rehabilitation
projects or by playing the name here in
there so to speak of recovery today in
Syria is to speak about these three
construction processes that are taking
place and that are supposedly to pursue
a peaceful future in Syria so recovery
somehow implies future but future is
rooted in the past and we cannot speak
about a peaceful future if we do not
speak about the past violence and trauma
and in Justices and grievances that's
why today we're gonna start by exploring
the context in which this war took place
the urban context in which this war was
initiated was escalated and was enacted
through the Syrian cities we will be
talking about how the urban sphere the
urban arrangements were manipulated in
the Syrian context as a tool in this war
to pursue certain interests political or
economic interests mostly to homogenize
the country from a political and an
economic perspective so that's why
that's so that when we talk about
recovery a future that celebrates
diversity and that's an inclusive and
environment that celebrates diversity
and differences we can talk about
reconstruction then yeah exactly me
speak about the future we would only we
all want to see Syria which is inclusive
which is place for every every sector of
the community every segment of the
community we want inclusive Syria but
unfortunately this is how it's not it's
earning today I mean this is a quote
from Bashar Assad the prison in Syria he
stayed in two
17 after a major a major operation to
capture or recapture land from the
opposition he said we lost the best of
our people and our infrastructure but we
want healthier and more homogeneous
community and homogeneity means
something if we look at it from a budget
perspective something good we all want
to have a machinist community but
unfortunately from the eyes of a
president or at least from the eyes of
the action that the of the of the Syrian
government what we saw is that they aim
for a society a homogenized society but
is homogenized from the same status
include only one political sect it's a
society where the loyalists to the
government are empowered where the
economical cronies of the regime's are
empowered as well where the opposition
especially those people who support it
position the local pay the local based
local support of the opposition are out
proved from there the places this place
or even genocide I mean we're going to
be speaking today about the term
herbicide and I mean to some extent many
of the scholars said what Syria witness
is an herbicide herbicide for those who
are not familiar with the term is
derived from the word genocide and
genocide is the de bruit deliberate
killing the deliberate destruction of a
specific segment of the community
herbicide describes the act of violence
against the herb environment to
deliberately deliberately eradicate as
we said a diversity eradicate a specific
group of the society herbicide has been
defined as the violent attempt to impose
certain urban arrangement those urban
arrangements aim for enforcing
homogeneity stur homogeneity is not
always positive if we said from this
perspective the term has been
use for those who are not familiar with
it in the 60s and the USA this is
following a mass displacement of people
due to massive infrastructure project
and but then the day the term was used
after that in the 1880s for example in
Lebanon in Bosnia later on the 90s and
still being used today in the
palestinian-israeli conflict and always
referring to the violence against urban
and the urban environment for the aim of
eradicating specific group from the
society so how this term herbicide was
employed in the different geographies
and contexts we can say that it's
usually manifested in three different
trajectories first is the systematic
destruction of the built environment and
second is denying cities to particular
groups because herbicide is aimed at
homogenizing the urban sphere so when we
deny cities the particular group denying
them access to services infrastructure
in the aim of vacuuming these cities
from their residents and this is an act
of genocide and then thirdly and the
discriminatory frameworks of
reconstruction or we can say in
reconstruction and its destructive
interpretation now the term has been
extensively used recently in the Syrian
context scholars have been writing about
this and conferences are being held to
discuss it today we will be laying
several examples to see how the
trajectories of herbicide are manifested
in the Syrian context we do acknowledge
that herbicide manipulating the urban
sphere has been a strategy that is
employed by different parties in the
Syrian context but today we will be
specifically looking at how the
government specifically manipulated the
urban sphere because we believe that
this was not just for military purposes
so different parties in the Syrian
conflict in the Syrian context they used
the urban arrangements in a way or
another to win a certain battle or for
military purposes but in the case in
which the Syrian government employed
urban arrangements we believe that this
was part of a systematic strategy to
pursue political and economic context a
strategy that employed destruction in
the name of reconstruction so we will be
laying several examples to speak about
how the urban arrangements are
weaponized and militarized in the Syrian
context another reason is actually that
Syria the urban spirit is militarized
way before 2011 way before the
Revolution started the revolution that
was later on turned into a war it was
militarized as means to to ensure
citizens obedience and citizens
discipline and the military state that
Syria used to be so speaking about the
three different manifestations of
herbicide the question is now have we
witnessed those manifestations actually
in Syria to say that Syria witness
herbicide and substances we going to
speak about a few different examples
this is the map of Aleppo Aleppo is the
second largest city in Syria it it had
over two million maybe two and a half
million in population
what we see here the colored map the
green is referring to the area that was
controlled by the opposition in 2015 and
the red is the area that was controlled
by the government army the in 2015 this
city undergone and a massive bottle was
named the mother of the bottles because
was very extensive and it was a highly
importance for all warring party and the
the one of the weapons that was highly
used in this but what was the barrel
bombs for those who doesn't know what
power bomb is power pump is a cylinder
it's just actually a metal cylinder
with explosive and with metal fragments
just thrown from a helicopter down to
residential area and it's from its name
is not precise weapon and it's
prohibited to be used in highly dense
areas unfortunately this weapon has been
used and this was the result though all
the dots the yellow and red dots are
indicating a destroyed building either
party destroyed or three destroyed if we
if we just try to compare between the
map we can easily see that the old green
areas where the area that was targeted
targeted and as I said is using in many
cases using this weapon in 2016 the
Syrian Network for Human Rights
documented that only in that year twelve
thousand eight hundred and fifty-eight
per album we're dropped over different
cities in Syria Amnesty International
reported in Aleppo after a study of
eight attacks that eight attacks by
parent homes ended up killing one
hundred and eighty eight civilians and
one rebel fighter so I mean looking at
those number and looking at the the
button of the destruction looking at the
intensity of destruction looking at the
sort of weapon which which was used we
can easily say say that the destruction
in Aleppo wasn't just a collateral
damage it was it wasn't just a result of
the fighting in the city but was
actually an instrument which was
utilized in the war for specific
political reasons and this is just the
photo of the Aleppo after being this
destructed in 2015 so not only an
instrument for political oppression or
for political homogenization but also
people scholars argue that it's also for
economic
purposes so this is a map of homes
another city one of the largest cities
in Syria and a city that was identified
the capital of the Revolution and the
early days of the revolution so this map
shows the city centre and yellow and red
and then towards the West is where the
original residents of the city lived and
expanded and then and the East the
orange parts are where the newcomers the
internal economic migrants who came to
the city for economic reasons have
settled and informal settlements now
this is the pattern of destruction and
homes we can clearly see that it draws a
line going from the north into the city
center and back to the south and it
precisely walks into sunny neighborhoods
and the neighborhoods of the city center
now it's complicated to go into whether
this was aimed at sectarian
homogenization because it's I think it's
the argument of the hen and the egg and
the Syrian context were they they
revolted because they were Sunni or they
were targeted because they were Sunni or
they were targeted because they revolted
most of the majority Sunni most of the
neighborhood that revolted or solicits
but at least what we can claim here is
that it passed by the cities and the
neighborhoods of the city center which
have been identified previously 2007 as
part of an old master plan for the city
of Homs a master plan that in 2007
mobilized political unrest because
people are suspected that the the
redevelopment deals that were held under
this plan we're deliberately
confiscating their lands and properties
with unfair or no compensation at all
and then awarding them to the private
sector to be developed into a neoliberal
project so back in 2000 starting 4
seven people have demonstrated against
the plan and this sign they're saying
don't mix our land with our blood
referring to the the fact that a
conflict that might come out of this
plan due to the political unrest the
government puts the plans on hold but
then in tooth after 2011 the patterns of
destruction that specifically targeted
this neighborhoods are seen as part of a
strategy to bring the old dream to life
again another example I mean people
might say well Olympics amma for example
homes where kind of cities where like a
major battle has happened but in how
about other plane other places and this
case is very important this report is by
the Human Rights Watch and was reported
in 2013 and it decremented for in two
main cities in Damascus and in the
bottom of the picture and Hama in the
top of the picture those neighborhoods
marked in red where all deliberately and
unlawfully demolished demolished not
necessarily because there was a conflict
on those cities they were demolished
actually by bulldozers and by explosive
not by rockets and by the fighting and
they all those neighborhoods where
opposition let's say okay I mean
communities that supported the
opposition left and those lived in those
areas and this is why they were targeted
people in those area I mean we're
speaking about massive places we're not
speaking about few buildings I mean as
you can see it's it's a it's an area of
equal to 200 football field it's very
big and as well was all be dosed to the
ground people had no time no morning so
they were not allowed to go and collect
their stuff in some of the cases there
were a lot just to get their stuff I
leave their houses but there were no
kind of proper notice and people were
not
offered any compensation so just
demolition for the sake of demolition
for the sake of punishing the community
that lived in there so this is another
example that showed us the destruction
can be explained in other explanation
then it's just the collateral damage or
it's a result of the fighting the
government justified these demolitions
as urban renewal projects and that's how
it came on on the public media but then
officials also recorded interviews
saying we find any job opposition
fighters out of their homes but Human
Rights Watch concluded and their reports
that these were unlawful demolitions
because the the areas were not used for
military purposes by the opposition they
were not stores for weapons they were
not places where there was operational
planning or anything so they were yet
maybe their party some of the people
build on their lands illegally but they
still own the land so it doesn't make
sense and then we're in the middle of
the war this is in 2013 the war was in
its peak doesn't make any sense that you
spend time on now
doing kind of regeneration project is
maybe if you have some money if you have
some time you spend that on the people
who are being displaced and they need
housing it's not the time for
diminishing more houses I mean we
already have a lot being destructed all
the time so yeah so another way to which
herbicide is manifested in Syria is what
we call the denial of the cities denying
cities to the residents and that was
done by simply making life unbearable in
those areas areas who identify as
opposition strongholds or who have
significant economic strategic interest
for the government so how cities were
denied to the residents is through
different tactics first and foremost is
the deliberate siege that was enforced
on so many localities in Syria
hums but it was also applied on Eastern
Mota we've seen that in the media a lot
last year and also in many other
localities in Syria that meant blocking
movement of people completely blocking
movement of people and of supplies
medical supplies and food were
completely blocked another tactic is to
destroy infrastructure and in those
localities and and to cut power so even
in places where the infrastructure was
still operation operational power was
cut for years destroying vital civilian
facilities hospitals schools bakeries
you name it mosques Church local markets
civil defense centers all of these were
documented by international or local
human rights groups massacres of the
bread was a term that became common in
Syria and and is seen as a strategy to
targets lines of people waiting for
hours to get their bread under siege so
it's for hospitals and schools this
tactic was used not only I mean I think
that last photo was from Aleppo if I'm
not missing I'm not quite sure but is
that mean distict it wasn't only using a
lip or and and that's what Damascus was
used all over the country after
exhausting the areas after exhausting
the city is denying them from water
leakage the medical care all of those
services people will be put to choose
between two different options either to
evacuate and those are the buses I mean
everyone every student with know what is
green bus it what green bus is green bus
is a term that is I mean actually they
are green buses but when you tell Syrian
green path they won't understand that
you mean the buses that used to evacuate
people or to forcely affect people from
their cities to other city usually is to
Italy or the northern part of Syria so
people will be
we'll have either to accept being
displaced and to leave their cities or
to agree on what we called you consider
local reconciliation agreement and if
you agree to stay in the town and
reconcile with the government then
you'll risk yourself being detained or
being taken recruited by the by the army
to go and fight on the government side
people will become putting themselves on
race so people have to choose between
those two options and in many cases
people prefer just to leave their cities
so another way of vacuuming actually the
city from their original people and some
people would say well I mean this is a
temporary it's much needed to do such
actions in the world people need to
leave the city because it's an important
they've come back but we're feeling
today that some of the reports are
coming and saying that well some of the
neighborhood's after people leave them
there will be the neighborhood will be
destroyed and this is from a report I
think it's from Human Rights Watch this
is a neighborhood of kaboom a slide
image it's a neighborhood near Damascus
or in Damascus near the center it's in a
position area and recently all the
opposition the families evacuated from
it under the deal after evacuation after
is an empty city this what happened
they just demolish the whole city so
plugging people from returning to their
houses so what I mean when people come
and say well it's just a temporary now
I'm saying well look what's happening if
this kind of carry on to happen then no
one would be able to return if we forget
about all other aspect that block people
from returning from a security
perspective but now they don't have the
actual house to return to the houses
that were still standing when people
lift them so they were not destructed
they were still
able to be used families are still able
to use the houses when they left them
but then they were build those what the
government did not use urban planning as
an execute this time they said they were
they were the remnant of explosions they
were destroying the tunnels in this area
so they did not that these two urban
planning is an excuse I mean I'm not a
military I can but I cannot see how like
like a destruction of a tunnel will end
totally razed to the ground it's a zero
building in the map it's just not
executable this is very close to the
city center and then people and the
government tells Damascus were seeing
the explosions and the smoke and the
sounds and everything and they were like
what's going on this is a vacuums area
so the excuse was we're still destroying
rebels tunnels what's important to tell
that this was one of the last major
stronghold of the Opposition in Damascus
day it had a kind of an aspect of
revenge that okay this is what we go
into do you live now this is what happen
to your house so back to vacuuming
cities from the residents another
technique that was used as tempering
with housing land and property rights
through different techniques so the
actual targeting of of registries and
fests and facilities and infrastructure
of properties this is the registry of
Homs which was seen to be deliberately
burnt on purpose because it was a
neighborhood that remains more or less
very safe and this building was the only
one that was targeted in that
neighborhood the only one other
techniques include the falsification of
transactions frauds but also using the
documents of housing land and property
rights as means of surveillance when
they asked for them to give access to
people so in general using housing land
and property rights
tempering with the
as means to to facilitate taking over
the properties of certain groups and
Syria
well mostly identified as semi who are
opponents to the government and be
awarded to other groups mostly
identified as fighters or loyalists who
come from a Shia or ala white background
that's at least as documented and falsi
falsified transaction that we recorded
where people would just wake up to find
that their houses were sold we spoke a
lot about destruction and we show how it
is it's being manipulated obtained today
actually it's been manipulated by the
government for to achieve certain
interest and certain political goal but
now how about reconstruction some people
would say well this is the past we're
almost I mean the war is almost over the
government is in control of the majority
of the country or what we call a useful
Syria and I was a time of for
Reconstruction why to speak about
destruction well we speak about
destruction first to learn from it and
second because reconstruction is not in
a better shape today reconstruction
seems our turn to be just another phase
of manipulating the urban sphere I mean
reconstruction is being used and
utilized exactly like destruction whilst
you're studying better at all I mean we
can't see this from the legislative it
was just literally framework and 2012
mean many many laws were we're announced
and in the last few years those laws
were always kind of laying the ground
for practices that are in discriminatory
and we're not going to speak about them
in detail but we're going to shed light
on two of those laws and loan number 66
of 2012 displayed the lake legal and
financial ground for working in the
informal areas in the informal
settlements areas actually to to
reconstruct them by the private sector
the private sector is highly
dominated by the regime financial
cronies so again just giving them more
power in a way to serve the regime on
interest the loan impertinent of 2008 I
believe 2018 yeah wait 18 2018 this is
another law which was released to
empower the local administrative unit to
create redevelopment zone within their
areas to be designated for
reconstruction post or for redevelopment
project this low Intel really extensive
requirement for the local residents
there with people who live in those area
that will become designated for
reconstruction project they they they
asked the entailed extensive requirement
for them to prove their ownership of
their house and for land and in the case
of the failure to show their proof I
mean I mean first I mean I think
everyone will have the paper themself
but then they ask people to come and
bring those paper printers different but
if you fail to bring your document then
your house you learn the ownership of it
will revert to the local administration
Council so another way of appropriating
land in the preparation for a
reconstruction project now the the
extensive procedure procedural
requirements for these laws are
problematic for a wider sect of the
Syrian population simply because they
because of the because people don't have
safe access to the government's
institutions and registries we're
talking here about refugees who can't
follow up with those complicated
procedures we're talking about refugees
internally displaced people people who
live in
and health areas we're talking about
destinies and their families disappeared
people and their families let along
killed people and their families and all
who identify as opponents who or have or
who have any sort of link with
opposition activities all of those do
not have safe access to the government
Institute to claim the right to just
begin in the process of reconstruction
we're speaking here about mostly half of
the Syrian population and reconstruction
is not theory or a long-term goal
anymore reconstruction has already
started the Syrian government impact
their own project and this is just a
photo from one of the informal
settlements in Damascus near near rich
neighborhood near I mean it's very
strategic location in Damascus and it's
surrounded by many embassies the campus
of the Damascus University is just
behind the Iranian embassy it happened
to be behind him embassy for some reason
and they started their first project
from here a project which they named
Marita city and Marita City is looked at
as a blueprint or the pilot project for
reconstruction that is come that is
being successful at the moment and it's
going to be replicated in other places
but what's really important to say here
that informal I mean sometimes people
will say well this is a formal
settlement okay is to reconstruct it
first it it hasn't I mean it's not
demolished it's not too much it wasn't
demolished because of the war so save
the energy and to something else second
and formality in Syria has a different
meaning it's not like informality in the
UK informality can be someone who who
owned the land but they violated the
planning regulation and they build the
house it's a art culture none and should
not be building a house and build your
house people in poverty they need to
find a solution or it could be you have
the regulator you have the permission to
build your house but you just build an
extra house many people in Syria
maybe 50% of the presidential area and
Damascus is informal settlements so I
mean for for someone who know the city
would say this doesn't make any sense
but again this was important location
for political for economically reason
and this is why I started why they
started with this area so the
implementation of this project which is
called Maruti City Maruti as a CEREC
Zurich name that means sovereignty and
it was chosen carefully by the
government and this location that used
to be called something else the
implementation has already started
properties of the people these
properties were evaluated based on their
current conditions they evaluated the
properties the houses the cement
structures not the land and this is how
in this way they did not account for the
value of the potential development
that's going to be so people people's
property were evaluated based on this
condition and then they were compensated
with shares in the redevelopment zone
that's yet to come but the new projects
are way too expensive so that the
compensation can actually give people
access to these luxurious high-end
apartments that are being built this
meant that people the original residents
who owned the land and there were faced
with very limited options either to buy
new shares so that they can have access
to this or to form companies where they
can develop the land themselves or at
least to sell the shares they were
compensated with in public options this
through this strategy the government
expelled a majority of the original
residents of this particular place with
no compensation or unfair compensation
or in many cases no
session at all for tenants for example
or people who didn't have the rights to
the land or the document they owned and
at the same time they facilitated the
access of the private sector investors
who are now who have access to the
developments now at the expense of the
rights of its original people so yeah we
speaking today about post-conflict
reconstruction we're speaking about
recovery I mean when you say
post-conflict reconstruction and after
seeing what we saw today can we still
say that we are post-conflict
I mean are we really post-conflict did
the conflict has the conflict really
ended or the conflict is yet to come
this is the question I mean when we
speak about recovery we need to speak
about all the goofy incessant Corinthian
tsa's of people we need to speak about
healing those grievances and the
practices I mean the practices that we
saw today produces just more of those
grievances just a layer on top of the
layer another layer of the conflict on
top of the old layers of the conflict we
have now political conflict we have now
class company and we see those poor
people leaving their their houses and a
newly rich people coming in then we're
just creating another kind of
class-based conflict when we saw the
case of Helm's another
sectarian based conflict people maybe
people from one sect would say why we
we've been expelled and the other sector
has not been expelled so a layer on top
of the layer just accumulating conflict
this will never lead to recovery when we
speak about both post-conflict
reconstruction and we speak about
herbicide there's no way to see in the
rice and any peaceful future unless we
find a way to undo this herbicide which
is happening today at least if we don't
want to undo it if we don't if we cannot
undo it at its top it to say well this
is enough this cannot go in this way
this is if we don't speak about all the
Basque grievances that was actually the
the reasons behind the conflict in the
first
in the first place and if we want to
speak about right based framework for
reconstruction this will never happen
unless we really understand destruction
and reconstruction and their political
and within their conflate context we
need to understand what is the result of
the construction or destruction be
behind the damage of the building and we
need to understand what is the result of
reconstruction behind just the new
building arising from the ground so how
to move forward any entry points into
that very complex situation
well at least this is the map of Syria
today so it's true that the government
represented in the red color the pink
color is recapturing most of the land
that was previously lost to the rebels
but there are still and this is there in
the red area is where the the
discriminatory and legislative framework
and the reconstruction framework that
was put by the government is enforced
it's not yet and forced outside these
territories but we still have we still
have the yellow parts we still have the
green parts and we've seen in the
exhibition earlier today and rock cut
out of the destruction the vast
destruction and there these are areas
where the government authorities the
government's legislative frameworks are
not yet enforced so there and a place
where we can look into how just an
inclusive and a right based approach to
reconstruction may unfold in Syria and
the green areas adlib that's now that's
currently as we speak is under a
military offence by the government to
capture the land it left that little
green spot on the
is the area where all the forced
eviction campaigns from other areas that
were captured by the government so
people evicted from there were relocated
to that green spot and the top so it had
all of those who identifies opposition
from all around Syria there's a huge
huge displacement and housing crisis and
there the number of displaced people the
situation of the camps it's a huge
crisis that is left to like the response
to this was left to the humanitarian
sphere to respond in the form of camps
and adequate shelter or that was left
for the commercial response it's a
construction hub areas as a construction
hub where small and mid scale private
developers are just building houses and
a very inflated market a market that is
equal so the rental markets in 2016 I
think was similar to that of Istanbul in
that area and in the peripheries of
Aleppo so it's a very highly inflated
market but but there's that so there is
demand a very high demand and there's
people who could afford to pay this
mostly those who work for the
International and Joyce but then you
have all the locals in this place to
still live in camps and work in the
local market and who do not have access
to this and they were just left for
nothing inadequate shelters so this is
an entry point that we can think of
housing how can we can how can we take
housing out of its commercial
interpretation and deal with it as a
right for people to have access to
adequate housing at at the same time use
it as a catalyst for the local economic
recovery and to catalyze local markets
and there how we can come up with a
hybrid models of housing that can take
that can
give access to people who need it but at
the same time it does not contribute to
the inflated market so that's these are
questions for us to take and to think of
how we can set the ground for a more
inclusive approach and rights-based
approach for reconstruction but if we
zoom out a little bit and we think of
kind of the entirety of Syria and we
kind of think of the even the kind of
government controlled areas and we see
how the international community here in
Europe and other places is really
dealing with the Syrian case we really
see a dark image unfortunately what's
happening today that the EU made it very
clear and USA as well that they will
never contribute the reconstruction
efforts in Syria unless there's a really
kind of true political process in place
which might make sense for a while but
then when we think of what we spoke
about today and when we think of
destruction reconstruction not as mutual
a process when we see think of
reconstruction as a process that can
hurt people actually that can it can
enforce the displacement of those people
then we say well time not on the side or
I mean waiting is not in the interest of
the local people the more we wait the
more those practices will be employed
the more we wait the more people will be
this place the more we wait the more the
the government cronies will be empowered
the more we wait the more the loyalists
will be involved so waiting is not the
solution for now Europe and EU in the
Europe UK I mean the USA are all just
standing and waiting and observing and
waiting until the moment when the time
for reconstruction start but as we say
reconstruction has already started at
least from one perspective and um today
the negotiation is about who to pay is
it the goal is a Saudi Arabia or Qatar
or the Gulf is it Europe who's coming to
pay for the reconstruction again the
question is not who's going to Bay the
question is not how much money is going
to be paid the question is what sort of
reconstruction we really want what sort
of practices we really would want to put
in place
and it's not just throwing money into in
this country it's not coming to work are
we going to support the project that we
just show and if with the big high-rises
its bending people from their places
so again time is not on waiting is that
in the interest of the people is not
about the money it's about the type of
reconstruction and withdrawal from the
whole process saying well we're not
going to contribute to this
reconstruction because it's not good
we're going to wait until the conflict
is in first is like it's not realistic
because the conflict is not going to end
as we saw it's just it's just getting
bigger and bigger
second because withdrawing from the
whole process and sitting in the
observer seat will never make any change
you cannot just sit and wait for those
practices to be further enforced I think
and we'll end up with with this thank
you
thank you
hello I mean okay thank you for this
credibly interesting presentation I
think we have a lot of time for
questions maybe starting this you know
part of your intervention I should
probably ask one question just to start
with which is you know wait take it from
where you where you actually left it and
I would just I'm very much interested in
let's say that technology and the
materiality of this reconstruction
process right I mean materials
themselves are part of the conflict so
reconstruction is not just the layouts
but it's an entire technology of control
of who has access to what who controls
the quantities of what and so on and so
forth I mean we know for example in from
other places that you know concrete
bricks plaster you know they have their
own role within these processes so I'm
wondering if you have something to add
because I guess your points about
property in how property arise are
mobilized for displacement were
fantastically interesting I'm wondering
if there is some sort of research about
how material reality is on the ground
during the destruction but also for the
reconstruction process have been somehow
evolving in the Syrian war
can you hear me so um I mean material is
like building it's physical but it has
different aspects to it so we're
bringing the material make do make a
difference for example if you're
inverting the material from a government
supportive government it's different
from importing it from Turkey or
position supporting government so this
one aspect of it where to bring it from
from in in what way in what access you
bring it is another story as well if you
bring it through the Turkish border for
example then you're bringing it from a
porter which is not under the control of
the government which mean in a way for
the government it's breaking the
sovereignty of the government because
you're bringing something things
illegally into the country so it had
this political aspect but I think I mean
if if we have something to share is what
we how we use materials in our own
project we always think that materials
despite whether they are concrete or
brick or whatever they they are as long
as they are locally produced then they
will be part of revising or kind of
empowering the local market the local
economy so in our project in our
attempts we try always to rely as much
as possible on locally produced
materials just to say that we're
supporting or just to make sure that
we're supporting the local economy so
this is only one aspect I think that the
politics of the materials used and in
the reconstruction can be seen with the
the latest international trade fair that
was held in Damascus and under which the
government actually said that this is
marking the beginning of the
reconstruction process during that fear
the government actually signed contracts
with with different
countries including China India Japan
and others who were kind of passive and
in the Syrian conflict but now they are
in a way or another contributing to the
liars the layers of conflict that are
being consolidated by the reconstruction
project so there is politics to the
materials - to the investments and there
I think the international political
allies for the Syrian government
throughout their war on people they were
paid by investments in the country so
the phosphates that were the contracts
of controlling the whatever the mind
whatever whatever there is of investment
opportunities in Syria electricity
phosphide oil this is how the the
military allies were paid to actually
solve
that's to say questions
hi and just taking a starting where you
left off your initial talk okay the
government is now we rebuilding how do
you stop them I mean I totally
understand why you would want a proper
yeah regeneration plan but how do you
stop them doing what they're doing now
we I mean we can't say that we can stop
them but we can't show better examples
maybe in areas outside of the regime
control we can always play the money
card I mean the the Syria doesn't have
enough money to build many projects
they're doing this it's a prototype it's
an it's an area with a big size but it's
not the entire of the city so they can't
carry on unless they have further money
the money is with the the Arab Gulf it's
with the international community with
Europe with the USA is everywhere but
not in Syria and it's not of course it's
not with Iran I'm not with Russia the
only two or the major supporter of the
government so the government with this
ally are not going to be able really to
reconstruct the country and by
themselves and this is why it's good to
say well we're not going to sponsor
we're not going to finance those three
construction project we're not saying
that they have zero money they will try
I mean over the time they will use the
country resources for for reconstruction
so one way is to make sure that the
money is not given without any
conditions if we ought to give money
then there should be certain conditions
that will make sure that such practices
we talk about don't continue Sikora
sanctions not necessarily sanctions salt
sanctions also affect people on the
ground severely so how how to deal with
this dilemma but I think if we're
speaking in a utopian world somehow and
donatella and I have spoken a lot about
this like the government have survived
on the humanitarian and the
international let's say the
international development and
humanitarian support there is a huge
number of organizations working and
there they've been working even for
humanitarian operations and even now so
they're part of these few construction
projects they are led by the government
and they're they're given in shares for
a private sector who actually benefit
from the public sector benefits
under the laws that were presented but
then they need the international
community and they are there and their
programs UNDP un-habitat different
agencies and international organizations
working on on rehabilitating streets
infrastructure housing so they're part
of this their part there they're there
they're complicit in a way or another in
the violations that are being committed
if for any reason they could be unified
to say no so this is the leverage they
can play there they're doing everything
without even questioning rights and the
equation so they're just rebuilding
stones they're not questioning who is
going to benefit from this who has
access to these areas not a not a single
question what I was asked about people
who were evicted from here and and again
these are documented by Human Rights
Watch and other organizations who have
done the work on the international NGOs
engagement and rehabilitation and homes
for example not a single question of
where are people who used to live in
here they're just rebuilding and then
giving its back to the government so
that the governments can redistribute
again so again if it's a support then it
should be conditional support with some
conditions to make sure that some
criteria are in place that those
practices whoever is doing them will not
hurt people
well not lead to displacing for more
people will make sure that the original
people of those houses will have their
houses back so always kind of have
conditions before giving money we don't
say that the International Committee as
we said the international community has
not given yet money for reconstruction
but they're doing some activities under
the umbrella of rehabilitation or aid
which unfortunately was highly
manipulated by the government from 2011
to today we so like when you say like a
the the aid to trunks or convoys coming
and passing through towns where people
really need the aid but not and though
in those places just carrying to the
areas that are that we're held by the
government this happened in Duma earlier
so such examples such stories will tell
us how much the international community
was not aware of this special kind of
dimension special political dimension of
the operation in such highly contested
places another example is the city of
Aleppo that Hani explained the mob of
and we've seen how the destruction is
mainly in the eastern part what is came
to be known as the eastern Aleppo and
that's the opposition held Aleppo so
after the government's offence and after
the forced eviction of the people from
there the UN made a list of the top
priorities neighborhood in which the
reconstruction is urgently to start with
rehabilitating school and infrastructure
and everything but the government's made
their own list of priorities and they
kind of matched both lists and they only
identified 8 neighborhoods in which UN
is allowed to start working and surprise
8 neighborhoods are in western Aleppo
none of them is in the eastern part
where most of the the destruction I
think they they're piloting in three
neighborhoods now so to be precise but
neighborhood where they started now our
own are all in western Aleppo so in
areas that were that did not actually
see the destruction as in the actual any
is it that the interaction I mean
sometimes I mean we have to the metal
they showed us today the example of
Raqqa and how the money is spent on
public square I mean then how to put
your priority thing I mean this is not
an area under the government control but
if you have money do you put it on a
square or you bet it on a school for
example do you bet at first and in a
health to support the health system or
on making things the better make things
look like okay we're both conflict now
we we have a beautiful square and so on
again I mean being aware of all those
dynamics is really important I think
it's important I say something that
resonates with what you said about
destruction and reconstruction and and
especially I'd like to ask you your
insights about the Western understanding
of destruction or misunderstanding of
destruction and then their
misunderstanding of freedom starts
Illustrated it's not a destruction of
buildings it's not a geographical
destruction it's clearly a demographic
destruction it's like evacuating these
people breaking the consolidation of the
Sunni community in in big groups and now
we have like nine nine million people
between refugees and IDPs and I believe
the West's understanding of this problem
cut them into like feeling like they
have leverage over the reconstruction by
saying we're not paying for
reconstruction unless which is the
conditional thing you're saying so I
think the copy of reconstruction that
the regime is promoting which Europe is
like now trying to just push for
reconstruction to send the refugees back
I think this copy of reconstruction
would it eventually end up with these
refugees not going back so that's why
it's very important for the Western
understanding to say if the regime this
promoting that the conflict has ended
and then investing probably in the
reconstruction would would actually make
this decision final that these people
will never be like come back because
their houses don't exist how do you feel
like what's kind of leverage now to do
the Danai to like say the Friends of
Syria or the NATO countries have and the
other thing is how does privatization
like the logic of sanctions the regime
has been escaping the logic of sanctions
in the same using the same tool is like
privatization bringing more private
sector to provide knowing that there are
remittances coming from outside for the
series so for reconstruction it's not
really construction of houses of the
people is the infrastructure of the
services because eventually my parents I
sent I can send them money to fix the
house and so like thousands of Syrian
but like how does this look now how is
the how I would just end with this
question how is the Western countries
like us and France and UK losing
leverage using the reconstruction cord
how are they losing that now in the
comment like in this context thank you
the government so the way the Maruti
City as a pilot project or deceptive the
blueprint for reconstruction is being
implemented clearly says that the
government started by depending on the
private sector right by by giving so
they issued a law that allows for local
councils to establish private holding
companies these companies would benefit
from the private sector benefits but at
the same time of being under the public
sector so they do not pay tax away they
have huge leverage to actually take the
the development zones in shares and
redevelop it and then sell it back so
it's literally just like any
gentrification project that we could see
in here in London or in any different
European city or a city in a developing
country so they're using this model for
now to finance the reconstruction
project and that's problematic because
of the political context we're not going
into that again in details but sooner or
later they will need the money from
abroad so it's it's the billions of
dollars that the reconstruction would
cost but as Hanyu also said time is in
the essence so we cannot just wait until
the government starts calling for
especially that they're being able to
bring in investments from countries such
as Japan and India and others but I
think you've also said something crucial
is that so out of tens of flows that the
government issued that are very very
problematic to lead on the
reconstruction project only low number
ten got all the attention from the
international community and that's
mainly because of of the the refugee
dilemma and there because once people
understood low number tend I realized
that refugees are not going back to
their homes so that's a good point
to play on and it's just like time to
say that it's not just lower number ten
it's a whole complex set of legislation
and proceed
chairs that are making the return
impossible it's important not to forget
that section still is kind of legitimate
kind of play a card to play and today we
think even sanction being imposed on
private developers in Syria which is
which makes a lot of sense as Dustin
said I mean now they're using the
private sector to generate the financial
capital to do those projects so when we
see such sanctions being imposed on
those figures we see it as a kind of
kind of way toward the correct way also
so these projects the way they're being
implemented they do in certain context
violate international law and there is
also a work that is being done on how
these are violating international law
and thus how private companies or
investors or even governments or
individuals who contribute to these will
be also held accountable and occurred so
that's another thing to play on and one
of the practices that the good
activities actually to do comment all
those violations that we said well we
don't stand just from we sit in the
observer seat well will be active we're
not sending money but we're just not
sitting doing nothing we're coming to
the commandest this is what happening I
mean I mean it's a brilliant example
today we saw in Rock'em and we see
people stories being to commend them we
need to see the same happening for
people being affected every day because
this is going to be something to be
shown to more in the future and hi Paula
thank you for sharing such a simplified
understanding of fairly complex conflict
I think my my question comes from the
fact that how any international
observant or a participant in this
context would respond depends on their
understanding of the conflict and when
there's an international political and
economic interests with Russia and
America being part of this entire
conflict and there's no narrative which
talks about that in the conflict
how do you build a counter-narrative to
this alternative narrative to this which
would include a international political
and economic understanding of the real
conflict so an alternative narrative to
how this has been a proxy war oh yeah
how this has been understood as a
conflict globally mm-hmm like through
reconstruction you mean I just I think
it's it's if I understood correctly so
it's it's as as we said so this
reconstruction has paid or is being used
to pay the depth of the government to
its political allies right in a way or
another and the proxy war is not just
with weapons it's also with investments
and who controls what and and so so so
with with recently should lows in the US
and the sanctions over new individuals
who have actually been very active in
this kind and like in the project that
we presented and Marita City some of the
main individuals who own companies who
are now developing on the new lists of
the of the sanctions so so I think I
think the alternative narrative is
playing out somehow in there once we
like who like how do you control even
through the the development how do you
control territories and how do you
enable a processes through financing and
through reconstruction so how the u.s.
is playing this with with the sanctions
but how they the Russia is being paid by
the investments and shares that's the
Sun yeah but we should not dismiss that
it is proxy war and all those countries
has interest in Syria and we should not
deal I mean we I mean a Syrian we really
like to say that this is a Syrians here
and matter but it's not a Syrians even
matter anymore all those countries are
involved their interest is involved and
there should be some work done on that
level on the international level those
countries who are supporting the the
government should be stopped they should
be told that okay this is enough you're
intervening a wrong way I mean there
should be more action I mean nothing
and protracted conflict more than
working on the cone cold conflicts
behind them we need to work as much as
we work in the Syrian conflict we need
to work on the Iranian American conflict
because it has something to do with a
Syria so everything is connected and and
and we don't like to describe it this
way because it's going to make it very
complex and solvable but this is reality
we need to try to separate as much as
possible between what is local national
matter and what's international but
sometimes this is not separable and
those people should be should be dealt
with on the international level yeah
thank you again thanks for an excellent
presentation my question is looking
south east of Euphrates and cities like
Raqqa obviously heavily bombed a lot of
violence there but in opposition areas
and obviously the politics hasn't fully
played out but how do you see areas like
that going forward in sort of
reconstruction perspective thank you do
you want to take this one I think yeah
spit different another areas because at
the moment Raqqa is in the hands of the
sort of self-governing Kurdish
administration but we all know that it
will be handed back to the regime in
Damascus and so it's a time of great
uncertainty for people in Raqqa
certainly the those who caused the
destruction in Raqqa are the wealthiest
countries in the world but who are not
even pretending that they intend to
offer aid to people who lost their homes
and everything so I think that once
Raqqa goes back to being under the
control of the Syrian government the
same factors that are at play elsewhere
will be a play in Raqqa we just don't
know when that will be it's likely to be
quite soon
for now there is no plan for the
development in a place like Raqqa there
is a little bit of aid for public
infrastructure but not for people to
rebuild their homes
or anything like that I think
everybody's kind of waiting and I think
you know the faith will be very much
that of the rest of the country I think
there has been recently an announcement
right that that a new city will be built
out of the efforts yeah
so even in the current scenery which is
again problematic in itself why building
a new city for the displaced and for the
why not I mean people are returning to
their homes and the exhibition we've
seen laundry we've seen there's life
still in the rubble so people are going
back to their lives are trying to
reconstruct whatever they can
rehabilitate whatever they can so why go
and build a new city where already
people can do a lot so they just need
the support and
thank you um I just wanted to take you
back to a point here you touched upon on
sectarianism because what you've been
talking about is reconstructing homes
that belong to people but inevitably the
conflict was sectarian the international
dimensions of the conflict are sectarian
Iran is not trying to help all Syrians
they're trying to help specifically
regime aligned Syrians and so a point
about the sanctions as well that's where
they can help as well because it's not
just about targeting the Syrian regime
with sanctions talk about targeting Iran
which we have been doing as the West
it's also about targeting international
pockets of Iran in Lebanon for example
we hezbollah
and their international dimensions sorry
side note a lot but back to that is it
just a matter of reconstructing Syria
back to where it was just immediately
before the outbreak of the revolution or
is it about building a new kind of Syria
with new dynamics in terms of sectarian
relationships what the government is
trying to do right with the current
question I mean we cannot build anything
back to its original status right
nothing I mean reconstruction I mean the
term itself is something is not I mean
for me it's not logical
you cannot reconstruct I mean you need
to reconstruct actually a new country
new country that will preserve the right
of people so when we say it has a
sectarian dimension yes it has I mean
people who lived in there despite of
their background should be served right
should return to their original houses
but we don't aim to construct Syria back
to its original place because that
original status was the reason for the
conflict in the first place the people
people urban and other grievances was
the driver of the convict this is why
people revolt against the government
people were not having adequate housing
they were not having adequate services
there was some political pressure
sometimes sectarian pressure to some
extent although I don't like to call it
like a sectarian war especially in the
first period of it
but this status the the pre-war status
what the reason for the conflict so we
want to construct Syria but the hope is
for the better in a way that won't
contribute to creating new layers of
conflict this should be always that kind
of the main aim I mean whenever we
contribute creating conflict then it's
wrong simple whenever we're contributing
to make peace and preserving the rights
of people then we going in the correct
time a direction oh thank you for your
presentation I mean it's quite apparent
that we might with this kind of a
demographic conflict emerging from the
ongoing conflict now from the womb of
the Hong Kong conflict so and one of the
main approaches you suggested was the
quick rapid interfering of the EU and
the u.s. in an immediate kind of
reconstruction funding if I can say but
my question is that how do we how do we
know that the EU or the u.s. can are
able to change any legislations that
have already been enacted if they want
to work under the Templar umbrella of
the government or they want to cooperate
with the government because we're
assuming that if they interfere
immediately they will be able to change
something for the interest of the people
while we have two constraints here's
first the the legislations and the
cooperation the complicated cooperation
that will happen between the regime and
the the EU and second that the EU will
come as investors they also want to
invest in the country and the best
interest of the people will not be I
think a major criteria it could be but
it might not be a major criteria so yeah
thank you
I think it's the conditionality of the
funding that we're stressing here
because the position that's clear now if
the EU and the US is that the money off
reconstruction is billick is being held
until there is a genuine legitimate
political transition in the country and
that's very vague and very out of the
reach at the moment and what we are
trying to say is that waiting until this
happens is only making the the type of
reconstruction that we've seen more
consolidated and it's only making the
environment more hostile for any new
more rights based legitimate inclusive
approach to reconstruction so I think
what we're calling for is is that is the
content is an intervention is to release
the money but it but to stress the
conditionality of this to be based on
rights and and then when you have the
leverage to play with with what governs
the projects that are being implemented
I think that the attention that loanin
Burton but worldwide and and that
statements were made by the Lebanese
government who hosts big number of
refugees and by the German government
and that put pressure on the government
somehow to amend some of the clauses and
and and and the decree so the the very
tight procedure procedural requirements
were losing a little bit still many
that's nothing really to solve the
problem but I think I at least believe
and and and pressure and putting
pressure or at least I believe that
there is leverage to be played with the
money but when we embrace the
conditionality of that the power of its
conditionality I mean from a technical
perspective and from a operational
perspective there are some solution
people are now trying to find ways
around it's not simple it's very complex
but people are studying researching and
trying to find ways around some of the
suggestions saying that we'll do
something outside of the regime control
area at least so example that will if
you don't make the changes we are asking
you for on the legislative framework
then we're going to partner with some
other people this is one way another way
is to go local instead of thinking of
national reconstruction framework why
don't you say well we go to the local
level we say well we're going to support
this and this and that project in those
localities say down town scale or even
neighborhood scales not small scale a
scale that the central government or the
government has no control over it say
well we want to work directly with the
local council in a way that we offer
pass some of the framework that the
regime put in place so that's just an
example I'm not saying that this is a
solution the people if they think hard
enough if they go into the detail of the
the context because dot every I mean we
show like a map of Syria with for color
but if we think of it really from other
dimension from the political damage and
demographic dimension from the other
dimension then we will see it maybe 100
color or 200 color more than this so
it's not the same it's not one one
homogeneous kind of context so for those
people who are working on Syria like we
do we try to find our way through this
complexity to say well this is a place
specifically place very small place
where we can show a good example of
reconstruction practice why because it's
not time yet to do national
reconstruction but we cannot wait at the
same time is this is this going 3d to
help we don't know but at least we're
doing our duty so for us with this is
why we chose them for examine one
specific place in northern Syria say
well this is the town we're going to
work on it's not only because it's
outside of the regime control area but
it's well because under the control of a
specific local council with a specific
mindset that will help us start our
pilot project focuses so what we saying
conditionality on one hand and the other
hand understanding the context in its
steps and trying to find the way around
not don't not to say well this is Syria
this is how we treat in it no money for
now state end of statement very short
statement and that's it it doesn't work
this way and I think the same goes for
every conflict context and nowadays
because
every conflict contest is very complex
and it's very diverse and it's time
dynamics thank you honey and salsa for
your presentation
I miss you touch a bit about what I was
coming to ask but I was going to ask one
of the alternatives to the monotone
rebuilding the construction Oh method of
this construction of the government is
what you are doing in your own like
personal initiative which is like
participating with the people in
bringing houses to them or in other word
community architecture do you think
there is a way of developing that maybe
how to develop that how to spot that on
the map or to like other other parts of
like you you to really fund that or
support that thank you so thank you for
bringing up this question we're really
passionate about our project but we
don't want to kind of promise a lot I
mean as I said to successful project
then you need to find the good
environment for it well in Syria
unfortunately those environment don't
exist in every place right what we're
trying to do through our project which
is very small and we going to grow up a
little bit by bit why we're saying we're
going actually to create this
environment so we say we cannot do
reconstruction browser or house and
project at the scale unless we have a
cooperative local council like good
authority people who understand what the
planning is and the summer housing is
and share with us the same vision but we
don't have such council neither in the
regime held area nor in the opposition
area so what we say well we do the first
step we tell them what our project is in
the second step we will say why don't
you invite someone from your local
council to be part of the project and
after the step after we say ok this is a
framework
that can be how we can scale our
initiative this is what you need to do
this what we need to do so it's like a
step by step creating the environment
for good practice of housing and the
same can be taken for a reconstruction
project no reconstruction will happen
immediately
I mean reconstruction will take years
and years and years maybe we won't see
it maybe our kids going to see it so we
don't want this sort of reconstruction
where something like what happened in
Lebanon just build the old town and in a
way that will become like a ghost city
no one will come to it that also became
like modern very expensive so if we
don't want this reconstruction so the
reconstruction we're looking at is a
reconstruction which is a longer process
it's coming to take a lot of time it
involve all of building capacity
practices it involves a lot of kind of
creating shared visions with people with
government with local community so this
is the process we're talking about
people who sit and design those
intervention they need to be be aware of
those dynamics on our side we trying to
be as much as possible aware of those
dynamics and we trying to propose a
small project to showcase how project
can create actually an environment to
allow scaling up of good practices for
reconstruction I think I can add two
points first is I think the the need is
massive and we're aware that again
nothing could be solved at once it's
going to be an incremental process but a
process where a lot of informal
activities will be happening and that's
crucial to acknowledge and to accept and
to embrace and to build upon and
formality in the Syrian context is a
contested term and it's usually looked
down upon
looked negatively at even by the the
mindset of people in general and we need
to acknowledge that there wouldn't be
projects to solve everything in the
country people would start doing
everything they can whenever they can
and that would result in more informal
practices being there and that's a huge
positive opportunity that we need to
work with and
and to build upon and for that it's
important to work on the interpretation
and understanding and how we reframe
understanding of certain things so it's
a lot to do with the people but also if
at a certain point with with authorities
were responsible for planning and for
implementation and the other thing is to
be very aware of not shifting
responsibilities I mean what you called
community architecture and what's
crucial to ensure an inclusive and a
participatory results and because the
need is massive and it needs everyone to
put their hands there and start working
on stuff we need people to initiate good
models and good alternatives but it's
crucial to work with local authorities
on that if local authorities are not and
with these projects then they're just
going to be they wouldn't really change
the structures that if we can't so one
thing is to scale them up horizontally
to make sure that they're more spread
that they are covering different
location different scenarios etcetera
but the other is to scale them up
institutionally how to make sure that
the the structures are more welcoming
for these alternatives and for other
practices other than the the main the
traditional way of dealing with planning
and architecture and the built
environment in general in the Syrian
context but also yeah I have a last
question are you talking about the you
not wanting to give the money under a
certain set of conditions but at the
same time a lot of Europeans and
American companies are settling in
neighboring countries and hope to
reconstruct Syria from those neighboring
countries I mean I know that Lebanon for
example has just released the McKenzie
report which says that is gonna save its
economy through the reconstruction of
Syria and all of that is backed up by
you and us money so don't you think that
there's a sort of hypocrisy situation
going on there and also how much you
think that Syria is depending on its
neighboring country to reconstruct
itself knowing that its industry has
been very heavily damaged so they cannot
they don't have the
versity to respond to the urgency of the
demand right now I think yeah it's a
hypocrisy that's what we're trying to
say any on big statements they're saying
we're halting the fund until there is a
genuine legitimate political transition
in place but then we see money going
through different routes under
rehabilitation projects and and and
humanitarian aid and a little project
here for infrastructure and public
squares and and any the UN and other
international NGOs are working well but
it's again it's in the international
development system and international
humanitarian system that's how do you
identify humanitarian fund and how do
you identify the value when do you move
a case from being in the humanitarian
zone to the long-term development zone
that's very in it's really it's funny
how they deal with these things within
the bureaucracies of NGOs like where do
you move cases between the like which
team works on what Jamie why would Syria
not to be dealt with as a long-term
development projects if we if we're
seeing that stellen the humanitarian
fund money is going for preparing
infrastructure and also dealing with
Homs well homes are then being turned
into projects that are just completely
turning a blind eye on rights and
everything so they're very much
interlinked and it's very much a
hypocrisy that's what we're trying to
say so the solution is not by holding
reconstruction fund while releasing
other fund that is liquid and that can
go to fund other things it's how to have
a unified a solid plan on how to control
to put the conditionality of these
things so that they're more rights based
rather than for the other part
sorry don't you think in a way it's
happening in this in this sense because
the European countries have simply not
been invited to reconstruct Syria I mean
the Syrian regime has promised its
allies that fought with them that they
will get the reconstruction put in
countries like France and the US and
Britain they excluded them so in a way
it's also the European accepting the
faith that they will not directly at
least be part of that reconstruction
reconstruction has been used as an award
it's very simple and straightforward I
mean all the contracts has been given to
government supporting countries I mean
the first part contracts the big part on
the on the sea I mean in a way they're
even controlling if I mean this this is
something again I mean time I mean the
more we wait the more those mechanism
will be in place so if we want really to
go to more in the future maybe wait more
and then we say well now with doing
reconstruction we will find an
environment which is totally controlled
by the regime allies and the regime
itself so let's say well you want to
import something then the only port we
have is the Russian port where you want
to buy like material to reconstruct it
okay do your project but if you want to
import to use locally produced material
then it's being proved from the mind
that are controlled by Russia and some
of the contracts are already signed now
and and in any place so this is why I
mean waiting will not help at all
waiting we'll just make sure that even
when good reconstruction try to happen
will won't find the environment for it
okay I think we're just one last
question from here so for for those that
have been relocated and displaced do you
feel that their support and ample sort
of structure community wise for those
people I've have a friend that came from
Syria that was just the the terrible
terrible stories that he told me and and
witnessing that and being there in UK
a friend was with something that spoke
you know more more miles than than a lot
of other people that was willing to do
so I'm just from your your perspective
do you feel that in worldwide or
specifically in Europe there is that
kind of that support system for those
people that have been through a
situation that is actually catastrophic
so yeah I mean I myself from personal
experience I think I mean the the
friends I made here in the UK was like
really important aspect of my life
let's say it's important for everyone to
find this support system I'm not really
aware of the details of what sort of
programs are here for or anew in
generally in the world for refugee to
support them I wasn't part of any of
those programs but I think it's very
important for people on transitional
phase just to see to find that we at
least we have a society to belong to the
question is belonging is really kind of
critical and it's very important for
every Syrian those who are leaving their
communities the places they used to live
in their memories they need I mean they
taper I mean I think every Syrian is or
but through a sort of trauma at least
maybe this side or that side I don't I
don't believe that anyone doesn't have a
sort of a trauma because of what we've
been through even if you haven't if you
did not experience yourself like like
distraction or close someone close to
you died but you're still from what you
saw on the TV from the news from
everyone like caring about this Syria
everyone talking about it from this
different perspective misunderstanding
at some time understanding it sometimes
totally getting wrong I mean this is
like a really by self is a trauma course
so people need the support and but if
syrian going to go back home I mean this
is a question no one can answer
think personally that many of the cerium
will not return sometimes because of
because of security political reason
some other because it's just been away
for long and now they have a new new
life to live so they don't want to come
back but it's not the story for everyone
I think them I mean everyone at least
for now it's been only eight years I
think the majority or at least every
friend I have it's kind of really keen
to see that someday I can't go back to
Syria I think it's about embracing this
uncertainty I mean not to ask the
simplistic question of do you wanna
return or not no one knows no one really
knows no one wants to be away but no one
really knows there they can or if they
are willing to or if they want or
because we're building whole set of new
lives in here and and and it still
doesn't feel like home here but it's
never felt like home in Syria so it's in
that journey of looking for the place
that you can feel institutionally secure
and not just from the war but also where
you feel you have a and and institutions
that will protect you and that's
something that we find here in a way or
another but it's also a place that you
feel familiar with its culture with its
everyday practices with its people with
its what the people on the streets on
their balconies so it's out I mean
neither neither places gave what we gave
a full sense of home and it's just a
very hard question to ask and it's just
what we can do in an efficient support
system a system that can give you access
but also an easy exit
okay I think that's a very nice way to
and please join us thanking social and
honey for this very very very
interesting and amazing intervention
thank you so much
[Applause]
