hello good afternoon I'm going to
introduce you Patrick Balu
Patrick is an environmental engineer and
a founding director of Italia 10 a
building environmental engineering
consultancy with hundred offices
worldwide focusing on delivering high
performance buildings with extensive
experience in the integration of
environmental and building systems with
architecture patrick has particular
expertise in thermal mass energy storage
technologies environmental building
design and high efficiency building
conditioning systems he also won a
series of medals and awards which I'm
not going to list because I would spend
a lot of time and apparently it's the
second time he's coming here to the air
to give a lecture and I think he has a
funny or interesting started to tell you
please welcome me Patrick with me
everybody thank you very much yeah I was
last here just about 19 20 years ago I
gave a lecture here and there was a
somebody in the room from Yale
University who then I got a phone call
three days later from the Dean at Yale
architecture school saying he wanted me
to go teach at Yale you can see it there
I'm now the Eero Saarinen visiting
professor at Yale since then we've done
40 projects on the Yale campus and I've
been working we now have three offices
in America Volken down there has been
working with me in New York for a few
years and the whole I had literally 17
years of my life have been spent Duke
you know like beating here conquering
America bit like the Beatles did you
remember the Beatles but the Beatles
conquered America and they were famous
for that many many rock and roll bands
failed we've kind of got there we're
working it right across the states now
and it all came from a lecture I gave
here which I say was rather better
attended than this one so clearly my
frame was waned in the 30 years since so
whereas we now have 11 offices around
the world and a couple of hundred staff
and we focus throughout
for the practice on delivering
sustainable built environment I didn't
really start out that way I started out
at a firm called Bureau Happold working
I might decide Ted how bold was my
professor at bath and he was working
with the likes of in Liddell and Frei
Otto we left so I went to Bath
University to study environmental design
and architecture under Ted he was the
professor he'd left Erich Fromm just
around the corner where he'd been
working on the Pompidou Center and the
Sydney Opera House and when I went to
the open day at bath he talked all about
that his experiences working on those
projects I was going to go to Cambridge
and read urbanism and decided I go into
Environmental Design at bath instead and
so ended up there where I bumped into
this character who's a guy called Neil
Thomas who got his MBE last year he's a
family director of Atelier one there our
sister company they do kind of crazy
structures they do a lot of rock and
roll they do Rachel Whiteread
art installations and each Cooper's
installations but opening ceremonies for
big events and it was Neil who persuaded
me we were working together trying to
find a way to make structure and
environmental engineering and building
systems tick there's a kind of a way of
collaboration and the big deal that that
we built together was a kind of our
vision for atelier one in Atelier 10 was
to shape a more sustainable world now
this was 27 years ago this was in 1990s
so sustainability almost didn't exist as
a word and in fact a lot of the stuff we
were doing goes back to working with
people like Frye and Ian who designed
the Millennium Dome where it's all about
you know the minimalism in materials and
minimalized mimic minimizing the amounts
of materials you use in buildings
because when we started out the main
thing with M&E engineers was you just
made it big enough she didn't get sued
there were rules of thumb that
architecture and engineering didn't
speak the architect gave drawings to the
M&E engineer and he put stuff in it to
make it hotter or colder there was very
little dialogue between architecture and
engineering in those days so we kind of
began a dialogue and it's only more
recently that the thing has moved the
world has moved to a much bigger concern
about the plan
back in that period in the 90s we were
still sort of going on the only one
earth Jane Jacobs stuff on cities and
the all about resources and minimizing
resource use and I think since then
we've moved into a much bigger concern
about global climate change and global
warming which has meant that's the
recognizing that buildings you know
generate 40 percent of the co2 used on
earth generates on earth sure it'll
stuff you've heard shotted out before
but that's why we have to build better
buildings because the buildings that we
use otherwise are causing the problems
that the planet is now experiencing is
gonna carry on experiencing but back
there slightly we walk back campuses
back in the 90s we were also very
influenced by a kind of a world we
wanted to do more with less the Bucky
fuller world where actually it seemed to
me as an engineer starting out mainly
working with structural engineers
structural engineers always tried to
make things smaller in the right size
they very rarely tried to make things
bigger and there was that kind of Bucky
fuller isms around that said you know
and he was also the first person it's
kind of the godfather of sustainability
almost I don't know if you've read any
of his work but he was talking about
environmental the environmental world
and environmental and minimizing the use
of materials back in the 60s and 75060
70s I was an extraordinary teacher and
philosopher about these things and most
of what he wrote is pretty hard to
understand but actually the basic the
fundamental thesis of what he was trying
to do was all about really what we're
trying to do these days which is about
being more sustainable and of course
coming out of a 20th century in your
heritage or our Heritage's as architects
all happens that the the invent the
invention if you like at both the
structures I'm something to the
structure engineer but certainly the M&E
engineer or the environmental engineer
happened as technologies evolved in the
19th the late 19th early 20th century to
allow to liberate architects from the
need to build out of masonry and and to
build buildings that sort of stacked my
this picture from 1902 shows the
Flatiron Building and what's really
interesting about it if you look closely
at all the buildings around this in
Madison Square in New York is that all
the buildings have blinds on the outside
and if you go that building now
the blinds have all been replaced
Absalom's light blinds have all been
replaced with air conditioning units so
they have no they have no blinds on the
outside but back when the building was
built it was a simple naturally
ventilated building that relied in a bit
of thermal mass so in 1913 Willis
carrier invented vapour compression
refrigeration and we basically liberated
architecture to become to use energy in
the way that it does now and it didn't
you know the architects that period
didn't use to do that the Chrysler
Building was originally naturally
ventilated and the natural density of
floor plans but also had
air-conditioning because it was in the
30s now these buildings were sort of
intuitively quite environmental but then
Along Came people like Mies who you know
took architecture and said it doesn't
matter the international space that
doesn't matter which way it faces you
make all the facades the same and you
don't really worry about it
now I'm actually very unkind to meeting
this because we worked on this project
the renovate restoration of this
building and we did find out that he
actually had the landscape architect's
plant lots of trees on the outside on
the south southwest and and West Side
and the south east south west and west
side which shaded the building and
actually it was actually quite
comfortable it was only when they'd land
the trees got chopped down that the
building starts to become uncomfortable
they put air-conditioning it but that's
a whole other thought other story but
these buildings the whole thing about
modernism and the way that you know
modern buildings were being developed in
those days was to say don't worry about
the orientation don't worry about it the
engineer will fix it and so the 20th
century was about us as engineers fixing
the problems in some senses that the
architecture was generating because it
didn't really care there was no need to
because the engineer would just say how
big does the air conditioning system
need to be I could make it work
it's fine so you know to be fair to them
they hadn't there was no agenda at that
time for worried about resource use they
were just finding oil all over the world
there was no there was no sense that the
world was being poisoned there was none
of that going on so the architecture
sort of free wheeled its way through the
early part of the 20th century basically
saying yeah doesn't really matter we
just built bad it doesn't matter as long
as the air conditioning engineers can
fix it it'll be fine and Along Came
Brutalism in not all some of the
fictional some of it real but there's
nothing really environmental really
about the brute
movement there was never any sense I
mean everyone's favorite building at
Yale is the by Nicki read books library
which haven't been should go it's
brilliant but it's the biggest gas
guzzler you ever saw the walls are made
of one inch thick travertine marble the
light comes through it in a most
gorgeous way it's beautiful inside but
it has red books in it and has to be a
condition with an inch of its life and
therefore it's a huge gas aza but it is
a funny it's a phenomenal building so
you know that there was no environmental
story these a couple buildings that
we've worked on renovating you know
brutalist stuff that these buildings had
nothing to do with environment when we
got involved in them but we found a way
we've reclad and reglazed the rudolph
building at yale we've recently been
working the national theater put in all
whole new range of systems and you've
glazing to try and improve the
performance down to make it work a lot
better and there's a new kind of the new
international style I would also say
just be careful neo futurism I'm not
sure that building buildings all out of
glass and putting double screen facades
this I necessarily creates the green
buildings the future I think this is a
new kind of modernism it's a kind of
faux modernism it doesn't really do what
it says on the tin it's a bit of a
nightmare to operate be careful you know
I think there's the remote there are
more thoughtful ways of going about
building than just the big it's a glass
shard we'll fix them again the engineers
fixed it mostly so and I have wine back
now so what were buildings in when I
started out we didn't have computers we
did every lot of stuff by instinct we
have few computers we didn't really have
a lot of computers for doing analysis so
a lot of stuff was done by instinct
though winding back even further you can
find some beautiful examples of kind of
environmental buildings back from
history so I don't know if you've ever
come across these these villas this is
the villas cuff stop so in a village in
the valencia north of Venice and these
villas of on a hillside and they sit
above a cave system and this is
represented by this lovely picture from
by Barbara Kenda of Prometheus who stole
the Sun from Zeus cast Lima Sun down and
the Front's of these buildings while the
fire us who's the god of the southwest
wind puffs
breeze into his cave system that runs
underneath the buildings and they the
architects
and they were included and I've gone
blank on the name of the guy who was
doing it but you could look him up
the architect basically developed this
system for venti ducts where they
basically tunneled down into the cave
system and join the houses to these cool
these are these grills marble grills on
the floor and all the air comes up
through the under underneath through the
floors of the house and basically
provides passive cooling through the
cave system so as the caves are always
much cooler than the the outside air
they get basically passive
air-conditioning and lots of the the
cognoscenti of the of the Venetian
architectural scene used to go and hang
out in these villas particular Villa
castrato where the they would basically
enjoy free air-conditioning through the
summer in the hot hot part of the summer
in Italy so these beautiful simple
environmental strategies that were built
around at the natural form back in the
early days we used to always talk a lot
about the termites my professor at
university was mad for termites so
termites build completely
environmentally they basically build
their nests and the whole intention is
to keep the Queen who is at the center
of a nest at 30 to 31 degrees centigrade
exactly and they do that by blocking and
unblocking these holes in the structure
with mud in response to temperature
stimuli and they use the thermal mass of
the ground underneath and these earth
tubes these tunnels that go out where
the workers go out into the landscape as
the air intake ducts so the air intakes
coming through here into its
subterranean chamber moisture from the
nest drips down these circles radial
fins and this is big enough for david
attenborough and a film crew to get into
this chamber because it's been on life
on Earth this particular environmental
system so is a huge underground chambers
built by these tiny blind creatures
without an architectural degree
amazingly between them and they they
build instinctively these huge these
huge systems and that basically what
happens is the moisture runs down it
evaporates gives evaporative cooling the
thermal mass of this chamber keeps the
space comfortable keeps the the center
of an s comfortable and then when it
gets really hot the workers who would
normally be out chewing buildings and
would I have been observed coming back
they take a leaf stem or a seed pod and
they'll travel maybe 20 30 meters down
to the water table bring water back up
and then tip it into the chamber to give
evaporation and evaporative cooling so
if you're interested in a reference for
that as a book called the soul of the
white ant but there's a South American
South African anthropologist who usually
Mary who studied these nests he did all
kinds of crazy things like a bee put a
metal plate diagonally whoops he put a
metal plate diagonally through the nest
and then he would kill all the the kill
the Queen on one side of a nest and all
the other million workers on the other
side of the metal plate would stop dead
and died immediately so there was some
kind of weird system communication
system going on that's probably better
than most control systems in our
buildings but it's it's a pheromone
communication system that they use so
they're working as a single eco working
as a single eco system it's kind of
fascinating because they're producing in
a brilliant environmental control system
in a way that's kind of quite quite
humbling to us as designers so the next
bit of a talk is how if we tried to
emulate termites and these crazy
Italians in in building some of the
buildings that we've done over the years
and it sort of started as a project we
were doing I've worked for Greenpeace
for glycol Jonathan smiles with Peter
Clegg of field and click Bradley who
Peter plated brilliant environmental
designer and we were at the guy left
Greenpeace and he started to build to
promote a millennium project called the
earth center so this is the earth center
it's on the site of an old colliery in
Yorkshire and so it's a coal spoil heap
it's it's built over to fault lines so
it was a very difficult site to recover
but it fits ticked all the boxes for
social environmental and he could become
economic sustainability in as much as
the idea was to regenerate an old coal
town and turn it into a sense if
assistant national center for
sustainability so the first project we
did on the site was this thing called
the planets called the so-called planet
Earth Cameron don't think it was it was
cool it was I think maybe it was but it
was this gallery here which was all
about it was about planet Earth
that was the whole point the 65,000
square foot six 9,000 square meter
gallery space here you see the first
major PV array that was built in the UK
abouts about 15 years ago 17 years ago
for two it was for the Millennium but we
were basically the challenge was to
build this um this gallery space and
Peter Clegg started sending me some
ideas about how we might deal with it
and structural engineers are saying it's
it needs to be a very very thick floor
because we can't put piles down because
of the faults and it's cold spoil heap
so it's very very bad ground so we need
to build a giant rafter city on I sent
this fax to the sketch in 96 to 2 Peter
saying what could we sort of turn it
into two slabs and put up some walls in
between and making our labyrinth of
tunnels that we could like the termites
send the air down the labyrinth at night
to cool it down and then let the air
come out of a space in the daytime and
conditioners base no computer power this
was all done in the back of a packet
I smoked back then so we did use fake
packets for design and we this was how
we this was the first sketches it turned
into something like this and we built
this is what we built air handling units
back here pushing air into these tunnels
and the air coming out through these
these linear grilles here and out
through the floor into the gallery space
above completely eliminated any air
conditioning reduced the cooling demand
heating demands by about 50% because we
could stabilize the temperature and
store energy from day to night which is
the big thing with our systems trying to
equalize the weather from the hot days
cold nights and vice-versa in the winter
so this was the first example of the of
the labyrinths and what was kind of
weird was when we got to this point we
had these sketches in this design but it
was a lottery project so we had nobody
had any money to do it because he didn't
get the money until he got the money and
so but you had to picture the idea
before you got the money so we were
waiting for about two three years while
the lottery made up their minds what
they were gonna do
in about 1998 on maybe 1997 and then we
waited two and a half years and then
they finally said you got the money you
have to get it built in eighteen months
and we hadn't done any analysis or
anything on it and the first thing of
course we had to build was the
foundations because it was appointed a
contractor and that they had to
basically build the foundation so we had
a meeting where we looked around said
will it work I mean yeah think so and we
built it and we went on we were still
analyzing it and doing analysis on it
when we built when we were building it
and making it work which is kind of
crazy when you look back on it but that
was the way that our our system procured
buildings for that particular big events
that the millennium 2000 most of you
probably were bought they were you were
even born there but not much not one for
long so that was the first of the sub
labyrinth II buildings and we took the
idea down to a project in Melbourne it's
been the press lately because if you've
seen it but yeah they're gonna knock
this building down and put a new Apple
Store there and then people be marching
on the city of Melbourne and being them
in there so upset about it because
appala commercialism is taking over from
arts which is not great but this was a
project we designed with some guys who
taught here for a long time Peter
Davidson and Don Bates who were great
friends of the AAA they were living in a
garret in gude street literally with a
hole in the floor we used to go and do
the design we didn't design for this
competitions it's an international
design competition
I used taken a bottle of Jameson's on a
Friday night to keep them going through
the weekend you know cuz it was that it
was that hard we were what they were
working for months just on fresh air
they had nothing and we did this design
they got down to the last three and then
they had to produce all these models and
we helped them to sort of fund all that
to set this thing going so it's an art
gallery it's an atrium space this is a
Sydney Brook SBS's search a local
broadcasting centre the famous shards
and then a digital display screen where
they show the Australians walloping us
at cricket up to 20,000 people who can
sit in the square and we built it over
the train tracks that were running into
Melbourne station and we wanted a big
environmental idea was how to condition
this open-ended atrium space that ran
through the centre was going to get very
hot because I had a lot of Western glass
it was all about being open to the
square so we said well there's a big
space between the train track crash deck
and this Piazza which was sloping up can
we put a labyrinth in there and so we
came up with this idea for these
concrete tunnels and concrete
passageways that run backwards or
forward so the air comes in over here
and it passes backwards and forwards it
runs about a hundred and fifty meters
past for me to hide concrete walls and
these comparables are rippled to
maximize surface area and and the kind
of the contact so and I went down there
and they were trying to knock
200-million off the budget because we
would say it was so of a budget the
project so I flew down to Australia with
my little road of drawings no no
powerpoints in those days it was a roll
of drawings over my shoulder and so I
had the I could hear the bloodletting
going on as they were trying to kill the
architect in the room trying to take 200
million out of the budget
and I unfold my drawings and put them on
the wall with a usual anthill drawing
and all that sort of thing thinking I'm
gonna die here I'm thinking this is not
going to go well but they totally loved
it they got the whole thing and they got
it as they're kind of if you go to the
federation square website even today
they have it has its own the labyrinth
has its own tab on the website so this
is very much part of the that's a thing
but this whole Center runs I haven't got
a good picture it but inside the atrium
here runs at about 25 or 26 degrees
centigrade when it's 40 outside without
any mechanical cooling I just want a
pause on that just to make a point
because one of the big things you have
to sell to clients sometimes talk about
sustainability they always say oh can we
afford it it costs more what are we
going to do with certain types of
clients you can run an argument about
intergenerational thinking you can say
to them this is for a hundred years this
building is here for a hundred years
it's an art center community center in
that hundred years you would change the
refrigeration system the air handling
units the fans if you you know five
times every 20 years you have to replace
the plants and all the kids here there's
no kid to replace it's just some blowers
and there's some filters and that's it
and so not only a huge investing for
today's generation you're and you're
investing into generationally in an idea
about hope for the future and at that
time that weather was starting to get
hotter in Australia and they were
getting worried about it and the great
about this is the hotter it gets the
kind of the better it works and they
absolutely bought it and they went they
went for it and it's a very very
important philosophical point that I own
forgot to mention you know it's that is
how your people have to how'd you get
these things to work to sell them to
clients in buildings you sell it to them
by not necessarily doing the payback
you know the payback period and all that
kind of stuff you sell it to their souls
about in fact about environmental design
about the future and securing a mutual
future it sometimes works sometimes you
get your ass kicked out of the room what
can I say you know it doesn't always
work but that's the way in a way that
you have to play these things not less
that sounds wrong I don't even play it
it's the way you have to explain these
things to people to make them realize
this is serious you know it's not a it's
not a game
other clients this one was the the the
new Alpine house at Kew Gardens as you
ever go down to Kew you'll see this tiny
little glass house 100 square meter
glass house with Wilkinson air and
normally an Alpine house would have a
refrigeration unit outside to keep the
Alpine plants cool but we have a little
labyrinth underneath and again no kit is
it very very simple just a small power
cable to the building to run the fans
and the control system that basically
calls labyrinth at night and blows the
cool air over the plants in the daytime
really really simple but very effective
and labyrinth is literally just some
concrete blocks late late into end and
not to give you the impression of a
one-trick pony this is another one in in
Ankara in Turkey this is a guy I studied
with the bast was the architects selcuk
FG
I think he's taught here we will
actually sell chips for a while and he
he's moved to Istanbul now and he works
out of there but he asked us to help
with the competition for this
headquarters building for the Turkish
Contractors Association not the Turkish
M&E Contractors Association Turkish
Contractors Association so the big sale
here was to say you guys build but
actually what happens in most in Turkey
is the air conditioning this kind of
takes over
so Ankara is right up here in the and on
the Asian side of Turkey
there's Istanbul is over here and after
that move that moved the capital here I
think because the weather was much it
was not so humid in the summer so it's a
very big diurnal swings and temperatures
often when you're looking for these
types of systems you've got a look at
the weather
if it's Singapore and the weather is
always like that there's no point in
trying to put in a thermal mass storage
system because you need to have the day
to night temperatures being swinging
like this because it's temperature over
time is energy so that means in this
space you've got cooling energy required
in this space you can store energy here
you've got certain so and so on so the
idea is you can store cool fat nights
that you can discharged room a day to
help to flatten out those Peaks and have
a normal approach in Turkey is honestly
it's this bad day everything just gets
split system air conditioners thrown at
it and all of those are designed for the
hottest day and they work inefficiently
for the rest of the year because they're
short cycling goes on a hot day you're
designed for the max but for the rest of
the time you're running inefficiently so
that the whole point of it is to try to
attenuate these games it wasn't just
about the labyrinth we did a lot of work
with the architects to look at shading
the facades to make sure we got great
day lights in to allow natural cross
ventilation for six seven months of the
year so this is a mixed mode building we
have little in yellow and green
indicator lights now we have little red
and green indicator lights and all the
windows and when it's a natural vent day
the windows have a little red light over
them and they're told not to open them
and on a natural vent day they've got a
green light and you open the windows
people open the windows and they can let
the building breathe without impacting
on the services lots of solar control on
the facade I'm going as if on so quite a
lot to go through and then down in the
basement we've persuaded him to digger
dig an extra lap dig an extra level to
put a labyrinth in and it was when we
really explains them but this was about
getting rid of the M&E plant and about
in building with concrete cement which
is what they do is Turkish contractors
they kind of got it and said yeah we
want to do this we want to build it and
so we built the design these labyrinths
so they're relatively short by
comparison with the ones in Melbourne
but the air runs critically around 60
meters along concrete passageways at
about a speed of one to two meters per
second so very slow that's just picking
up moving each around as it's going and
there the walls we made of landscaping
blocks they're just literally dense
concrete blocks with these ripples on
and again we wanted the ripples to stop
or the surface roughness to give you
a little roughness to improve that heat
transfer so this was me down approving
the block let's look at the block they
started always poor-devil started
building them down in the basement so
that he rather than in Melbourne we
built it we cast it all in situate it up
tip-top form work here some poor guys
spent a lot of time down there putting
stacking bricks on top of each other but
they ended up making a tall enough to
put door sets in these have got the
louvers in that do the controls but I
own I've taken guided tours of kind of
the Turkish architects association took
120 architects around one night well
good thing we took 120 down and about 90
came back out again but we still
wandering around trying to find their
way out but it is a bit of a labyrinth
so that's what we call them labyrinths
but they they've become very much the
thing that we do in buildings we also in
this building we put the concrete sorry
steel ducts into the concrete slabs so
that we can also cool the concrete down
at night because the is so cool every
night in Ankara it's a perfect weather
to provide free cooling so we call the
concrete mass down at night these guys
are putting ductwork in before the
concrete goes down and you can see here
they left a cutaway slab to illustrate
the technology and then we put a little
chill beam underneath with lighting
exposed concrete and then these these
buildings pretty much freewheel they're
naturally ventilating or the thermal
mass system works for 90% of the time
and then just on really hot days the
chill beam gives them a little bit of
extra capacity so it's a it's a kind of
totally integrated building and it uses
a fraction of the energy of a typical
Turkish office building would do and
instead of all those air conditioners we
have these on the roof and very very
small blast cooler just for the hottest
weather for getting rid of heat and it
pretty much runs on on stored energy so
it's a I think it's a bit of a Bucky
fuller coat coming up which he said that
you never change things by fighting the
existing reality to change something
build a new model that makes existing
model obsolete and that's what we were
kind of persuading his client the way
they built in Turkey is obsolete and
they should fix it they should they
should do better
I wouldn't say we've quite fixed it yet
but which there are now a few buildings
that are starting to come online that
have got I've got this kind of thermal
mass storage and they're using the
weather and that's what we're talking
about and it was the first LEED Platinum
building in Ankara so that's sort of
taking that one idea about the ant hills
or the other right the idea about the
the Venetian villas and finding how we
could reinterpret that into a modern
piece of building and construction and
architecture and they honestly are
rooted in that you know a lot of this
stuff we analyze it now and we spent a
lot of time doing analysis on these
things but often we we slightly prove
it's it's kind of harder to prove that
it works than knowing that it works when
we built it because the computer quite
often will say no and that's that's very
frustrating isn't it volcán yes that's
weak a lot of things that we've built
and we've had work when you run it
through the computer simulation programs
are good yeah not so great and you can't
no we know it works we've done it it's
it's it's instinctive it feels like it
works so I do I still feel that there's
a big part of what we do as designers
has to still be instinctive and we're
not trying to take away that necessarily
completely take away that instinctive
thing for another project that we did
with Hopkins at the World Wildlife Fund
not the world Wrestling Foundation
Federation the Living Planet Center in
Woking Surrey which you can go visit if
you're interested it's just down the
down the rail line from Waterloo this is
a BRE amount standing building office
building for this for this NGO and the
design process this was the site and
we're going to build it above the
carpark so it's an air rights building
over the carpark in a pretty sort of not
great area of this little town called
Woking but we I'm not gonna go 12ms too
much but we went through a huge amount
of exercise a huge exercise to manage so
the games to make sure that the shading
system was precisely designed to keep
the Sun where we wanted it particularly
in the the summertime we want to keep
all of the Sun off we want the light and
in the wintertime you want the Sun in
but you want to control it so you don't
get glare so it's all built around all
of that but we're also very much about
the process the idea of Biophilia
bringing light into the space to to keep
plants alive and so this is a daylight
map of this space we work with the
architects to do
the sky lighting in the day lighting
system so that we had a daylight factor
above four in all of the office spaces
which is generally means that you can
work pretty much whenever the it's a
daily in daylight hours without any
artificial lighting a big part of what
the WUF wanted but also the the
environmental system was based again on
what we call mix mode operations so the
building works is naturally ventilated
in the spring and summer though in the
spring and autumn which is basically
that the windows at the edge open again
little red and green lights telling you
when to it when you can open them so
just here you can just see little red
and green light in the window frame
being Hopkins it's quite minimal
and then the wind breeze comes in
through here and goes up and out through
the wind curls at the top which are
based upon a common tradition alingas
kind of design but when we get to so
that's the the components of that
natural vent system when we get to the
the mid season out of the mid seasons we
go to a mode which uses a similar thing
to the kind of labyrinth but user thing
called earth tubes earth dance so these
are 70 80 meter long concrete pipes that
are buried in the ground beneath the
building they wrap backwards and
forwards and we push all of the air that
comes into the building goes through
these concrete tubes again just like the
anthill really and delivers the air
through the floor through a displacement
system into the space so these are the
the concrete pipes which is our
ventilation system they pop up in just
out the edge of the car park here in
these little and what you call them
broke black Daleks first who know about
Doctor Who but they they effectively are
90 centimeter diameter drain pipes that
are designed to be to resist water
coming in late to a slight fall and say
they're about 80 meters long and 80
meters the air coming in at 28 degrees
on a hot day will be in contact with the
ground that's at 12 degrees all the way
along the pipe 12 or 13 degrees by the
time it comes out the other end the air
is at about 17 degrees centigrade which
is perfectly fine to put it into the
floor and bring it out through the floor
as a sort of passively cooled outdoor
air so it gives us basically full
air-conditioning in the building through
the summer without any
frig eration system at all and these are
the things that this is a measure this
is some measurements you won't be able
to see this graph that you're gonna take
it from me that this says 30 degrees
this line so that's the outside air
temperatures spiking at 32 on three
consecutive days and the air in the
earth duct this is about 12 degrees and
it has a few hot days it goes up to 15
ooh sorry I hit the wrong button it goes
up to 15 16 degrees centigrade on very
on the very hottest days and then cools
down again at night because obviously
you're able to push the air through it
at nighttime as well so this gives us
the ability to kind of passively
air-conditioned buildings you look at
these wouldn't say why don't we throw
all buildings like this why don't we
it's so easy it's big ly low-rise
buildings it gets high it harder when
you're doing city buildings and they're
tall and you can't you haven't got the
footprint all this stuff but I just
think every business Park in England
that has an air-conditioning system as a
conventional chiller and cooling system
they just need to look at these
buildings they work
they've all been working for years it's
it's not complicated I I was teaching in
Germany in in Austin u.s. sorry with a
German engineer called Thomas our from
the really brilliant company called
trance Sola and when we first did these
earth ducts we went I phoned him and
said Thomas you always talk about earth
ducts have you got some buildings in
still got we can go and look at I'll
take it bring a client - he said oh yeah
I think 60 or 70 so we went round in a
day five office buildings on different
parts - all of which had these big earth
fights all of which did this as a
standard thing it's absolutely normal in
Germany all the buildings do it they
think we're crazy putting in you know
taking air conditioners and total
recognition listen to all the
conditioning because you know you look
at this look at the physics it's not
hard really isn't that hard so what I
mean it I mean where do we have offices
in Scotland and we still put air
conditioning offices in Scotland because
the developers want us to put they have
to have a box saying your air
conditioning or something or train or
sorry if I'm on film did denigrating
anybody but you know it they want a box
that says that they've got air
conditioning but actually you don't need
it you really don't need to do it in our
climate if you do it smart so I'm not
saying that particularly smart we're
just copying the Germans let's be honest
about this and a lot of this
technology if it's been widely trialed
but we're in England we're really slow
on our markets very slow picking up on
this and it needs you guys to ask the
questions when you're starting to work
on your projects as architects and
sustainability consultants to say we
know we can do this better it doesn't
have to be exactly like the old way you
can always change the changes the change
is possible and we've done it we proved
it we sometimes don't sleep nights but
mostly I do when we do when these
projects are getting put together so we
do have a small cooling heating cooling
system here we've got 22 ground-source
bore holes that go about 100 meters down
into the ground they have this plastic
pipe that I've done it again sorry I
have a plastic pipe that we pump water
and dye called solution down and
basically put that into a water source
heat pump to take heat out in the winter
and put it back into the ground in the
summer and that gives us a little bit of
capacity for for heating as dooblydoo
still need a little bit of heating we
made the decision to go all-electric on
this building rather than putting in
connections to district heating because
we felt that with the decarbonization of
the grid ultimately I think electrical
energy is probably going to be which is
already getting a lot a lot more lower
carbon content but will get better and
better I think as the years go on and
gives us the opportunity also to buy
renewable energy which Greenwich WWF -
to offset their carbon emissions so this
is kind of Net Zero Carbon they claim
but that because they're buying green
energy off the grid how am i doing for
time Oh
rambling on so also on the roof of the
building we have lots of PV cells to do
only does about there's about 20% of the
regulated energy loads of the building
so a decent contribution to what's left
in our low-energy building but of course
you know so many clients come to you and
say I want to do a green building I want
to put PV on the roof and I hope you can
see from that little thing that the PV
is kind of the last thing we do the
first thing you do is you make the
architecture better so the building
doesn't use so much then you make the
system's better so that they don't have
to use so much and then it's possible to
get 20% of the remaining energy from
renewables if you take a bad
building and stick lipstick on it you
get a which is PV panels you know a bad
building we call lipstick on a gorilla
it's it's kind of you can get 3 or 4
percent of the energy you have to work
hard to reduce demand first demand
reduction is where we always start at
Elliott n drive demand down make the
systems efficient and then you do the
green the green stuff on the roof but
that is it really is it is the last
thing you think about in many ways on
these projects although you know the
architects always a prioritizing that we
also work with start Sturgess carbon
profiling this is going to be this is an
increasingly important area of the work
that we're doing looking at in body
carbon with Simon's team we we did a
hope was you know might seem blindingly
obvious things about reducing the cement
content of the concrete's that we were
using we were you looking at low carbon
cements we were making very precise
decisions about the window frame system
to minimize R or aluminium maximized
recycled aluminium so on and so on and
so on really all the rebar in the steel
was 100% recycled so just by making the
right decisions between stage three in
stage four we say 4,000 tons of co2
emissions which is about two years worth
of the building's co2 emissions just on
decision making with the architects and
the carbon consultants
so again body carbon is becoming you
know clearly as you make buildings get
better and better and better and they
use less and less energy the embodied
carbon you used to build them becomes a
bigger proportion and a bigger concern
for how we do how we go about building
in an environmental way so again this is
kind of it's slightly dull but you have
to sit there and work through a lot of
spreadsheets but that's how you get you
know you can save a lot of carbon as
well and this got the outstanding rating
for briam and it's a much visited
building weirdly at one the Innovation
Award from the British Council for
offices I think to two years ago we won
the Innovation Award and actually it
uses exactly the same systems we put in
a building 20 years ago we had a
building with earth ducts underfloor air
and it's not this building down in Kent
but it didn't catch anyone's attention
but because this was a bit higher
profile twenty years on it became the
innovative building innovator
building innovation award of the year
which is always made me kind of laugh
I'm just happy about it obviously to win
it you got the building got recognized
but it is slightly strange that it's
taken so long for this industry to
change so I'm just going to finish ish
no quite finished talking about a
project that we were lucky enough to win
as another international design
competition called the gardens by the
bay in Singapore and you've you've been
and will be new Gardens by the way
few people people okay it was a
competition we've been working with Andy
grant since the earth Center days at
Grant Associates and with Jimmy and Paul
Baker at Wilkinson air for years atelier
1 obviously have been involved long time
and the competition was to design a new
garden for this 55 hectare site here
this is the faint now famous Moshe
Safdie Hotel triple tree towers with a
surfboard on the roof building right
here there's another garden up here
which is ultimately won by Gustafson
Porter Katherine Gustafson and another
garden going up here so that basically
it was called Gardens by the bay and
this is the Marina Bay building a
barrage here to turn this from a
freshwater area to seawater sorry vice
versa from seawater the freshwater and
slightly weirdly this project we did in
about 1990s the Opera House the
Esplanade which is called the durian
building that was on the waterfront when
we designed it in Singapore so Singapore
has grown this is all landfill and it's
been amazing did the change in 27 years
so this was the
a week to the animation to the
competition
this was done by squid opera which is
widdle soft Sun run screen opera and
very early in their life so in the
beginning we were talking about natural
cooling and how the building's might
work environment making work and whose
big idea with you see these super trees
which is like super nature the giant
size daily established part of the
gardens experience value engineering
slightly reduced the number for those
we've been there and quite that many
very much and then we were really geared
up to try and make them be slightly post
rationalized and we get up to makes it
part of the education but also part of
the environmental systems of the gardens
as well as providing shading as you went
along but you see our environmental
diagrams impasse this is in there
and the first of the two glass houses is
a dry biome sits as a Mediterranean
biome be one of the largest biomes in
the world and designs up there's a
showcase for Mediterranean plans so air
temperature not above 26 degrees
relative humidity not above 60% light
levels 45,000 Lux eat needed for the
plants to flower and about 500 megawatts
hours a year
the other one is a mountain lion
tropical montagnes are also cool
21 22 degrees centigrade like I put some
mountains of clozapine Barlow and Mexico
with humidity around 90% 100% so two
giant glass houses at the competition
stages watches that fades we thought we
could design them with glass and then
with the big fins that would be the
structure as our shading system this is
on the equator we were kind of worried
about the Sun for obvious reasons being
too strong I'm gonna come back to that
in a bit and we also because of the big
towers that are sitting here we knew
that was shadow being cast upon a lot of
the garden by much much of a day by
Moshe safdie's big be careful I say like
large structures with the surfboard on
the roof we're going to put shadows here
so we put we needed light in the biomes
about everything else plants need light
it's very different to humans and so we
put the glass houses up at the top of
the site and then they're linked
together by these pathways and secondary
gardens that are built around the
patterns of an orchid flower flowering
on my knuckle this is then built I'm
jumping to the finished story so this is
the the Mediterranean glass house this
is the mountain tropical montane glass
house the entrance areas are here
open-air and then there's a giant sort
of restaurant complex under here energy
center here and here's the super tree
three super tree groves these two are
linked to the energy system and these
are a little bit but mainly they're
restaurants bars and a giant aerial
walkway they have a light way they have
a light show every night these super
trees disperse the heat from inside here
and I'll come back to that a bit later
and we also had a main water course from
a city running through here which we
have to filter all the dust and dirt out
of so it's all part of a big water story
so I mentioned the sort of environmental
design criteria completely different the
other thing the client said we needed to
use less energy than an office building
in Singapore when okay it's
for that but that was that was the
challenge baby see this is the pink is
where the plants come from the
Mediterranean plants and then the green
is the the tropical Montaigne plants but
the key things were these light levels I
mean you think you do if you're familiar
with designing office spaces but you'd
normally design an office to bed around
about 500 to a thousand Lux
at peak you know in a working
environment maybe 300 Lux for artificial
lights and so 45,000 Lux are required at
peak times and then we also for the air
temperatures we had to be able to
generate different air temperatures
inside so daytime is at 25 at nighttime
because we have to fool the plants as a
day/night cycle if they're going to
flourish in there it's down to 17
degrees and then for one month every
four we have to hit it with the 13
degrees centigrade at night so they
think they're going to vernal eyes going
to go into winter mode so the plants
will actually flower because the trees
are going to be there for a long time
and we also have to blow air at them
really fast at night so we have these
giant fans they come and plug in at
night because the trees don't develop
roots unless you give them something to
agitate against and the root system then
holds to stop them from falling over so
a lot of work was done on the kind of
environmental systems and it was a
unique challenge really so there's just
an example that's the 45,000 Lux
compared to what you'd need in an office
or in a house so they needed a huge
amount of light this is what we thought
we realized as we were developing it and
the other problem is Singapore is it's
incredibly cloudy so on 62% of days you
will have cloud at 2:00 in the afternoon
it's usually clear in the mornings but
it gets cloudy or through the day in the
afternoon is generally cloudy or cloudy
and then it starts to clear off and
towards the evening when there's no
sunlight anyway so actually if you think
about it it's also worth on the equator
we only get 12-hour day now we're going
to put in this glass house olive trees
that will be fitting on a hillside
outside Rome or somewhere or down in the
Greek Greek islands which would get 18
hours of sunlight full-on blue skies Sun
lights in in Greece and they're only
gonna get 12 hours and it's going to be
cloudy half the time so it was a we've
realized as we got into it that light
was a massive problem and we had to make
these structures as light as possible
too
the light in and then only control Peaks
online we went a massive amount of
detail with the horticulturist so this
is work we did with the botanists and
with trance Ola who were also helping on
this and we're looking at this is I
can't predict companies this is
hydrangeas dahlias asters ranunculus
euphorbia freezers they're types of
flowers well and this is the amount of
light they need so this machine keeps
jumping bigger fun this is the amount of
light that they need per annually global
illuminance levels and needs to be sorry
Pete daily we need more than 45,000 Lux
to make these some of these plants
flower so that was that was our
challenge so something we could never
have done a few years ago we started to
test different structural solutions
working with tele a one for light levels
and to identify where we could get the
brightest level so we could put the
right species in the right places
working with the horticulturalists and
we started with the fin that I mentioned
was the original design which we thought
was a shading system big structure glass
in between and it absolutely killed the
light levels it just blocked out way too
much light we then looked at making
those fins into trusses to let the light
through still kill too much light so it
was only when we got to a different
solution Atelier one came up with which
is a grid shell so it's a glass grid
shell that is basically free to move and
then it's just restrained by the arches
that go over the top so these arches
don't actually carry the weight of the
grid shell itself by itself loading and
the arches are very light so they only
just stop the out the grid shell from
falling over is the the basic principle
we then work with them to this was the
original detail for the grid shell
support in the glass system and we got
it down to this because we had that was
producing so much shade inside that we
were eight we had to basically reduce it
and reduce it even to the point where we
might add the grid inside of the grid
shell so that as you're looking up you
just don't the plants looking up don't
see any light going through these are
Neil Thomas's wonderful hand sketches if
you want to see a guys do hand sketching
this is he's a man he teaches here
sometimes so go to his classes if you
see him he does things on the train it's
really irritating he'll sit there and
draw these and beautiful 3d drawings
right in front of you anyway looking up
from underneath you can see that you
have this trees looking up hardly see
any structure in the way they see the
main these
is going over but there's really very
little a little occlusion and yes you
get lateral blockage to the daylight but
the light coming straight down from the
sky onto these trees is is enormous and
we get 45,000 Lux a peak so this was
this is how it ended up this is what we
built the only cross-bracing in the
building and these little wire cross
braces here that's what stops it all
from sort of tumbling over but very much
that a lighting structure that's tuned
to lighting and I guess the point to
labor this is you know this is really
about integrated design it's the most
integrated project we've ever done into
everything with the architecture because
what you don't see here is edits or
stuff it's okay this is fully
air-conditioned fully cooled but it's
cooled by the floors having pipes in
them which you've got chilled water in
so any Sun that comes in and hits the
floor gets the heat instead of the heat
reradiating and promoting the greenhouse
effect
we have pipes in the floor which take
the heat away then we have air built-in
coming in through all these sides of his
planter bed so there's cool air spilling
out across the floor as well but the
trees absorb about eighty-five percent
of the energy that comes in the hits the
trees is turning to chemical energy so
only about fifteen percent gets
reradiating as heat so the trees are
very much our friends in this battle but
we've also got an issue then if not
letting you want light but not heat so
we worked with a lot of the glazing
manufacturers around the world to find
the best glass so we have a selective
coating that gives us a visible light
transmission of sixty-five percent which
we needed for the plants but only lets
the heat in at 35 percent because you
get about 1200 Watts a square meter of
Sun on the equator hitting the glass
house so you can imagine if 70 percent
of that comes in at 700 watts for every
square meter it's a huge energy demand
we then work with with Walker today to
come up with a shading system so on the
really hottest days we do need to keep
the Sun off because it's just too - it
takes more so the direct overhead Sun we
shape we shade we let the cycles on sent
them in from side so we came up with
this idea for these sales structures
that are like some boat sails that
deploy out from the main structural
beams and shade the glass so on a day
where we've got really intense overhead
Sun
we let the low-angle stuff come in from
the sides and sometimes we don't deploy
these ones but we just puts shading out
over the over the center of the building
and then and they they hide away like a
yacht sail inside so that the when
you're inside you can always stand
we don't always fully deploy them so you
can stand in the shade because you
didn't get that kind of high radiant
heat on you but the the service the
shades partly deploy just to take the
edge off the the air conditioning loads
to reduce the energy use so Singapore if
you're familiar with the psychometric
chart the temperature and humidity in
England the psychrometric charts that
have all comes down here and it is all
full of dots and Singapore it's just
always hot and humid this is typical
tropics it's always over 20 degrees
centigrade and it's always about 8090
percent humid and so the main problem we
had to get to these conditions is we had
to dehumidifier air and then we had to
basically dry it so dehumidification
saris like that Lian constant moisture
content and then we could cool it so we
were looking for ways to do that in his
energy efficient way as we could we
could we integrated airflow into air and
these pipes into all of the systems into
all of the surfaces of the building so
we could control the the temperature
inside but and we developed with the
architects different ways of getting the
air into the space to try and make it as
invisible as possible we then did lots
of CFD analysis to show that we were
just trying to cool the areas where
people were so these blue zones allowed
us to kind of calibrate the amount of
air litres per second per square meter
here going into every part of the
building to allow us to analyze how much
I had to go in and then we started to
build with these pipes in the grounds
and this was the air handling plant room
these are some of the Earth's the return
air grills here to bring our back down
to the ground and this was in
construction we were also pushing our
aus at low level in the planter beds to
keep the plants themselves cool through
these displacement terminals and these
grills around here in the all around the
planter beds we had these measuring
stations that measure the black bulb
temperatures radiant temperature the
light level and we also sniff
temperature and humidity so we control
everything as we go around the garden
and there's a
air supply diffusers are built into
they're built into a landscape in the
cloud forest we basically did a similar
thing at low level with all the air
supply coming in at a low level this is
the amazing mountain so you kind of come
in here guggenheim like you go and lift
up to the top and then you wind your way
down all these walkways through this
incredible incredible garden and every
half hour we release foggers to
basically put up to 100% relative
humidity and when you look down the what
you see here is all the you see people
walking around but this is all cooling
surface and then air supply surface are
all these metal grills that run around
here so cool air is pouring in just to
develop a pool of cool air at the bottom
of the building so back to the question
how do you make a building like this net
zero carbon well we had figured out
early on that the best way to dry the
air go back to my psychometric chart was
to use a thing called liquid desiccant
have you ever you've come across
desiccants I guess in when you buy a
leather goods or shoes or wallets or
bags you get a little bag which says
silica do not eat don't eat it that's a
desiccant and that a desiccant will
basically take the moisture out of the
air you can regenerate that desiccant by
drying it with with heat so it'll drive
the moisture off so you can use it again
so we figured if we do you can do this
with a liquid lithium chloride so we
could basically dry all of the air in
the space and we then thought how can we
use how could we regenerate that now the
initial idea was we were going to use
solar energy but at a meeting that I
have with the the boss of the gardens we
had a cocktail party one night he said
that he was looking after three million
trees in Singapore and said we mean by
you're looking after three million trees
so well I prune every tree in Singapore
in the public public realm every two
years so he's getting 1/2 million trees
a haircut every year so said so what do
you do with all the wood waste and he
said I don't know I'll go find out so he
turned out they would all these massive
amounts of wood waste that's coming off
the trees so wherever you go in
Singapore you see these guys giving
these trees a haircut because they grow
like crazy and they basically would put
this they take it all away and they were
taking it away to an incinerator plant
outside the city and burning it so we
said well can we intercept that waste
and basically put it into our energy
system the same time we also found that
the ports which is huge gets rid of
massive amounts of timber waste every
day with packaged dry packaged goods
that come in from China particularly
where they use a little timber packing
cases so we said well we could take that
mix it with wood waste and use that as a
fuel for the building so every night 18
articulated lorries arrive and dump 500
cubic meters of wood waste into a giant
structure where as a walking floor walks
wood into a biomass boiler the biomass
boiler which has a chimney that goes up
inside one of the super trees heats
stick make steam we have a steam turbine
then that drives chillers which sends
power to chillers and then the Heat
drives absorption chillers to provide
cooling and the waste heat from that
goes into a desiccant regenerator system
that dries out the desiccants and pushes
the waste water up the up the super
trees so effectively this is a sort of
brief diagram so you've got a desiccant
system there that shows that that part
of a cycle here's the biomass arriving
going to a steam turbine that we also
recycle all the ash goes out to be used
as fertilizer in the garden and then we
have the coudé the waste heat basically
provides cooling through electric
chillers and things called absorption
chillers so we're able to use all of the
cooling so this building has never used
any grid cooling or any mechanical pony
power off the grid it runs entirely off
a waste stream from a city so you hear
about circular economy and all those
things this is kind of a notion of
circular economy I guess in this in this
context here's the boilers that's a
model and you can take a photograph and
they're so big but this word is just
being constantly pushed in to a certain
death and where it's burned in a high
temperature combustion chamber and then
the all you see of it is in this super
tree here this that's a half meter
diameter carbon steel chimney that runs
up the middle of a super tree and
disperses the heat and then we have a
small basically heat rejection system
that just dumps waste heat surplus heat
out through there and then one of the
other super trees has all the desiccant
drying system in in the base so that's
the only sign of the M&E systems on the
whole garden and they are all running in
a completely you're arguably is it
carbon neutral I don't know is it a good
thing to do these things in their in
their
Golf is its part of the world well we've
taken away stream that was getting
burned anyway am i using it to generate
energy so I guess that's a good thing
we've learned a lot for the for the
local market about using desiccants for
drying air and on the whole it's been a
very successful undertaking we still
have big kit this is these are the
chillers that do the do the cooling and
we but what we have actually is we've
got we've beaten our brief because we
actually generate excess more power than
we actually need to run the garden so
the waste the additional energy goes to
running all the light shows and things
inside the garden and if you go there
you see these fantastic displays and
exhibitions of how it all how it all
works it's been a life-changing project
for us for me particularly which we had
we had a great time doing it I was
working on it with my some of my best
friends and we had a we had a great time
for the visitor going around these super
tree gardens and walking around the
aerial walkways you they see the
structure they see the kind of the
landscape they don't really see our
stuff so we are the invisible architects
in all of this where the invisible hand
behind it all
but Sally I wondered a fantastic job on
this and those of you if you have been
good a bit like show in the evening and
it's it's absolutely brilliant these are
the super trees that have some of the
night time it turns into a kind of
Wonderland but the best part of it all
is this is the client dr. tan and these
are the four of us from architecture
yours truly landscape and structures at
the opening day and we were still
friends which after building a 800
million dollar project it's quite a good
thing actually it's a nice feeling and
we still have friends we're all still
friends and always course it was a much
bigger team that was just a few of us at
the the opening night dinner but these
things are hard to do you know this is
where the what you learn over years is
trusting fellow designers you learn till
you have to earn people's trust you also
need the architects have a degree of
humility to want to listen to what you
want to say what the team have got to
say because it honestly is the most
difficult thing in the world is working
with people who don't want to hear what
you've got to say and think they just
want
what they want to do so not to say that
Wilkinson aren't willful and and have
their architectural agenda of course
they are but and we have our agenda and
we will have our agendas but actually
working together collaboratively is what
made a project like this really sing and
and really that's where we're I think
the most valuable lessons one learns are
about being able to sit listen talk
discuss and all draw together and make a
make a great project and I'm going to
wind it up there on that very positive
note thank you very much
[Applause]
Thank You Patrick I know you are in a
hurry is there time for any question I
should explain it's my wife's birthday
today and I've got my whole family
around the corner in a restaurant
waiting for me cuz I've got the credit
card and it's her 60th so it's a big
it's a big deal so um well it's for her
anyway
I guess but I'm happy to take any
questions if anyone's got any that's one
over there first of all thank you for
the inspiring presentation I'm a student
of sustainable environmental design here
at the a and mostly we are architects as
per our background and we constantly
wonder if we have to make a decision
whether we are going to stay in
architecture or become consultants for
or become environmental consultants and
I just checked your company's website
and I see that you're offering many kind
of services and I wonder why don't you
also do the architecture for this
project how how would it be possible to
integrate these two disciplines even
more and even further as the put in the
project that you were presenting these
these professions went hand by hand yeah
it's a great question I mean we we have
thought about it often and we've kicked
it out as an idea equally as often and
the main reason for it is that if we
start to offer architectural services we
become a competitor so basically the
hand that is feeding us which is the
architectural profession the
architectural world the nature of being
a consultant is that you are a trusted
collaborator with multiple architects so
the projects that we're gonna I was
going to show you next is some work
we've been doing with Heather wit with
big with the people like that as well as
we walk in saneras Foster and partners
with Rogers but we work with you know
the bazaar house office we work the
minute we set up as a tell
a architecture them is the minute the
phone stops ringing from my trusted
friends who say I've got a project for
you and I promise you no literature I
mean every literary every day every week
every day the week we get a call or a
think about a competition or a project
or something like that and they almost
always come from the architectural world
because most architects most architect
most architecture firms believe that
working with external collaborators
actually gets a better result than
having an in-house service and I I kind
of agree with that I've watched a lot of
the big architecture firms struggle with
in-house stainability teams and found it
hard to get the traction within the firm
whereas if you have a project where the
the sustainability team is being it's
from the outside we find it we find we
can get more traction we think I'm
obviously biased but so I worked in a
multi-disc for a while but between
bureau Happold and starting Atelier 10
and i I couldn't get anyone to listen to
me
but when I'm on the outside shouting in
it seems to work if I'm getting if
they're paying me to do something all
the clients pay me to do something you
get their attention if you're just if
you're the in-house resource it can be
more difficult so that's why we don't do
it was a very long answer but that's the
way why we we decide to stay doing what
we do we get frustrated sometimes I
don't deny it but we've kept we've kept
out of it and we have many architects on
our team so it's that's that's the
answer a good quick one if if I may
sorry for so the in the coming few
decades a lot of construction is going
to happen but mostly in the developing
countries so the ways majority of
buildings and carpod we are going to
admit by construction is going to happen
in these areas and how do you think that
this kind of services and environmental
design and sustainability related
information can be made accessible for
these areas of the world
well and we one tries we all try our
best to get this information out and we
have very much open source we don't hide
what we do or or put our arms around in
say it's ours you can't have it what you
what I worry most about is the impact of
bad architecture in the emerging markets
because you know if you take you've only
got to look at cities like in Texas and
the states Phoenix and those places that
places like that where they've just
taken sort of the International style
and plunk these big glass blocks down
and you know enormous lis energy
consuming buildings I just hope I mean
I've seen a lot of buildings going up in
in in India and in Pakistan
less in Pakistan India but you do see
people being quite concerned for to make
buildings that they lose because because
they haven't got the resources I mean
lotta buildings they have to bring the
oil to the building to make it work or
whatever so we asked if we do see to
some extent that lessons being learned
but it is a it's it's down to you know
the big architecture firms you get
brought in to to design these buildings
need to be mindful of some of this stuff
because there's great possibilities to
do better but there's equally great
possibilities to do badly and our
profession hasn't necessarily excelled
itself in doing better over the last
hundred years but we do have the answers
I think your concern is right how do we
how do we get them out there I know we
do what we can but it's not it's not
it's so that's such a huge problem I've
been teaching sustainable design through
university in America for the last 20
years which is about the stupidest thing
you could imagine and fly into America
every year every week or every couple of
weeks to teach sustainability which I
mean I do offset my carbon but obviously
but it is kind of nuts and yet you think
well you're throwing a stove you know
you're constantly doing is throwing a
stone in a pond you're making the
ripples expand the ripples expand and
you hope to have impacts that are beyond
you know your own personal sphere so the
best that you can do is to try and
disseminate that knowledge and I made it
I mean I don't teach an engineering
school I'm an engineer when I teach in
architecture schools because I think you
can have the biggest impact to spread
those
thinking through architecture more than
necessarily through engineering
completely rambling answer but you get
on how'd we get my point thanks I think
there you go yes thank you very much
once again
[Applause]
