good evening everyone I will have a do a
very very quick introduction of our main
speaker today tonight
Jose Lopez he's an architect writer
editor researcher and educator one of
the the major organizer of this long
project called the building which
materialized into the publication which
you can see on the table this evening
he's a drunk professor of architecture
at Columbia University where he leads
Graduate design studios he has presented
his work internationally across Europe
North America in the Middle East and
taught besides Columbia at Cornell
Princeton Rice University in Paris and
University of Granada and he will
explain introduce tell us the story
behind the building as a project and in
the first half an hour or so of the
event and now we will I will then
introduce our special guest tonight who
will speak in turn of the response to
the building that's the project and I
will act as a moderator in the
discussion and the Q&A thereafter so
Jose please
well things they're in for the
introduction thanks manager for the
amazing amazing amazing assistance and
coordination over the past few months
and thank you the rest of participants
for accepting vegetation to today's
events I am so really happy to be back
at the AAA basically where this whole
endeavor started over three years ago so
basically we've we've come full-circle
as you'll see in a minute because
although you see it now as a book as
therein mentioned briefly this is rather
a kind of self initiated multi-year
discursive project which has four phases
so two symbols are organized in 2014 AAA
and Columbia University within six
months seminar Theory seminar Cornell in
2015 and then the actual production and
editing of the book 2016 and then
basically what
become a fourth phase of the project in
town right a series of events around and
the u.s. in the spring and our new room
in the fall to kind of keep fostering
the conversation around the agenda but
also probably more importantly to kind
of see how different audiences in
different geographies react to the
purposes of the project basically the
whole thing is started with a fairly
simple diagnosis during the early stages
of my PhD years ago on the one hand I
was fascinated by the intellectual
expansion that I was being exposed to
but at the same time he became fairly
apparent to me that there wasn't a lot
of discussion on architectural design
within scholarly circles in architecture
so in other words that was saying a lot
of architecture in architecture so I
showed that diagnosis with a number of
colleagues faculty friends everybody
seemed to agree which means there was a
kind of repressed quality to the issue
so let's bring it to a surface let's
gather historians theorists PhD
candidates and architects around that
which is supposed to establish a common
ground for everybody
ie architectural thinking as form of
knowledge with the building as a kind of
proxy for architectural thinking or
architecture and this is something
hopefully we'll get to discuss later the
relationship between the two categories
so basically I've brought here a few
pictures of those events I guess I won't
have to say much about this one
specifically you guys are familiar with
everybody there was the five days before
the opening of the 2014 Banali
second one June everybody was there can
hit discussions and you're like versus
the one with you at Columbia more
conference like you see him Victor
Walter stand out on some of the
roundtables when I Schumi was in the
audience as his bidding was being
presented john Hockman
senior living from apollo to michael
young woman and I putting also a few
images of the events we've done after
publication so this was nearly a year
ago already at the Lisbon Act Petri
tovarisch as we largely in the official
opening in New York mmm
that's MIT see Michael Hayes anomie
Jackie I'm under reserved refuse to go
to Columbia Bernard Stan [ __ ] potato
and rouse University of Chicago buxom Oh
JA macmorrow Jon Keller Penelope Jean La
Cigale Dean Markley millinery lectured
in the summer series of Columbia and
then jump back to Europe it's a
prophetic Kersten Geers cristóvão narrow
way as a college architect in Madrid
stand again immediately on Lisbon and a
Galliano
so yeah University of Malaya just a week
after just last week at at the house if
you the Pushkin gender builder in Edina
whe understand that so we basically
started to put together some graphic
information to kind of have a very a
better understanding of the scope and
impact of the project internationally I
see some of the locations they're also
kind of metric with all the participants
and contributors basically area was to
convene many if not most of the top
thinkers in our field while at the same
time appealing to both history theory
and design practice so this matrix is
incomplete actually this is as of late
August we were at nearly 6040
at the time the evolution the graphic
identity how it changes over basically
across the different posts and posters
is just for a spring in the US all right
so
typically what I do at this point is I
share with you just very briefly a
number of propositions that underpin the
theoretical armature of the project I'm
gonna elaborate this articulate very
briefly right so I don't speak for too
long
first is to say that the building is a
necessary condition for contribution to
knowledge in architecture right so it's
always there it's either in the
foreground in the background or in the
middle but it's always there it's
necessary I'm sure we should write about
many other things many other aspects
many other layers of knowledge many
other agents but all of those will be
relevant to architecture only insofar as
they relate to a building the idea is
that the necessary condition would be
different if the target where urbanism
furniture design installation design art
and so on and so forth for the different
disciplines within design same for the
different different disciplines outside
of design now this distinction between
the different disciplines is important
because only if we're capable of
accounting for the differences between
these different fields comprehensively
enough we'll be able to understand
really the interdisciplinary processes
that can occur between them and their
results and so while every time or most
of the time when we speak about into
signally processes we tend to emphasize
zones of overlap and intersections and
so on here the claim is in a way the
opposite to say that first and foremost
interview signal processes are rooted in
difference now sorry start to the
theoretical turn of the 1960's which
mostly will be familiar with a picture
history and theory started to establish
relationships with non disciplinary
structures and social reasons such as
philosophy linguistics anthropology and
so on through the so called mediatory
concepts concepts that really belonged
to those other fields such a reification
signifier signified
ideology deconstruction rhizome and so
on
now that was the beginning of this
pattern that we see still very dominant
today by which altitude sativa theory
tends to import terms concepts and
theoretical frameworks from other fields
to apply to itself
now in parallel based on just a little
bit later around the mid seventies more
or less the status of the architectural
object and actually here there is
another important discussion between
well basically whether a building is an
object not this also not clear will
become discussed later status of the
initial object became increasingly
unstable and as it appeared in more and
more guises so let's say the building as
the reef occation of power structures
the building as a facilitator of
participatory processes the building as
a construct amenable to mirroring
processes in the natural world the
building asked the locals or
phenomenological content the building as
the building as the winning has
something else now this is not a bad
thing but this diversification is really
an index for the increasing
sophistication of architecture as a
field of knowledge right so that's a
good thing now if you look closely
enough it turns out that the flip side
of it is that the building itself
appears more often as a vehicle as a
medium through which to tap into
concerns that belong to other fields
rather than itself every arm of research
in its own right so it is in this
particular sense that perhaps one of the
most controversial claims of this
project one could say that actually in
the last five decades the building has
been primarily a means and not an end
within a touch of history and theory so
with this project what we attempt is not
to overturn these two tendencies right
that would be undesirable actually as I
said I'm pretty naive but to kind of
balance them out a little bit to balance
out the two tendencies and it is in
relationship to that goal that the two
for agenda for the project established
so on the one hand to discuss what it
means for a building to embody a
historically significant contribution in
terms of a design aspect or a concept
relevant to the reading of buildings in
general so to go from the building as
something else to the meaning itself as
a domain of research
and second a little more ambitiously to
see it become venture ways in which
buildings themselves can induce
theoretical frameworks that could
potentially be applicable outside the
boundary of the disciplines so in other
words for a detectors tendency to import
to co-exist with its capacity to export
in other words the project appeals to
Architecture specificity to kind of
expand its limits and audiences right it
appears to attach the specificity to
expand its limits allowances are
supposed to withdraw in into its own
autonomy right now here's where almost
naturally a distinction between
specificity and autonomy makes itself
felt right so we're going to take a few
steps till we get until we get to this
to that differentiation first to say
that a building is not form right or a
building is not only for at the very
least the building is a combination of
form and program right or you could say
well building is something like a
three-dimensional material organization
made up of a number of elements and
relations between them would typically
call for it has the capacity for housing
a set of human or human related
activities but usually called program
right now in architecture it's
particularly important as opposed to
other fields to distinguish between
discursive and representational
knowledge right so what we mean by
discursive knowledge shall listen this
project is just in its classical sense
no it's it record insane smart more
recent which is the classical sense made
the kind of knowledge that involves
premises narratives judgments inferences
ideas concepts and conclusions as
channeled through thought and suppressed
language channel through thought and
expressed through language
now that is fundamentally different from
representation of knowledge which is the
kind that proceeds through images
drawings are models it's particularly
relevant in the case of architecture it
relates to
the design disciplines in general such
as for example graphic analysis or
illustrations of Neurology architecture
so what you see in the book insofar as
the book is not a building obviously a
book there is a book contribution to the
of the book is supposed to fall in the
domain of discursive knowledge even
though representational knowledge is use
precisely to produce discursive
knowledge now if all of the holes then
we can claim that architectural thinking
is something like the practice of
producing discursive knowledge out of
the analysis conceptualization and
discussion of that's aspects of two
inextricably linked domains that of the
building and that of the design process
leading to the building which as a
subset of architecture thinking we can
refer to us as a collection design
thinking therefore a touch of thinking
is a distinct domain of knowledge within
the map of the humanities and the social
sciences right basically the here the
map of human knowledge whose item is
rich well beyond form and aesthetics and
many of them are relatable to at least
Antalya by Scientology technologies have
almost of logical phenomena of course
I'm not gonna elaborate on that
philosophically but I'll just just throw
it out there in case we can pick it up
later okay so now we get to the point we
can discuss discuss this distinction of
these two terms we get conflated all too
often my view so as many of you well
know autonomy has several branches
several approaches within architecture
well what it does fundamentally is that
it reduces architecture to a kind of
itself nice
rooted in the essence of form which is
meant to create a system out of the
reaction hermetically-sealed when we
hear terms like
eminent or self referential might be to
to to describe the system and this
system is meant to fall outside of time
is supposed to be timeless in some
now worry whyis octet I think and not
autonomous by definition well first and
foremost because a [ __ ] is not foreign
only and so these formal reductions are
certainly a methodological option but
they are not written into architectures
constitutive purposes with just an
option now second yes
the search for timelessness and
universals is again another option but
on the other hand as we know our culture
is bound to its time which triggers the
need for historical knowledge as a
matter of course right so again
universality and timelessness are just
options and third architecture thinking
is not some closed of epidemiological
film if such a thing was possible it is
not possible to begin with but it's
connected to other fields and to
actually culture a large however at the
same time but the thing that is
definitely a specific domain why because
they brought the characteristics of the
outcome yeah the building itself and
those of the process leading up to the
building exhibit a number of particular
areas which made them fundamentally
different from a piece of music a novel
a painting or sculpture let's say for
film regardless of the analogies that we
can establish a pasta Garre between
those two the different mediums right so
in short one could say that autonomy is
grounded in specificity or specificity
does not imply autonomy
[Music]
therefore capitalizing on this
combination of specificity and non
autonomy curtain is perhaps the most
important trace of the whole endeavor
aims to produce a kind of knowledge
which is at once
architectural specific i yet
generalizable potentially specific and
generalize were grounded in the
specificities of architectural thinking
and yet potentially applicable outside
the boundaries of the visible okay so
I'm going to say just quickly a few
words about the structure of the book
basically there are 30 case studies and
the six categorize the six labels under
which this case studies for were chosen
deliberately for being at once directly
relevant to architecture but then at the
same time elemental enough as to be
potentially germane to fields outside of
outside of architecture so basically
authors were asked to picked to pick a
building built or design not necessarily
built could be designed within the last
25 years through which they could tackle
the Teufel agenda I explained earlier so
that concept is the main section of the
book then there is a second section
where you'll find five longer critical
essays addressing this question of
architectural thinking as a form of
knowledge partly through reflections on
the rest of materials in the book yeah
so the conversation is kept going within
the pages of the book are supposed to
just frozen them and then third five
short essays which address this renewed
interest in the building in relation to
the current state of architecture
education right so the last section of
the presentation what I do in a
different tone that was that kind of
more a theoretical approach now what I
do is I basically share with you five
examples from the book that speak to the
first part of the agenda and then
another five examples to speak to a
second part of a team so in terms of
buildings which embody historic
significant contribution in terms of a
design aspect or a concept relevant to
the reading or business in general this
Penelope Dean writing about the any
house and she says a number of
interesting things I mean just to keep
it showing on just say one which to me
is a more interesting one she says that
while early twentieth century works of
architecture discarded the room they
eliminate the idea of room through
through the planet for the the
plan just to reinstate the wall as a
special divider in new Isis here what
happens is the opposite nice Oh Fujimoto
does according to her is that she keeps
the principle of the room and then
eliminate the vertical divider so in her
view what would you motorized it that
she replaces the vertical divider with
the separation the offset between the
different platforms with a nominal
thickness of the actual edge of the
platform which is equivalent to saying
that he's flipping architecture he's
flipping modern architecture sideways -
it's like turning it 90 degrees so what
she does is that she places the building
in a certain lineage and then tries to
illustrate the way in which this
building add something to that lineage
right out for something new to it now by
just saying it right but - but by
actually arguing but by illustrating
cousin this with a beautiful essay on
some do still use truffle house he says
something to the effect that this means
not design but actually what happens
that what's prescribed its its
construction process so for those of you
who are not familiar with the building
what happens there is that dig up a hole
in the earth fill it up with hey pour
concrete around it remove the earth have
a calve eat away at the hey at the
stacks of hay and that way you get the
interior space and actually I just
realized today after so many
presentations that the CAF grows as it
keeps eating hay so anyway I mean
there's always a risk of not knowing
actually how the thing is gonna look
like when you use reinforced concrete
right but what you do is you mean
through the elaborate use of the cast
you try to minimize that risk well here
the opposite is decayed there is a kind
of intentional roughness to a technique
which fits further the sort of
unpredictability of the result so in
other words the cast is used to
introduce uncertainty as opposed to
certain right that that's where the
contribution lies Yamamoto riding on
NBATV sexpot mm at a billion she says
this building enacts a modification to
the
so call 1909 theorem has identified by
REM koolhaas in the leaders New York so
that's the image on the right where you
see the suburban house plot being
supporting this massive steel structure
she says that in the the latest version
of the diagram the semantic and
environmental autonomy of each floor is
kept
I mean it's actually prioritized whereas
what happens here is that those
separations are reconsiders about the
whole building functions as an
ecological mechanism so the surpluses
and excesses of 1 & 4 under are gonna be
utilized on the next floor in terms of
air heat light water and so on so so
basically according to him the pavilions
open structure materializes a principle
of interconnection through separation
and integration interconnection through
separation interaction thereby adding a
further step to the lineage which one
could whose origin become place around
the 1909 theorem this one is an easy
ones on Antonio Cortez and writing on
senators and I immediate X they say
obvious case of free playing as well but
there is an independence between plates
skin and tubes and the contribution here
relative to the Amazon domino lies in
the fact that the tools are replaced by
latitudes actually the original columns
are replaced by these clusters of tubes
which free up space inside to be able to
house the vertical the vertical flows
right suit an addition and evolution to
the Amazon domino in the eyes of 110
Cortes and then lastly map for sure from
a high-riding on Roxana
he sees the contribution here around
what he calls the management of
threshold right so basically the walls
that and normally tend to separate the
different soundscapes within a building
here replaced by 18 arches in pretension
a floating squid so you can actually
build it on a carpet that create inside
these long topographical thresholds
right these artificial horizons which
create these low variations from places
for verbal exchange to places of total
quietness this number of other things or
symptoms of light and in terms
function for example the fact that the
topography subsumes the function of a
seat and it's basically used at the
giant so far right so this idea of the
management of threshold thresholds
applies energetically distributionally
and in terms of the actual performance
EVD of the building okay and then five
examples speak to a second part of the
agenda obviously more ambitious but you
see hint of it at least at least hints
of it so according from Stalin who
writes about Messi intense music
building in Leon
he says literally or the protest
accomplishment is not so much to resolve
contradictions or to make didactic
statements as it is to suspend and
dissolve apparent opposition's so if you
extract that statement I chucked it away
from the building then you realize that
actually it's easily applicable to
realities problems and discursive
elements that belong in other fields it
is abstract enough specially if
developed into something more of a
theoretical framework that could be
applicable to a number of other things
outside of architecture similarly here
it in Santiago writing about the typical
suburban American house is one of the
most appreciated examples in the book
for reasons that are I think interesting
but I'm not going to elaborate on here
basically he is that this type of house
embodies a novel way of thinking how a
set of things internally rooms but also
information people objects can be linked
systematized organized the resulting
space he calls it super urban and he are
used basically challenges received ways
of conceiving of boundaries and
connections may so effectively what he
saying is that into into an
organizational model that he's
identified in a building you can
actually read an epidemiological wonder
is to say a way of understanding the
reality beyond the example of the
specific building I mean the research
comes up with this very attractive
phrase concept in my view architectural
sameness how can we talk about that and
she says I think there has been a
search of interest in academia according
to her in terms around questions of
derivatives replicas copies allusions
and so on
and we lack a theoretical framework in
relation to which distinguish these
related but non identical changed she
says to me the most important thing
though is that this idea of sameness
integer sameness could be applicable to
fields like photography or history or
even metaphysics where the problem of
identity and difference has occupied
philosophers for millennia is that
expandable Kea or something the audience
riding on homage to by Renaissance my
interpolation of her beautiful pieces
that she writes about what she calls
iconology are supposed to icon ect she
sees this building as a kind of absolute
exterior that is capable of observing
and in turn projecting any meaning I'm
serving and projecting any meaning which
means that this idea of a kamala tree
would be the idea that a building's very
condition as an icon can be determined
by is it's unstable semantic identity
unstable semantic identity so she says
that in 21st century late capitalism
because of the obsession with images and
the rapid proliferation basically all of
this dynamic generates this instability
in terms of the meaning of things and
within that realm the Alma project can
be seen as a kind of epitome of that and
then lastly underwent amuse a philosophy
that that's why there's no picture there
he distinguishes between building in
regular letter and building in italic
says building and regular letter is
something like the worse of relations
that precede the conception and
construction of the building still
you're an interior to the building
versus building an italic which would be
the internal networks of relations that
are actually just disciplinary and
embodied in the in the building itself
so he argues that the latter the
Disciplinary one
should be thought of in terms of the
possibility of other in the global other
in the global which is what he calls
countermission right
destabilizing reconfiguring with
distributing or reconceptualizing the
preceding network networks of relations
that exist prior to the existence and
the conception of the building okay and
just to end I typically show this slide
with some 60 concepts pertaining to
virtual thinking it turns out the viewer
zoom into this field of knowledge it
gets a becomes really sophisticated
neurons it cannot be reduced to
something generic like spatial thinking
often in a meeting where there are
people from political science from art
history and so on the person
architecture gets labeled as somebody
who understands this spatial thinking is
much more than that it's much more
nuanced and it's so complex that
actually one could envision picking out
two or three of these concepts starting
to study the relations between them with
a view to generate a theoretical
framework even more ambitiously a system
of thought that could become
meaningfully relevant that could
meaningfully alter fills outside of
architecture so this is the double
expansion that this project is trying to
accomplish so an implosion an expansion
from within as in zooming in with a
microscope and then expansion into out
from architecture to the outside so
these are tend to grow architectures
dispersive capacities from within in
order to ignite its potential to expand
its name its analysis is the way in
which we believe that we could attempt
to bridge these fears of history theory
on the one hand and on the other hand
studio culture and practice and that for
that to be successful at all the current
potential history theory project would
have to be expanded as opposed to
contract but it sounds like focusing on
the building is a kind of narrowing
but as I've been trying to argue and as
there Epstein Jones and Philips prong
identify in the book actually hit the
opposite it will have to be expanded in
terms of how its meaning and its role
it's understood within the general map
of human knowledge right even
potentially beyond the humanities and
the social sciences to domain such as
computer science or the culture of
Silicon Valley why not all right thank
you that was a very thorough
introduction to the discussion that's
going to ensue tonight and I'd like to
introduce our three special invited
speakers and who hasn't been part of the
project so far but they act as an
external critic and offering their
contribution and their take not at all
the less important then then that's a
the written component of this project
firstly there's Murray Fraser as
professor of architecture and global
culture and vice dean of research at the
Bartlett School of Architecture UCL he
has published extensively on design
research architecture history and theory
urbanism post colonialism and cultural
studies currently he is general editor
for the 21st edition of Sir banister
Fletcher's global history of
architecture which will come next year
there is douglas spencer the author of
the architecture of neoliberalism which
came out last year and as a critical
theorist of architecture he has
contributed to numerous journal
including the journal of architecture
radical philosophy architecture design a
flux a files new geographies and volume
he teaches at AAA and the university of
westminster thirdly we have Beth Hughes
the head of architecture at the Royal
College of Art education in Australia
she worked for several practices before
joining office for metropolitan
architecture oma in 2004 as an associate
she has she was responsible for projects
in London Latvia and the Middle East in
2011 Beth established her own practice
in Athens Greece and now based in London
her work has been extensively published
in aboard a and several international
competitions and and we do have our
current interim director Samantha
Harding them
who will she apologies from her that she
missed the first heart because of a
meeting but she will join us for the Q&A
session later on and can we invite the
speaker to they'll take turn to offer
their response to the project more
akley's good evening everybody
thank you very much for inviting me here
I've just have been asked to respond to
the book so basically have read the book
and I said first off and then so I
thought I'd do is just just talk about
my response you know what I have a see
the book house in the project etc I
won't go into any great detail I don't
really meant to speak for a few minutes
I mean the first thing to say is to
praised you know say for doing such an
amazing job or a feat editing a lot of
people myself I know but I know what an
achievement today is even to get this
thing done
there's obviously got lots and lots of
content a very diverse range of speakers
etc so writers and in order a lot of
very interesting ideas okay that's
that's the first sentence okay and
presume I'm not here just to do
back-patting I'm sure that's not the the
purpose of this exercise so I'm gonna
try and offer a critique from my point
of view and please take these as
suggestions you might disagree
completely
but anyway about something Lou said one
was and then if I was kind of doing this
kind of imaginary book review I guess
that's kind of what I'm about to do in
there okay so the first boutique so this
is couple critiques the first one of the
framework just the way MERS has been set
up etc the way those
and a conceptual idea and then secondly
kind of you know kind of content what
people have written about in the book so
the first one yes and I think possibly
Jose you're a bit too obsessed with us
East Coast academia it's a very
particular culture not one that all of
us agree with you know so I guess
slightly worried there's a stereotyping
of this as somehow there's some kind of
norm some kind of given condition and
thinking about architecture a patient
doctor don't think it is it strikes me
the one of the things that East Coast
academia has done really other than the
impact of neoliberalism over the last
two or three decades as basically is to
work as hard as possible to deny any
material conditions for our potential
whatsoever I mean I think this is
somehow there's been the subconscious
intellectual task assess of retreat from
engagement maybe and instead this
business of the creation of architecture
is almost exclusively an intellectual
activity and I think this is this is a
problem actually your book is an attempt
to to try and bribe me to do this to
grasp for this by the horns etcetera but
them and I think you're a hero for what
we're trying to do this and maybe maybe
you will do this or maybe this is a
beached whale and things are much worse
than we think so so there's that point
there is this if you think about it I
mean I don't recognize quite a lot
distribution I didn't particularly
recognize if you know what I mean you
could compare I would say perhaps I'm a
the beaches Carla Mena who sees
architecture in terms of media in terms
of photographs et cetera analyzes in
terms of that and to compare them with
somebody like Adrian forty it was a my
fan tour as well you know who's been
writing material architectural history
in dealing with buildings and dealing
with these kind of complex readings of
buildings while focusing on the
buildings as well so I was just to put
the put in the big one here there's I
don't think this is an essentially the
condition of the normative condition
that gets like worried you know that we
frame our arguments around around that
so that's my one might worry about that
etc the other thing you destroyed me is
that there's possibly another condition
which is too easily to accept this
somehow there's a conceptual distinction
between design
in weather in academia practice and also
with the way in which we can think about
the subject and we constructed in the
architects or history in theory again I
think this is pretty well in France as
far as I can see in a lot of these
course I could academic skills in
America and also in Europe as well I
think there is a slight tendency to
divide these up etc and I also sensed
there was a sense in your book you're
trying to put these somehow bring these
together again to reunite them as well
but again I don't think that's
necessarily a given condition and this
blight everywhere and I'm going to say
something a bit at the end about why I
would call design research in
architecture so anyway that's my that's
my two volumes but they can the overall
framing of it in terms of the contents I
mean there's obviously a lot of very
bright people writing very interesting
stuff but I think this there's a
particular view of architecture and
there was I've got a slight worry with
it I think this is absence about any
discussion about this idea of time of
duration of view so the sort of of a sub
depth of building and I think somewhere
in them in the thing Philibert strong is
sober side to you know this is a bit
light that's trying to 14 be an ally
you know exhibition by bike illness etc
and you say yes yes acceptable and he
said he thought the expression had got
almost universal plaudits he said
someone who is I say everybody as well
my experience is completely opposite I
mean I think most of the Findo I
actually thought was terrible
I was shockingly bad it probably was the
worst Batali's and so I was missing that
nothing it was this I in the Billy
Caesar so integrated the way mister so
elements and all that kind of
fundamental stuff steam just a break
with this notion of buildings disease
having these deeper histories of having
time and then use some duration built
into the met cetera and how the molded
have appropriated etc so not just about
design so I got the feeling that this is
a missing thing there are most of money
of your categories there's nothing
really about this the depth of time etc
and I think then that sense the
thicknesses say yes I worry about this X
no for candidate I think the submit of
the time traveler I so wish I might be
the last standing missus enlightenment
maybe there's some how these are sort of
a new things etc it seems to deny this
are layering you write him a building
maybe disconnects it from you know from
what it's been but it actually is it
disconnects us from other buildings as
well so I think this so also a kind of
concern there really there
maybe there's kind of another aspect of
the building of the others kind of wider
meaning there's been sort of them left
out from that so anyway so I stood with
my mind my starter's 4:10 I just maybe
go through a few of the just just
illustrating just cool I'm not going to
as it is a percentage I'm sort of
creating this new global history of
architecture deep issue access so now I
just not have this kind of flat ontology
of history it's really to look at
discontinuities changes breaks and
histories disruptions etc but
nevertheless there's something about you
know looking at material growth cost
culturally and also in deeper history
that makes you very kind of think things
think things of fresh so I'm not gonna
go into any great therapist we have a
good time but this is the kinda I think
this is an amazing piece this is a
sculpture of a Sumerian lately really
koga data from roughly about 2200 BC
it's on his lap he commissioned the
building this is a plan of the building
that he commissioned this is 4,200 years
old or so something like that as well
you know kind of stuff this was the
point at which you know and it's
probably the youngest drawings the
probably where are other drawings or
other representations abstractions of
buildings before but you know this idea
they know this would be going on for a
very long time this idea of the removal
of the building problem is killing so
again I think we've been we'd get bits
obsessed with her maybe we've more
recent history probably this is the
myths of the Renaissance and all the
other things that kind of you know get
propagated in our history as well so I
think that we were thinking about that
forward a long way this is the painting
start up the building of the Great
Mosque in Samarkand this is early 15th
century this was recorded for the again
the Brotherhood Commission this thing
this was to celebrate his great
contribution cetera and this essentially
just the drawing of the building site
it's about the social organization of
Labor orchestration there as well and
it's about power it's about all the
other things that kind of come into
buildings this is not the first
representation of a building site there
was lots of other ones as well but this
idea of seen the labor process is the
kind of bother why the part of history
again I think goes back a long way and
no no this also becomes a social record
the elephant in there don't know the
bottom corner this is there because it
was so unusual keep on seeing elephants
before this was part of the
USP of the building that they've bought
materials from elephant from India as
part of the Tiberi contest in that
country so so there's these kind of
other kind of things then you think well
maybe that's some kind of old building
as well but I think actually this idea
of a building somehow builds this kind
of some deeper history also into its
kind of condition is probably well
represented by this building here as
you'll probably recognize they'll follow
money by an Hamburg buy house on to
Marina cetera so fine well so
fascinating new new building here partly
obviously because this idea of the kind
of returns to the notion of the
palimpsest of this thing of the there's
been over layered in time this old
building you get built on Moschino
reminiscent of the kind of the older
kind of forms constructions of the
mythical Tower of Babel the tower at
sermon on key in Babel and Babylon etc
on this idea of this kind of building
mistake and overlaid on each other put
on each other's superimposition of
histories and meanings on top of each
other and in place and again you can see
this idea here this idea of the the
layering of building you've got the big
space of the stairway to heaven them
there you've got the kind of got the
precious temple at the top versus you
now your opera house etc so this is kind
of Sighs of other reading of the
building but it also you can read into
this kind more recent concerns as a cool
housing counselor of congestion a
certain logic of production of today etc
and so it starts with these buildings
this is sort of a suburbs probably a
sort of deeper history that needs to be
explored and really perhaps and so much
in the building and they obviously
they're building now is also as a
commodity it's a piece of capitalism
it's it is part of the sales pitch for a
ram for Hamburg etc so has this very
contemporary economic use as well but
also mixed in with these kind of other
kind of value systems as well so I think
there's a kind of a possibly you know a
wider deeper kind of way of thinking
about this idea of returning in the
building and I think I've just finished
off by just saying you know that I think
probably about the interesting things I
mean I'm trying to promote these theses
idea of design research on architecture
know that there is a kind of a form of
knowledge production and creativity said
that comes through opportunity through
the making of project so the kind of
projects
and this seems in with other things like
thinking about our potential history and
theory and other kind of intellectual
ideas and this is actually and continuum
and we should be looking at ways that
sort of entwining these things there I
was I put this I've almost I'm intrigued
I'm the first time I've ever come across
the time design research was in this
bubai Eliel Saarinen father of arrow in
1943 when he actually uses the word
design research and tries to talk about
this conceptual way of how you how you
have an octave designs a city and how
you operate etc which involves both our
thinking about the projected city coming
back and how it might be unpeeled and
also their projects you need to design
at the same time to create that city etc
and this of dialectic between the kind
of forward and backward approaches to
design sort and the thing and this is
also based on the kind of a deep sort of
a deeper understanding of kind of the
understanding of the history and theory
etc also very much integrative this idea
of proposition etc I think there were
projects I there was a looking at
building the building and the much mores
of responsive creative way this is the
process by to my colleagues Neal
McLaughlin in your manual ocular this
was that the last be an ally there are
varying Kaluza myself it takes one of
neil McLaughlin's buildings person
outside most center in Dublin which you
can see the plan there and tries to get
a sort of a way of thinking about this
building about memories this building
about what happens with the loss of
memory of the building etcetera Birds
both relates to the form of the of the
space and the way in which the building
is designed but also reuses as a as a
research tool really to think about the
kind of processes of finding ones way
around architecture how architecture can
respond to this this is one of the kind
of time lapse drawings that comes out of
this as well and so I think personally I
would say that sorry you were either the
idea of somehow injecting the building
back into architectural history and
theory this might be kind of one one way
of reading this book and then I think
this actually this actually cost me more
of a fluid more member ways of that of
bringing in this thinking of buildings
and designer things that hold together
nothing it the answer lies somewhere in
design research
so first of all thanks for inviting me
I'm really pleased to be here at the a
this evening so by way of introduction
I'd like to preface everything by saying
that I have a sympathy for the project
I'm intrigued by the possibility of what
this project suggests and applaud the
ambition of returning the object of
architecture the building to the center
of the conversation as it has been
conspicuously absent especially from
places like Studio for quite some time
as a protect practitioner all of my
thinking around architecture is mentally
filtered through the lens design and
therefore in essence a building a
projection of a building that will
formulate my ambitions and intent are
the way in which I formulate all of the
work that I do but I say these were the
very large caveat around the definition
of the term building this is also
something that my students constantly
resist and I think mark Cousins in his
afterward alludes to this challenge the
final rush to suddenly make a building
somewhere out of kind of many months of
research and so I recognized the kind of
anxiety but Jose is trying to bring to
the foreground so I I advocate that it
is critical to understand that processes
of research which is where I think I I
fundamentally agree with you as design
as research the process of testing and
exploring are the ultimate agency of
architecture and I and I see that this
is where this is the building is the
place in which all these forces come
together and that that sometimes that
has been lost in the translation so I
would very much advocate that coming to
the foreground but as I sort of immersed
myself rather intensively this past week
in the writings of the building and
watch some of the conference in Colombia
I sense if that's not what has happened
or that that that that opportunity has
not come into the foreground so that
materialization of designers research
has being potentially one of the
conversations that which the building
would frame is not yet tangible so I
wanted to sort of posit three potential
questions or issues that I see with that
with the formulation formulation of the
document I guess
to start a discussion around them so the
first problem I see is around definition
so I think the book presents a very
compelling survey of buildings they're
nice buildings I like these buildings
I'm interested by these buildings but I
would suggest it portrays a very narrow
view of what architecture is and what
architectural practice is today and what
I would like to consider as relevant to
my field or discipline and I think that
if we want to create a new body of
knowledge then our definition of what
that that object that we are that we are
discussing shooting should encapsulate
all of those discussions that we want to
have so rather than understanding a
building as a structure with the roof
and walls and such as a house or a
factory I find the term an inadequate
and reductive for the work that I'm
interested in the work that we're doing
at the school and that the conversations
that I would like to have around
architectural practice so I think that
comes up in the conference and I think
Michael Meredith suggests that we could
talk about the body of work potentially
or architecture or the project I
realized the term project is somehow
contentious in some cases but I think
the term the building and the fact that
the book specifically restructure to
singular buildings is quite restrictive
in it in it some framing of the
discipline so I think a mall starts to
talk about a project Amala draya's Dean
of Columbia that starts to talk about
some of the limitations that I find in
this definition of building so she
brings forward this student project by
namju kim at MIT called the storehouse
for earth and I think what's really
beautiful about this project and that
this is what I'm our state's about it so
I'm sort of paraphrasing but it defines
a new horizon of what architecture could
be so this kind of this it's a it's a
roof for a glacier which I find quite
poetic in itself but also she talks
about the project in in the long
tradition of building that serves as
infrastructure architecture and
infrastructure working together and the
the project also talks about a
geological register a timepiece it's
also not for human occupation even
though it takes on quite distinct
building form but it starts to address
questions that I think are funded
- to our practice today and that
architects should be engaged with and
what I'm concerned about is in the
limitation of what a building is defined
as we limit those questions that we let
allow ourselves to engage with so she
refers to as a sort of expanded field
what the discipline should be or could
be similar to she equates at also these
plastic balls that are put on top of the
reservoirs in California and potential
projects or spaces of intervention for
architecture and I think that this is
something that we're also exploring at
the at the Royal College of Art so again
sorry this is the idea about
architecture and infrastructure being a
project it's a long ongoing tradition
it's not something new but what does
that new infrastructure look like and so
I'm bringing forward this two projects
from the Royal College of Art of two
students of ours last year Isabelle was
looking at palm oil plantations in
Borneo her project worked at this kind
of massively territorial scale but then
it also came down to the scale of soap
and how she might use soap to infiltrate
into these these palm oil plantation
fields I think these questions that she
was asking that raised also questions
about labour neoliberalism in these
contexts ecology they are questions of
our discipline and they must appear in
our conversation and so if we limit the
the fields to the building and the
traditional understanding of that term I
think we limit the conversations that we
enable ourselves to have similarly this
project by Toby was looking at coffee
foot plantations in Vietnam and how
water collection could become and new
forms of irrigation could become a kind
of architectural project in themselves
but what was beautiful about these both
of these projects is that not only did
they discuss a kind of very
technological concern that would be
maybe traditionally understood as part
of an infrastructural project they
discuss the power of these things the
agency of these projects to have agency
within human relations and I think
that's where there's a fundamental
question for me um I think if we were to
go back in time I think if you look at
the work of people like RQ zoom and
super studio they dabbled it very
peripheral definitions of the discipline
I would suggest but if you understand it
as a body of work it then becomes a
question that I would understand their
question about building or a building
about a question about architecture that
is that is very important and very
fundamental and that that we must
examine in our in our work so my second
conversation is around method and I
slightly forgotten the slide that I have
coming up yes okay all right so my
question about method is it is a nice
survey of buildings but my concern is
again this thing that it's limited to
discussion only around the building
itself in tectonics forms and I don't I
don't think that that's I mean it might
be a function of the challenge that was
put in front of the contributors that
they did not necessarily know in this
first pass at doing this how to how to
tackle these things and people do
discuss social relationships etc but I
think in the discussion of the buildings
I would like to understand a far greater
relationship back to those
socio-political questions that that are
essential to me in the practice of
architecture and I think that's where
the agency of architecture lies its
ability to construct a subject and for
me the subject had become the object and
that was highly problematic in my
understanding of the reading of the work
so I think the the contributions unfold
a kind of experience and and and
discussion around a building but in the
majority they fall short of unpacking
the many layers that go into
constructing the these buildings so and
I don't mean layers of construction
technology I mean the process of
constructing these buildings as as a
project and the way in which the
argument is communicated through that
process I also thought them as a kind of
I found it very hard to read the
buildings in relationship to one another
so there is an assembly of buildings but
I I was unable to read a body of
knowledge through that process so each
individual project read nicely I was
able to extract an understanding of that
project but I found it very difficult to
to put them in relationship to one
another to to to construct an
epidemiology if that's what the ambition
of this project is I think I
slightly different reading Avenger
Benjamin's contribution to to the book
which which is interesting in itself I
think um I read that he he problematizes
this this situation that I'm that I'm
experiencing that the discussion around
the building ends up being around the
artifact alone without consideration of
the network that is essential to reading
those artifacts in themselves so for me
I can't understand this work by Aguila
variks if I don't understand this work
by Aguila variks and I don't understand
this building in Athens and then I don't
understand this reading of Athens in
itself and I think that that's
absolutely fundamental to to any project
that I would work on and also in terms
of understanding the power of
relationships that architecture has the
power the capacity to establish is the
relationship of the artifact to the
network and to meander Benjamin is
suggesting that there's a immense power
and potential in being able to do that
in reading it through the building but
that's not necessarily happening and so
that the the call is for a kind of a
greater challenge around that I guess
especially in relationship to the the
idea of place which I also thought was
strangely absent from the discussion and
the representation of the Lord the
buildings for me to understand a project
and it's agency as a piece of
architecture I always have to understand
the place and the relationship of that
of that form or that change in that body
of knowledge in the way that it relates
to that context um so I guess my feeling
was there was a sort of limitation in
the scope because the identification had
been around the word the building which
meant that people kept talking only
about the building which diminish the
capacity to talk about what I think he's
most essential in architecture which is
the creation of the subject and so
finally and I don't have any slides of
this apart from the word if the ambition
is the ability of us to take
architectural thinking and export it to
other disciplines I think the the
previous two issues are fundamental to
resolve because we have to be able to
put these things in context to one
another and have a discussion across all
of them to be able to export that does
someone else and for me the the power
relationships that architecture has the
capacity to establish must be cut be
part of that conversation in order to
have that that capacity to move outwards
and I found that it was quite limited in
the way that those things were discussed
so I find it hard to relate to other
disciplines
if those discussions haven't happened
internally so on the whole I'm I'm
excited by the potential I'm not
convinced that it quite got there
everything that Marie said at the start
sothanks wrote no genuinely thanks very
much for the invitation to come and
speak about this book and I suppose that
you won't be surprised that I'm also
gonna have some kind of critical
commentary and watching what you have to
say I mean certainly in the world YC is
the kind of denigration of mediation
that the presentation the mediation is
the kind of problem that architecture
suffers under I can only take that as a
kind of challenge and a friendly
challenge so that that's what I'm going
to present and I'm going to focus
actually just on on your introduction to
this so in your introduction called
introduction the building's discursive
building you remark that the way in
which you remark on the way in which the
architectural object has come to be
displaced by high theory so the
production of knowledge Jose says mainly
in the most advanced segments of
architecture but also elsewhere started
to undergo a major transformation in the
1960s this transformation occurred in an
opening up to various other systems of
thought such as semiotic s--
psychoanalysis Marxism and structuralism
and a consequent rewriting of some of
those systems key concepts into
architectures ideal Act this complaint
and it would be difficult to read it as
otherwise in the context of this
introductory essay as well as that the
broader project that it serves to
introduce recalls to me at least a
similar complaints against theory in
architecture that have been articulated
in various forms since the mid 90s as I
note in the architecture of
neoliberalism and in some sense drawing
on some of the sources you use as well
as his Hayes's anthology from the 60s to
the mid 90s theories presence within
architecture comes to be seen as
troubling precisely because it posits
all manner of unforeseen connections
between architecture on the one hand and
language the unconscious capital class
and gender on the other since these
latter concerns are to be found in ex
trick ibly lodged within the discourse
and practice of architecture the
discipline is forced to acknowledge the
presence of foreign elements foreign
elements each of which bears its own
burden of unresolved contradictions
foreign elements that have been residing
all along in the very places where
architecture might have thought itself
able to locate its own autonomy and
rather than Umbridge rather than
enriched by such encounters architecture
like theory itself in its relentless
work of translation correlation and
displacement finds its foundations
unsettled it finds its foundations
unsettled and according to some its
mission compromised so Michael speaks
writes the theory attached itself to
architecture at this time before driving
it towards a resolutely negative
condition architecture fine
itself then not the master of its own
house
what follows from this discovery mainly
from that most advanced segment of
architectural discourse and culture to
which Jose refers are a series of
efforts in which it attempts to
extricate itself from its apparently
inextricable condition of being mediated
there is the pragmatic turn represented
by Michael speaks my favorite one of my
favorite quotes to use here theory was
interesting but now we have work there's
the post critical turn associated with
samel and whiting there is the turn from
the negativities of critical theory to
the affirmations of Deleuze and Guattari
the term from meaning to effect the turn
in Schumacher especially from Marx to
managerialism what I have to say though
what Jose appears to want to effect in
the project of the building is a kind of
reversal of camps Copernican turn for
architecture I don't know if it's
something that's occurred to you you
might family disagree so I'm just
offering you my reading here so what I
mean by this is that the architectural
object that has been displaced from its
proper position at the center of things
that has suffered at the hands or minds
of high theory is restored to its
rightful position as the locus and
source of all architectural thinking
right this might be a surprise and this
is very English way of putting it as
opposed to Beth's more straightforward
expression of sympathy to the project
actually I'm not entirely unsympathetic
to this project or at least to its
motivation unlike earlier turns against
the possession of architecture by theory
Jose's projects is not explicitly or in
fact at all against thinking and not
explicitly against theory but is rather
concerned with
how these are conducted and if the place
of the architectural object within them
his complaint as I understand it against
the deployment of theory is that it is
in his words unidirectional that it
supplies ready-made concepts which are
subsequently applied to Architecture
simply to prove the validity of the
theory architecture in such practices
serves simply as an instrument an
illustration or example through which
Theory reasserts what it claims to know
already and this that that kind of
practice which has been criticized here
this is hardly a critical practice of
theory even if it appears wrongly to be
a practice of critical theory the same
might be said something like the same
might be said of the architectural uses
of theory deconstructivism or de leurs
ism where architecture has been employed
as little more than a vehicle through
which the architects might illustrate
his or her philosophical credentials and
their allegiance to said theory in the
attempt to effect this anti Copernican
turn for architecture so that's one that
restores the architectural object to its
proper place at the center of
architectural thinking however one might
discern the emergence of a problem of a
different sort in attempting to escape
conceptual mediation architecture
nevertheless burdens itself with another
concept through which it thinks namely
that of the metaphysical conception of
the architectural object in seeking to
establish that which is in Jose's words
irreducibly architectural and in the
proposition that architecture is best
thought of outside of or at least prior
to any mediating concepts the political
the economic the social the semi
ethic etc the danger is the danger is
that knowledge and thought are imputed
to the architectural objects itself in
and of itself the one starts to talk as
one you know these the terms that jumped
out to me the one starts to talk about
the ontological primacy of the building
or to reference a spring again of what
buildings know or of the building as a
form of knowledge in its own right now
to invoke marks one of those conceptual
mediations of course in trying to make
architecture stand on its own two feet
one courts the danger of also allowing
it to stand on its head so that it
starts to spout grotesque ideas but
against this personification of the
object which is for Hegel and Marx and
everyone who follows on from them that's
the the mark of fetishization critical
theory as practiced within the Frankfurt
School endeavored to show how the object
mediates and is mediated in turn by the
larger totality in which it exists
mediation then need not be
unidirectional it need not take the form
of the application of theory to
architectural objects so in the critical
theory of the Frankfurt School in fact
the proposition is precisely that
mediation always goes both ways that it
isn't a unidirectional process it's a
dialectical process rather so the basis
of Adorno's critique of identity
thinking after all of his complaint
against the way sorry is his complaint
against the way in which the concrete
example is subsumed under the ready-made
concept to which it is made to appear
identical so I think that there's
something already in there within the
Frankfurt School and their methodology
that might be drawn on to affect this
change you're you're looking to achieve
here
so for Adorno and others of the
Frankfurt School theory is understood as
itself necessarily changed through its
encounter with its objects what they
called the labor of the concept like all
forms of labor is itself critically
reflected upon so as to reveal and
reflect upon it's working so the the
obvious examples of what I'm talking
about here the most obvious example is
also Benjamin and is our cage project
but there are lesser known but equally
significant examples the one time that
Arduino engages with architecture where
he's writing about functionalism and and
loes or craft our secret Cracow is
writing on hotel lobbies or cinemas and
these these undertakings I show the
possibilities of thinking through and
with architecture of understanding
architecture including the thought of
architecture as mediated by the social
the economic the cultural the political
etc and at the same time they show how
architecture recursively acts upon
critical thought enabling it to adapt
sharpen and refine its capacities so for
example when Benjamin is is you know is
his work in the arcades project is not
it's not the application of a theory
it's the thinking through of a
particular condition and its
possibilities through architecture and
through thinking through the experience
of that so I could edge that we not
abandon mediation more importantly this
is impossible to do anyway and it's what
we have to work with
and work through and work on thank you
[Applause]
this actual transition the knees with
with a small kind of was something that
everyone probably must have heard by now
so the recent announcement of the RIBA
Stirling Prize 2017 was awarded to
hasting Pierre and and the kind of
widespread reaction to to the decision
was that there is clearly a lack of
building and this was heavily discussed
in popular media on the radio and
newspaper by specialists the archetypal
so by people who are non specialists and
and this kind of reaction really
intrigued me in the sense that so what
Jose has done with this project and
presenting it in a critical sense and
now we're still in a conundrum where a
building which clearly the field had no
problem with but it's still being
questioned is and it has the building in
its definition and it is presence being
reduced to narrow down to something
which even the public can challenge the
specialists in that sense and and also
[Music]
the the architecture power does achieve
through them and what the Alex the Reich
so the DRM and the practice some
representing the practice he explained
in an interview to say that there's a
pleasure of space that comes with the
lack of material presence so that was in
the architectural statement explained in
public but yet this architectural power
achieves through the most subdued sense
of material gesture should be questions
is something which some perhaps can
raise some issues to be discussed here
and I'd like to there's some really
brilliant responses from the the three
speakers and what I like to suggest is
perhaps two directions to speaking to
their issues one is there seems to be a
question of if
building can actually be verbalized or
be textual eyes in a sense that we can
actually talk about the building in
words and also this search or the
necessity of a new vocabulary which was
they were suggesting through its around
his final slides so whereas such a
sameness subjectivity boredom which
didn't come from architectural field per
se as he suggested is something which we
should not use to discuss the building
and so the the question of terms and
definition is bound together and perhaps
there are some is let's say it's polemic
of that this can remedy the assumed
division between theory and practice or
the division between design process and
history and theory you know either
through education or or in the
professional field in the second strand
which I like to also kind of in a way
simplified in as an issue is that of
relation so if the building in a way
Jose is trying to pose the s let's say a
generalizable term can be discussed not
only through a singular digging of one
building or one portfolio of buildings
but through perhaps previously non
related Jason sees perhaps in a
situation of urbanism being a situation
of a collective building activities that
may have consciously or unconsciously
relate to one another through space and
time so one is the question of terms and
definition the other is the question of
relation agency and collective reading
of the building and actually I hope
that's broad enough for any of these
speakers to respond either directly to
these two issues or to respond again to
each other's proposition which there's a
lot to discuss who would like to take
the lead in doing that I think you
should know a couple of things mmm
not all architecture is building right
and the only way to discuss
architectural thinking is not the
building for sure that means you can
find actor to think of materialized in a
number of different ways which you'll
have exemplified in in various forms
basically here the argument is that the
building does seem to be one of the main
objects through which together this
domain of thinking as a form of
knowledge right not the only one that's
that's one thing right so this project
happens to be on the building could have
been an infrastructure it could have
been on body of work it could have been
on a number of other of other topics the
same way if you accept playing soccer
you know playing basketball you're
playing soccer so I don't have anything
against all of that actually I think
that is necessary every be goal of you
it's just that they are different
projects right then that's one thing
then the other thing is that and that's
why I mentioned in the introduction a
building is not necessarily an object
right and that I will do some self
criticism because I don't think it's
entirely clear that I think this is
lipid in interaction around the time
object because it can be understood as
an object in the empirical sense which
is to say a self-contained reality with
clearly delineated boundaries which
dissociated from its volunteers service
big versus a building as an object of
knowledge hmm so what I mean is the
ladder are not the former right has been
pointed out in other events a building
doesn't necessarily have to be an
that it can be something more
infrastructure it can be more well I
mean it's time for sample mesh a couple
times he's into field conditions right
so it can be something that merges with
the background it can be found in the
slightly urban scales in between for
sure I'm part of the job
hopefully this budget does is to also
kind of reach into those middle scales
or blurry or very boundaries right so
mmm the majority of the examples that
came for and the contributions well very
much on the building as an object they
don't extend into those blurry territory
so I guess the question I would have is
is there problem with setting up the
question or the title the building
because it sort of pre-conditions
everyone to think in those terms
yes so I guess that that's what I mean
partly by accepting the rules of the
game right so the idea is to say well
let's see we can create interesting
place by accepting the rules of soccer
right let's see we can create something
into something contribute something to
discipline or switch to your soccer
right let's see we can do it through the
building in the market section right
even then there are at least I would
argue 25% or 30% of the case studies
especially in the section content and in
some of the ones under the label context
which actually do extend beyond the
building in this let's say quote unquote
reduced sense of the term and in some
cases basically to a point of almost
deconstructing I would argue right the
same is true for some of the responses
as well
so in that sense there is this little is
a number of alternative views on what it
means to VOC the building as an object
of knowledge included within the product
itself right which I appreciate it I
wouldn't have warning for everybody go
fantastic the same
yeah well they searched me we're being
slightly tough on Europe I mean that I
guess that's why we're here
ya know I had pay not be made I mean I
mean any of us we put forward a project
we're going to get you know critiqued
that's fair enough bourbon that's part
of the processes and that's part of the
healthy process you know we all realize
we have our tropes our limitations and
things of that but I think is a very
interesting project I mean have masses
of sympathy for this as well I just get
slightly worried that certain kind of
coded meanings game put into it dogs
what I think very very clearly worrying
about the slightly aunt elect
intellectual slightly kind of reified
view of architecture might happen if we
narrow it down too much thing that was
Doug's warning very very clearly so
that's the I know no that's not your
project I'm just saying we're always
worried about how these things might be
read and how it might be interpreted etc
one of the other things I would say I've
never I know observes banging on but
this bethis idea of design research when
we do the PhDs at the the UCL we've
quite a lot of people doing design based
research both other for their
theoretical research so fears here as
well with tutors them too as well so we
have these people doing very very
high-level kind of stuff as well and
then but also do design speculation the
proposing things on buildings and then
because of the a subject we have Co
surprises with other parts of UCL and I
get slightly worried this idea that
somehow other disciplines don't want to
listen to objects or don't know how to
listen to our architecture or I'm not
particularly interested in architecture
do we explain ourselves to try other
disciplines our feel our experiences
that they act opposite we have people
working from a whole range of
disciplines from UCL and just love they
think this is amazing thing this ability
to use architecture to think
theoretically through spatial publishers
and through design it's actually very
liberating for their subjects and
they're they're really energized by
these mice in their reading lots lots of
papers about very very similar things
all the time in here they've got chance
think about it from a complete view so
I've got the feeling we've actually got
its capacities engaged very very well
with other you to export and to gaze
through people we I think this is kind
of we're almost like we build these
myths and stories around us to keep
ourselves in looking at something it's
like telling these other ghost stories
all the time so we don't go I was at
night or something that's it's a bit
like there's you know something pretty
hard by the Red Hood
this is real and I think and I think my
experience is completely opposite you
know that people are actually genuine
interest in how we do and how we see
things and I hope we can see but it was
wrong because I've had this and I cannot
get worried digging it's always a bit
like something no no yeah let's see
working ourselves out there we can talk
to other people with time to think yeah
let's see here we got something out so
as somebody who teaches the sign right I
am super interested in Sinai desert
obviously right and it might have a
greater effect than let's say so-called
I don't want to call like highly
intellectual projects but projects of a
different kind and these different kind
of thing it's important merit because
this is the reason why I differentiate
between discursive and representation of
knowledge right design research relies
mainly on representation of knowledge
and also also on this cursive novels but
I think we can have a discussion as to
the degree and kind of discursive
knowledge that's embedded into design
research relative to a let's say purely
intellectual endeavor
i purely intellectual attain the
traditional sense of the time right so
the kind of work that gets done is
called a circus but you've been purely
written yeah not purely intellectual I
mean Chris essentially it's an
intellectual activity as well and again
these just have knowledge yeah its
intellectual but I think when you see on
an on a jury for a design project or the
design research project because of the
kinds of things you try do tend to
appreciate in the project are often of a
different kind than the ones you
appreciate in a in an argument of a
certain kind the argument is going to
favor it's no it's synthetic character
its number of layers built into a
different step through which to arrive
at a conclusion the number of different
those are qualities of the discursive
kind right whereas in a design research
context you tend to appreciate drawing
so the way they are connected to one
another and in turn the way they can
connect to concept as well right but
that's already a different thing it
might be well I mean I didn't have a
sorry updates but I will stop talking
about some promises so and for me design
businesses as a research Britain design
is one component in amongst
forms of knowledge production as well
and they're kind of the written work
that I heard design research students
there is just as intellectually rigorous
well food no seed constructed as the
people who are doing purely written work
it's this is just less aw it's cuz
they're doing other stuff as well so
again I get slightly worried that
there's this division etc I mean yeah
the road again I'm just flying up I
think they're dangerous these
intellectual preconceptions we might
have beforehand that maybe kind of force
us into these positions which are not
really that healthy that's basically
it's my concern that you're alluding to
I'm just trying to those divers are
suggesting we're at certain points
architecture has become a vehicle for
kind of expressing a kind of theoretical
concept rather than the which I would
understand design research to be twofold
all of these things together rather the
architecture has been a product of a
kind of process that comes out of it as
a out of a theoretical concept and has
nothing to do with the other kinds of
bodies of knowledge that a frame
architecture whereas I would understand
design research to be the joining up of
all of these things and I would
absolutely advocate and support that is
that where the concern comes from the
kinds of moments in architecture where
it's become absolutely subservient to
this kind of theoretical process because
I thought that was kind of articulated
that yeah yeah but I'll try to answer
tangentially by also have to Douglas I
killed two birds with one stone about
just to everything you say right I mean
everything you said has been yeah I mean
you mention all the references have been
written about and and and carefully
thought through all of that is I mean I
completely agree I just mediated the
same same way other practices are as
well right so the idea here is not to
replace anything right this is not a
project or replacement this is a project
of coexistence so the way I laid out the
argument at the beginning was to say
well there is a kind of dominance in my
view even though yes it is tied to a
certain
American East Coast America mentality
and its interlocutor as I say in the in
the introduction so there's nothing that
there's no hiding there but if that is a
dominant pattern let's see if that
dominant pattern can coexist with this
so there's not a restoring of the
beginning to the center right that makes
me very uncomfortable
even the term core which I forget
actually if I do use in the in the
introduction I might I I forget also
makes me uncomfortable
it's more of a epic insistence on
another looking into ways in which
architectural thinking can grow actually
can grow within as I said the map of the
map of human knowledge so when you use
the term architectural thinking what is
it that's thinking is it do you mean
what architectural theorists right or
architects right or that the thinking
that goes into the design process this
goes of knowledge yeah so it's thinking
about architecture
nice thinking I was intrigued a few
moments ago when I think I heard you say
that not all architecture is building it
surprised me in a way that you would say
that and I would have thought that your
position is that you are trying to
approach a point where you can
dogmatically say architecture must be
building because it seems to me that
even if an individual act of drawing or
designing doesn't get built and even if
it doesn't expect to get built it must
as it were on so logically presuppose
that it could be built and building will
be going on and it is of that ilk of
things which presupposes that it must be
built it's about 34 years gone now
before since Leon Korea in this room
famously said because I'm an architect I
do not build but he didn't say because
I'm an architect I don't want to build
the presupposition was there with an
ontological imperative not necessarily
in every individual Act no more than
every individual hour of your day is
being an architect but the project
collectively must Center on getting
built it's bit like otherwise you're in
position with a composer who doesn't
it's not bothered but with stuff ever
being played or even heard yeah to me
there are two different issues there one
is whether what you're doing is going to
get built or not so the issue of
actually materializing that which you
are designing or the enactment
architecture thinking that's one issue
and then the other issue is regardless
of whether you're building it or not
whether what you're doing being a
building or not being a building
actually embodies some kind of
architectural thinking right for me
those are two separate issues sometimes
they go together but they're separate
and I would say indeed the calendar is
often natural thinking embedded in
something that doesn't amount to the
definition of a building by any stretch
of the imagination for sure and on top
of that that even if you don't actually
build it that I would argue even if
you're not even presupposing the fact
that you can be there can still be
architecture into your drawing or in the
design process that you're considering a
particular moment in time
I think placing too much emphasis on
knowledge and epistemology I'm trying to
speak existentially here I mean
architecture is an activity that only
exists in so far as it ever gets built
and so therefore you know obviously in a
complex society is a division of labor
and there will be contributions to the
discourse that don't themselves get
built but they can only proceed on the
assumption that something is going to
get built
so are you arguing that there can only
be architectural heap that
presupposition exists it is that is that
your claim I'm kind of surprised because
I rather like dog I'm not unsympathetic
to the proposition I spent an afternoon
talking to students about architecture
as media but I to the students this is
partial view there are tectonic issues
that this is entirely excluding and many
other propositions about what gets done
at all there's a long built but amongst
all the things that get done buildings
have to get built
maybe I'll stand up CMC Mia I think I
can appreciate that the project has a as
a condition an attempt to redevelop or
maintain a kind of minimal disciplinary
consistency for architecture around the
building around the sort of practice and
objects of architecture but it seems to
be lacking a kind of appreciation for
the material in historical context for
the disciplines sort of strategic
necessity for consistency or for the
consistency of the discipline in general
so this this is something like the what
defer recalls the institutional
character of architecture and it gives
the whole thing a kind of Praetorian
character that doesn't seem to address
the political and social basis of
architecture say in the relations of
production yeah I mean same same answer
I gave earlier there is a lot of work
being done that direction currently and
all the work is very necessary and
actually very often extremely
interesting right this is just an
attempt to offer an alternative to that
and the one thing that's important to
mention perhaps is that because it's
happening in 2017 and not in 1970 or not
in 1940 is that you're basically taking
[Music]
an object of research in this case of
the building and then have it subject to
the intellectual tools that have come to
our disposal today right
so just by virtue of you know sort of
enacting that transference something
that basically a traditional object of
study is gonna get transformed and it's
gonna get hopefully thought through in
in different ways so that's why I would
not agree that you know this project is
kind of Praetorian or will be equivalent
as one done
years ago right because the intellectual
dimension around data has shifted quite
a bit over the past four or five decades
the same way has shifted in technology
when it comes to design and fabrication
or a number of other things even is to
institutionally indeed Sofia it's a
question at the front
Thank You Jose and thank you to the
panel for excellent discussions and
criticism I've been following both
points of view and I've been in both
point inside of the Atlantic so I can
really see having been in the University
of Michigan for three-hit for six years
and haven't done my studies at the
Bartlett and this is where I'm based now
I can really see the different points of
view in the whole conversation so a
perhaps it is a European attachment to
history to our urban history that makes
us think about the palaces that Madame
mentioned about the socio-economic
dimensions and how they really impact on
architecture about the ideas of network
the city and the relationship between
all these things and architecture and
this is the way in which ways we see
things in Europe but in America there is
a very very strong engagement with the
discipline disciplinarity is the key
word in American American academia in
architecture so although I do understand
because I think we really need to talk a
little bit about why we're sympathetic
to the project we mentioned we are
sympathetic but why are we sympathetic
I've been a contributor and I don't know
if I'm biased as a contributor but
although I understand the contributions
that are made to Architecture from all
these external factors I do really think
that we really need to know what is
produced within the discipline of
architecture as well so what are those
relationships in the building that can
give back something to society back to
the socio-economic aspects what
architecture can really contribute back
so for me it's not either/or but it's
this kind of interaction between this
point of view and I would summarize it
as the the tile EMA between the
autonomous versus a contingent object
that Hayes
in his anthology and it's not the
autonomy it's not contingency either but
it is it's both points at the same time
you know I don't see them as I don't see
it as an either/or question yes kind of
pick up and response when I kind of
pushed you on architectural thinking and
then you say oh so thinking through
architecture and I mean absolute
agreement with that I mean I so I always
say this at some point
I'm not an architect so had a few times
I've been talking with students and I'll
let that slip and they'll go you're not
an architect but you're the one who
talks about architecture in history in
theory so it's it's kind of important
for me because that's how I'm interested
in architecture but it is a means
through which to understand abstractions
like subjectivity you know capital of
general equivalence commodities these
are all abstractions and so for me
having a different perspective as a
theorist rather than a practitioner this
I'm you know absolutely sublime
simplicity too is this notion of
thinking through architecture and I
guess your notion of mediation really
needs that link well it's up a
managerial notion of what we up there
the ideal worker is but you know part of
that being realized is through the
mediation of space itself through the
experience the construction of space as
a construction of a recognition in which
to work for example you proposed at the
end
kind of the body of knowledge that would
be architecture constructed through
these layers of the building alone would
be that I guess okay I'll move into
becoming a very elaborate panel
discussion um if you would understand
those terms as being something that we
could genuinely export in those means
because to me it says the ability of
architecture or the building whatever we
want to talk about how we want to relate
to its ability to construct those
relationships and and its ability to
frame the virtual or the non visible
questions that come into existence that
is so important and I do I think I would
challenge whether those terms of other
ways in which we can construct a body of
knowledge around architecture rather
it's the fact that architecture has that
capacity contain those power
relationships and answer to engage back
out with that that that is the agency of
architecture I would question whether
those terms like it is the way in which
we're going to do that is that the kind
of end game that you're aiming for the
week that we construct give us a
language to communicate externally I
guess not all terms have the same
potential but I mean there are I mean as
you will know well several examples
throughout the 20th century where
studies within a particular field became
larger systems of thought actually I
mentioned a few of those in the
introduction such that the impact
basically exceeded the original
boundaries of where they were when they
were born so the studies on the sign for
example which belong specifically to
linguistics became the system of thought
with a huge impact in our history in our
cultural criticism or failed would be
another Cleveland or for Indian
psychoanalysis or Frankfurt School
dialectics right all of these systems of
thought and criticism arm frames of
judgment were born specifically in a
particular discipline and then good to
become a large assistive but so has
architecture or teacher thinkers in
theory ever accomplished something of
that kind does it makes sense at all to
suggest such a project in 2017 versus a
hundred years ago maybe not is it
possible what are the you know benefits
things about that would it make our
discipline grow is that something that
we desire or is something that we resist
there are definitely example we may have
time for one short question from the
audience
you know how can I respond to your happy
transatlantic relationship I'd like to
say as somebody who's written a major
book about this I'll be staying this
long time I think it's been pretty
disastrous what's happened in American
academia and then the summer we have to
carry the can of responding to I find it
really very offensive I mean I mean I
know other parts of the world are
worried about European hegemony okay
fair enough I think you have to speak up
where we see it as well I went to this
GTA and 50 years event so you were there
as well seem to be all about some time
dealing with the likes of Peter Eisenman
you know there's something digging
ourselves out of some kind of
formulation that iseman came up with a
long time ago etc let us not forget
postcrossing old theory disastrous
disasters Ben spent a long time trying
to argue that went away so we've done
this well now you realize were in a
climate when there's a quite a lot of
senior American academics saying the
actors have got nothing to do with
research
Monica Ponce de Leon says is very
clearly in a chapter in the book I mean
I mean they're shocking it's there as
well John Hoffman
they're talking this don't publish
online they've demonizing research
objects was not research and I think the
research we're gonna decide this I'll
fight back against this one it's wasting
our time we've got other things to do
the rather intellectual projects to go
on we I don't want to deal with this
kind of narrow
rarefied them a new color disciplinary I
just call it very conservative backwater
I'm thinking how many nights I would be
still there this gets rolled down and we
have to respond to it and I think it's
wrong I'm saying this something uh-huh
pretty much lying in the sand there here
you know because I just I think we've
got this much more urgent things to get
on with and that's why I think the thing
that does talk about we know so I
understand entirely you you said some of
this we're not were all very sympathetic
to the posse but be careful the company
you keep on what she said to here three
weeks ago is precisely the she was
objecting to research precisely because
of its excessive research she says in
that chapter no she was objecting to the
promulgation of research model in
universities and it's precisely on the
grounds of its presumption of a certain
disciplinarity which is capable of being
defined it's not what research says that
is somebody's narrow definition of
research that we then have just trying
on pick out something that's well why do
we do not keeping the word research I
just said it's the word research yeah I
need some new knowledge this is created
through the form of activity this is
what research is I mean there's a very
open elastic generous concept you know
first people to might be saying oh they
don't agree with that therefore after
outrage there's no research I think it's
just plain dangerous I'm sorry you don't
get this another subject areas you know
some of you decide you know that that
would jog with is this kind of place
problems they for job it's not research
all those guys I just think it's you
have to be careful what we say I think
is wrong you know anyway that's all I'm
just saying there is the risk and of the
research and of this problems sharks in
these waters so what they do in in in
other fields that means a very very few
that I'm familiar with is that indeed
they have different
to research right so the term research
does not stand for some kind of loose
term which encompasses many different
ways of art in the production of
knowledge right they have different
kinds so what happens is that it's often
the case purposes define judgments right
so different kinds of research we serve
different purposes get to be charged
judged by different frames of
understanding right so that's why we
have to be a little bit careful because
there are different ways of approaching
the problem of research in architecture
and to judge one type by the frame of
judgment actually correspond to another
lead to a lot of undesirable things all
right so I don't think it's so much that
you are in disagreement with American
culture is that that you guys are
speaking about different models of
research which get to be judged by
different frames of understanding right
so when I hear you're saying implicitly
Jonah actually actually articulated it
that way is to say that is shipped and
in that I also hear John of mine kind of
not not so different in terms of her
claim is that in enacting a shift
towards design research we might gain a
better access to fields outside of
architecture which is basically with you
said earlier intent of what I don't find
an issue actually with not being
listened to or actually not being
important to fits outside of action
actually we do right so maybe what
you're saying basically is that we sign
research of all kinds of research within
architecture happens to be a
particularly successful model when it
becomes about actually establishing the
conversation we fields outside of
architecture I just wanted to add
something to think about that yeah
respect whatever that's there's also
many other forms of access to research
we must have a broad church we must be
tolerant I watched that talk on video
and I think what she was opposing was
the financialization of research or the
financialization of architecture in the
sense that some academics have to really
tailor the research to be appealing to
agendas which are pursued by funding
bodies
this is this is a response I would agree
with John Rahman but at the same time I
acknowledge that the direction the whole
discussion took was against any kind of
research whatsoever which I thought was
highly problematic I mean you do
different forms of research you know
very true but that adds another
dimension to the problem I mean that
that's in a way a different problem is
you do have to engage it's a quiver they
show financing and everything else I
didn't see it basically versus arguing
recently is that most of research have
to be adjusted but if you don't choose
options researchers can be fancy machine
you can't do buildings the capitalist
economy buildings are capitalist as well
so he won't
I mean boobs I guess is I think the
answer is right fine if models are doing
it yes okay thank you for that brilliant
debate and thank you for your
willingness to stick with it for the
evening and and just I just went on to
end was just one statement from Andrew
Benjamin's essay in the book it says it
all occurred in the building all
occurred in building leave the
indulgence with you in architecture or
outside of it thank you very much
[Applause]
