okay well thank you feel for the kind
introduction hopefully I can follow that
somehow also thank you to the AAA for
the invitation to give this talk and
also welcome to the audience for coming
tonight it's it's actually quite great
to be here again
I think it's been 13 years since I was
in this room the last time I was here
teaching at a summer school program with
Katarina Dione Sapolu and Jennifer
Bonner and the final review was in this
room and I also recall a couple of
canonical lectures that I tried to go to
and attend in 20 years there was an
event where Peter Eisenman and REM
koolhaas
were literally sitting here and battling
about form versus function and I have to
say Rob colas won that one hands down
and maybe more interesting was I was
trying to come and see I did lecture
here and the building was so packed it
was literally impossible to get inside
and we had to go to one of the overflow
rooms upstairs and we started watching
the lecture on the screen and when it
was over we were basically joyfully
clapping at the TV which is kind of
awkward but because it was so full in
his house entire building felt like it
was shaking out of you know with energy
so there's obviously a lot of history
surrounding the AAA and this facility
and as you know this lecture series is
titled new canonical histories and with
this talk I was trying to respond to
that topic which is thank you very
charged in a way but I would try to
engage with this discourse by sharing
some of my projects and design processes
and how we are maybe writing new
histories potentially as we speak so our
work and I say all work because this
work is not just credit to myself
there's a lot of employees collaborators
consultants who we you know work with
over the years and you know obviously
without the efforts and
Contribution this wouldn't be possible
so that's quite important to mention so
I'll work is not necessary architecture
with a capital a maybe as Theo mentioned
but constantly shifting between product
design installation arts fashion
infrastructure and as a creative
practice it's very important to me to
embrace other disciplines and not just
look into our own discipline and also
introduce new technologies new
techniques and actually sort is speaking
that's when architecture has been most
successful when we actually reached out
and brought our technologies into our
discipline if you think about the
Renaissance with the perspective or even
like the idea of the elevator coming in
and that's why we can build towers so
that's quite important to sometimes do
that and when I talk to you know in
conversations to people and you know we
talked about me being an architect the
question always comes up oh you an
architect interesting so do you do
commercial or residential projects yeah
you've heard that question right and my
answer usually is yes but what I really
want to respond or what I should respond
is that I'm interested in design as a
cultural practice and I'm trying to
achieve this by re-appropriating
existing paradigms of design topology
for example can we rethink what a bridge
is can we rethink what a bench should be
can we rethink what a playground should
look like and we want to contribute
towards a discourse and how we can
enhance public domain I think that's
quite an important feature at the moment
we want to do it by forming new
opportunities for physical engagement so
how we occupy space and we will try it
by doing a visual participation so how
do we communicate through our work with
an audience
and parrots fishness to investigate and
transform to build environments on our
end and we trying to do it also by
introducing implementing computation
design so technologies that we have
available on hands new methods of make
and also the introduction of sustainable
systems and sustainable materials which
is really important again at this time
but I also believe that if you want to
design the future you need to sometimes
look back into the past learn from the
past under standards think about
precedents pick up best practices while
literary challenging the status quo and
in my case before went to the Bartlett I
had received a diploma in architecture
at the Peter Behrens School of
Architecture in Dusseldorf and if you
familiar with Peter Behrens he was kind
of early leading voice of modernism
you know Mies van der Rohe of Walter
Gropius liquor busy all used to work in
his practice so you can imagine it at
the school there was at back in a day
the ghost of modernism
very much everywhere and around us and I
was really interested to challenge that
as a paradigm and challenge to the
status quo so we see here
Alessa quotes by Mies van der Rohe which
says I do not oppose form but only form
as a goal and as much as I agree with
this position I was also noticing a
certain one not to me
monotony would its implication on the
production of architecture so a lot of
things just look very similar very you
know the same in my opinion and I was
just interested to kind of look for
other kind of novelties
then I was actually through the work of
zaha hadid there was a book that Aaron
Baddeley wrote about her that's what the
first time I was introduced to Russian
suprematism the movement that started in
the early 20th century by the likes of
like Nam Garbo Eliot sit-ski kazimir
Malevich and you see here the black
square on white grounds painted in 1915
where the subject of the painting is
reduced to its bare minimum and
represented only through its geometry
and form and of course Malevich
continued with further studies
introducing other primitive shapes such
as rectangles crosses circles etc and
also color while playing with the notion
of dimension and the effect of depth by
layering the components within the white
background which he considered an
infinite infinite space so this process
of abstraction is what I thought might
be quite interesting to also apply to my
my form studies that I wanted to pursue
where any notion of size scale function
materiality color program side context
and other parameters were considered
voids and non and non existing and just
focus on the form itself and so I start
to draw subjects which rejected
primitive geometry shapes which are
still associated with the polemic of
modernist principles but rather crated
non-euclidean geometries or kind of area
morph shapes which featured slight
similarities as seen sorry as seen in
this taxonomy
so similar to the supremacist movement I
started to draw and arrange two subjects
to each other with the idea that it's
organization principle would always
create a certain ambiguity and newness
and I'm showing here these images from
Audrey and Moy Mayer's book the first
fossil hunters were in ancient days the
way we assembled form can lead to
different unexpected outcomes which can
create new narrative and new histories
so you can imagine when people found
large bones of mammoths in the grounds
not knowing that mammals existed anymore
and they start to reassemble them you
get giants another ambition of the study
was also to combine existing shapes with
fictional shapes similar to this
experimental design of the camp of
Marcio by Pyrenees II where existing
buildings are mixed up with made-up
buildings creating a new indexing and
figure ground assemblage so some of
these buildings actually real some of
them were totally made up by Pyrenees
so I created many of these drawings with
that kind of idea in mind over a period
of time which are called the white
series really with the ambition to study
form itself and its relationship to each
other it's pretty much an extensive
library and collection of forms that
have been generated through this process
and are situated again in this kind of
abstract environments and some of these
drawings over the years have been
exhibited and published and really
became an outlet for me to study form
without the pressure really of you know
thinking won't function much reality or
any kind of performance so I'm just
clicking here through some of these
images and they're actually many many
more so I'm just showing a couple here
and some of them also quite larger
in scale but again reminded being a
reminder of mrs. position that form is
not the goal
the end goal it's also my ambition to
bring these form studies to life and use
them as part of my design process but
he's trying to use them as part of my
design process but in order to do that I
realized that these forms need to be
able to transform and adapt to given
requirements and parameters again such
as scale structure context or program to
name a few
and as a reference here I'm showing a
diagram by Zachary Ted Porter that he
produced in one of my seminars I was
teaching at Georgia Tech in the US where
he's actually analyzing the work of John
Haydock and one of his projects a
security project on the Left shows the
capability to literally transform in
different kind of configurations the top
one is a blaster boy then you have a
military tank familiar with headaches
work that was quite important to him
again he docks on wall house headaches
House of the painter headaches House of
the musician and at the end also Troy in
Trojan horse so it's important for me to
also be able to transform these forms
and shapes and the process was to
extract some of these forms from those
drawings or charged them with
performance requirements like structure
or size and scale of program and then
ultimately transformed it into a design
and ideally both would form a
coexistence or have a hybrid nature
similar to this project by Kalani who
just recently passed away the project
code of frog well let's read the driver
merges with the motor bike
so the first project I want to show and
I'm going to show about 1013 is projects
depending how much time we have is
called public figure it's a bench so I
was asked to design a bench for Art
Basel and Miami Beach this was my first
Commission in 2011 and it was for Eaton
events and the client asks for some sort
of social arrangement that many people
can participate in this kind of
situation and you know we took some of
the forms that we looked at and we
started to kind of morphed and transform
them because the bench has to obviously
offer seating it has to be structural it
has to function and what we also try to
do is think about how we can rethink
what a bench does if you think about
kind of typical benches in the park
they're all very linear you sit on it
you look in one direction there might be
a great view but you don't really
participate with the person next to you
and here the idea was to really think
about that paradigm by creating instead
with a linear version a loop version so
you kind of forced to actually look at
each other potentially start a
conversation or have some informal talk
and basically through that start to
engage in some sort of social activity
the other thing is also the materiality
we had done a lot of kind of complex
forms at future systems use things like
fiberglass and other materials to kind
of cast shapes but in this case we
wanted to use because of the budget
something more simple so we actually
used H high-density polyethylene which
is basically recycled plastic you find
that in your kind of kitchen garbage
bags for instance so we cut you know
literally like shapes out of four by
eight sheets and start to assemble them
and it's kind of linear fashion what you
don't see really is the network that
goes into this all the pieces are
parallel but there's like hundreds of
kind of like smaller pieces that are
connecting each of them individually on
a network on a network basis
another project is subdivision this was
a project in Eugene Oregon and I've
collaborated for a couple of years with
the very many on a few projects there
was about seven projects we did together
I think six of them we won as a
competition and then we separated and
kind of separated also the projects so
this is one of them and this was
interesting because at that time I was
teaching at Georgia Tech and if you
familiar what kind of you know surface
subdivision and how to kind of think
about rationalizing surfaces you
probably get to know Greg Turk Greg Turk
is a professor at Georgia Tech who kind
of came up with the initial algorithms
about 20 years ago
it's kind of subdivide surfaces and kind
of read to pologize surfaces find the
closest neighbor and these things so we
were kind of you know quite happy to be
in touch with him and also work on this
project so this is situated within an
existing building that just got recently
renovated it's a math department and the
idea was to place something in this
atrium so you can see here the contrast
between the existing structure and what
we proposed the concern was that the
ceiling couldn't hold a lot of weight so
we had to propose something it's very
lightweight still something that's large
enough to fill the edge room physically
and visually and the client wanted
something you can see from every angle
walking up the stair so what you see
here is a sculpture it's about 14 feet
high about 12 feet wide five feet wide
is that does it you guys do centimeters
here or meters yeah okay well it's
pretty big
and what's important to say though is
that we could only hang 100 kilos from
the ceiling and this sculpture is about
50 kilos simply because we use
lightweight aluminum material which we
kind of you know connected together you
see here a lot of the kind of apertures
that we introduce the kind of cut
material and weighed out and basically
the curvature of these pieces are
important as well because they are you
know they're the kind of structural
system the more curvature the more
structural the pieces a couple images
just how we produced this you can be
subdivided two surfaces with our
algorithms and then start to kind of
roll the pieces manually by hands he
also those holes that we have a kind of
a guides that show us in what direction
me to roll them you see here a very
basic sheet metal roller so every piece
we had to exact geometry determines we
can change roller angles based on that
and created curvature and then combine
these into chunks and then ultimately
put it into the space and connect it and
assemble it in there so what's
interesting is the because algorithm
that we used was quite interesting to
the math professors and what's
interesting is they're first-year
students when they enter the school they
actually charge to calculate the
structure in the room you know kind of
come up with the algorithm on their own
so this knows this is not just a device
that you know you can enjoy some sort of
like a visual piece but you can also
start to engage with it in this kind of
academic level as well from this project
we had a chance to develop another piece
in Atlanta a bit bigger scale is almost
like 2 or 3 times bigger in size simply
because the atrium that we had a chance
to put this in was much larger this was
just a three-story atrium and two piece
is made again out of very thin aluminum
this time we try to use even thinner
aluminum it's also funny you know if you
think about a coke bottle it's very
lightweight so that's how I usually
explain it to anyone and funny enough
the Coca Cola headquarters right next
door to this project and the idea really
was to create something that you can
visualize and see from every angle so I
saw the idea that this is a three
dimensional piece was quite important
and again you have kind of features that
think about how they intersect how they
kind of have the volume some somehow
like start to merge and so on and
because this is a public space we also
need to make sure that it is all safe
and sound and secure so we actually had
our engineers do a couple of tests so we
put these balloons in the space before
we installed it we then start to run the
smoke simulator which basically sucks
smoke out of the atrium in case of fire
so we just want you to make sure that
this whole piece doesn't get kind of
lifted up in the air and that kind of
situation if there's a you know alarm so
you see here some of the kind of tools
were using very low tech but doin's and
in high-tech kind of devices that would
measure if this would work or not and
ultimately it worked so we're able to
install this it's hanging from just a
couple of cables also for seismic
reasons but again this piece is very
large but it's only like about 120 kilos
which is slightly more than me I think
in terms of weights and that was quite
important for us and I want to give you
a bit of an idea how large it is in
scale here you see it when you walk by
and from different kind of angles and
views but this is a scale comparison
this David's and a couple other people
are putting it together so you see how
large is this it's almost like a
building scale if you think about it
again materials aluminum and it's
actually pre painted so we get this
effect of the kind of interior
it's black and exterior it's white and
there's a few kind of golden elements in
there simply because georgia tech's
colors are gold so they wanted that
feature in there as well but the piece
it's now installed permanently over
there and it's something that you see on
your daily commutes to your classrooms
another piece in that kind of series of
volume studies is in denver again within
an academic building this time we had a
chance to do it and again in a new
facility that was facing a very
prominent Boulevard called spear
Boulevard and the school was interested
in a piece that it's very visible so it
basically starts to communicate to an
audience on the exterior so there's
buses that drive by and cars and people
on their bicycles and pedestrians
there's also low of kind of buildings on
the other side so this is very much a
kind of extension of the school a
message to the community that's outside
the school to understand what happens
inside the building so this is a piece
that is partly suspended from the
ceiling and partly attached to the wall
so we had to think about a totally
different kind of structural system
because you have different kind of
components having to take on different
features again the notion of light
weight was quite important but also at
the same time you wanted to make sure
that people can actually engage with the
piece when walking down the stairs when
driving by and in different environments
so the notion of this thing's very
dimensional again was quite quite
important for us
so here you see basically that you can
engage with it visually from different
levels again this is a piece that's not
necessary function like a bench so it
hasn't have that kind of performance but
we use this piece to learn a lot in
terms of how we can create I'm a tree
how we can actually think about the
structural system that's part of it and
how we can then take some of those ideas
and apply them later to other projects
that maybe require them so for me it's
very much like the concept car that goes
to show an automobile show that gets
shown and then you basically take the
best pieces and the best practices and
maybe apply it to other projects along
along the way sometimes these things are
quite difficult to hang because there's
an existing structure so you have to be
quite you know you have to find a lot of
solutions how to solve it we had a
fantastic engineer that worked on this
project allows ad in in New York because
again this is a very lightweight piece
and we had to do love FAA testing on
this but ultimately we're able to hang
it so it would not rotate in certain
rotations that we weren't interested in
again just a couple of images to show
you what it takes to build something
like this you need a lot of space to put
all your pieces out the scaffolding
sometimes it's more difficult to design
than the piece itself because you have
to lower it change it and so on so just
a few images here of the construction of
the piece and then just a kind of a
couple of final images over itself you
see it again the colors are very similar
to the Georgia Tech colors but again
they had also very similar color scheme
for their school um final project for
this kind of like volumetric series it's
called emergent this one is even bigger
in size and scale so you see here the
idea that things have the chance to grow
over time simply because people trust us
more and they say well can you do
something bigger with bigger budgets and
so on and it doesn't mean it's easier
but the pieces get bigger so this is a
piece in Salt Lake City in Utah again
it's partly attached to the wall and
then it's
hanging from the ceiling this time we
had a chance to it all in whites I was
actually thinking to do everything and
black but nobody really accepted that as
an idea but hopefully in the future have
the chance to do it but you know some of
the pieces at least are monochrome but
I'll show some color but later as well
this piece is interesting because you
enter this room which is dedicated as a
gallery to that school so that's where
student exhibit their work at the same
time it's an engineering school sorry
they want to kind of highlights that's
kind of topic and just also a little bit
of aerospace engineering happening so I
really wanted something that has this
dynamic kind of notion something that
reads as it's belongs into the future
and something that inspires students
particular when it come to the school
and want to apply I want to kind of
enroll so a piece that engages you know
not just students on campus but also
potential students that come to campus
with their parents but you see a little
bit here the scale and size of this
thing is also sometimes difficult to
photograph because of the angle of the
room and these things but yeah this is
on the top floor looking into that space
and I think because I talked about the
drawings in the beginning this is
probably a good example how we're able
to translate some of these complex
shapes and forms into a
three-dimensional form again based on
those initial studies and how we can
actually bring them to life introducing
structure material and other performance
aspects again with the idea that you
know you can you can charge shapes and
form from the initial kind of state and
bring them to this kind of state that
happens in this built environment so
moving on from these more volumetric
studies to something more functional
this is a fact this is called phantom is
a pavilion we were asked to design in
Denver Colorado inside the part there is
this kind of island that was built
inside the park in the back is this
large residential area and towards the
front you see Denver and mountains in
the background so the client wanted
something that a place where you can go
and kind of sit down and kind of
informally enjoy the view
they also wanted us to frame the views
of the mountains as three particular
mountain areas so we came up with this
idea of a pavilion that basically
reflects a little bit the the kind of
two geometries of the of the landscape
this is actually one of my favorite
images because of the shadow that it
produces at the back at the bottom there
and what's also interesting is that we
look back into kind of history if you
think about the most kind of structural
system its regan arc so you see here
serious of arcs that are interconnected
to form these kind of three dome shapes
so it's not a geometry that it's
necessarily fundamentally new but maybe
what's new is the kind of or the
innovative parts the way we build it we
worked with a katie which is a
london-based engineering firm which
hopefully most of you are familiar on
the structure this is a shale a shell
structure it's actually cross laminated
so we have an interest shell that goes
in one direction and the next year shell
that goes in a different
action and through this kind of cross
lamination and the connection between
nose it becomes structural which means
that we can make it very light material
which obviously is economically more
feasible but also through these kind of
two different layers we also able to
introduce much more effect through kind
of integer introductory of color for
instance or also some of the kind of
cuts that we have in the facade because
obviously what we wanted to bring light
in to illuminate the interior of the
space at the same time also we wanted to
create this kind of pattern in addition
which is quite interesting as a shadow
play and this is a couple of the
interior views of the project the space
has a bit of a kind of Cathedral I like
feeling when you're in there it's very
kind of peaceful when you sit there um
but again I think you can see here in
some of these images the idea that you
can frame some of the views of the
landscape which again framing views is a
modernist principle that you know you
can go back to but yeah so here just a
couple of images the one on the right is
really how you put this together it's a
large puzzle so you have to really think
about this as a key our kind of
construction set with a very thick
booklets piece X goes thanks for peace Y
and so on and it's made of basically
hundreds and hundreds of pieces each of
them of Custance a custom shape have no
number have their own number and their
own codes and they're where they can
also be positioned exactly where we need
them to go
so just some of the details of this
piece as well
when we first installed us again this is
in Colorados is quite I mean it snows a
lot so obviously we had to also consider
that as a factor when we did two
calculations for the structure itself
but the first set of pictures we
received four basic pictures in the snow
which was quite interesting because it
started to blend with the initial colors
palette we had which are these shades of
blues and then black and then white and
then sometimes you got this interesting
kind of features and effects when a cup
in the snow would would settle one day
as well and this is actually the entire
park is a basin so when it rains a lot
or when the snow melts the water level
rises up and this becomes more like an
island or Peninsula it indeed you can go
into so a couple of other projects that
are again in a different realm which I
call the pixel play series so we had a
chance to again engage with introducing
a few projects on an architectural scale
so these are projects that kind of
attach to buildings the other occupied
corners or occupy the parapets sometimes
they're like wayfarer almost like
wayfinding devices or they're like
signals this is a project in Durango
which is again in Colorado it's at Fort
Lewis College and the building you see
here is Concert Hall and the idea was to
kind of create a signifier for the
school so again when students would
arrive or potential students they would
see this piece and it would create some
sort of interests and kind of artistic
present so we had a chance to repopulate
this whole thing and basically the idea
was also to kind of try to get away from
the monotony of those kind of block
buildings that are on campus and create
a bit more of a playful colorful
addition I was actually quite interested
to get rid of the corner the sharp
corner and introduce a kind of
alternative corner which are these kind
of pixelated features which kind of
soften the corner basically eradicated
from its original kind of geometry along
the way again each piece has a different
size dimension you know that was quite
important for us as well and
what's nice is also that when the the
daylight changes you know it changes its
perception so you will have different
effects if you either walk around it or
when the Sun changes or the shadows
changes or there's a cloud it certainly
occurs you got these totally different
ways of looking at the building and
understanding the piece sometimes it
gets inverted so you feel like it's just
kind of a parts illusional play which we
didn't really anticipate when we
designed it but it kind of created these
effects it we're quite interesting again
just a couple images what it takes to
abilities there's about 500 I think
different pieces in there each have to
be cut builds folded welded painted
cleaned packaged transported and then
ultimately installed we had this amazing
kind of video where we have two
different lifts going up and down the
facade and then people attaching it to
the wall so it's almost like there was
surfing along the facade and then slowly
this thing was kind of pixelating and
growing in front of the eyes and just a
few images again Durango if you've never
been you should maybe do a trip out
there as a fantastic landscape very
picturesque
so we also were able to kind of get some
interesting shots of that another
project is called bloom this is again in
Colorado happens to be a lot of my
projects there and we had a chance to
actually get occupy corner this is a
building that's right across the street
from Lieber skins Design Museum it's
within the art district so the the
architect who designed to building you
know this is a residential building
wanted something a bit more colorful and
what you see in the backgrounds so it's
like gray or blues and on blacks and
grays so we wanted something that has
this kind of vivid effect so we're able
to introduce these very different colors
there's actually two pieces each on on a
different corner and again the idea was
to introduce these pixels that are
either growing out of the wall or flush
with the wall in this case flush because
there's potentially another building
coming next door so we didn't have to
chance to extrude these pixels too much
but again the notion here that you can
use form to kind of generate a geometry
but also you can introduce color and
through the introduction of color you
can also start to rethink the form
because the color actually like changes
how the fourth the form appears that was
quite interesting in this case we use of
maybe about five six different colors
but through the reflection and to tint
off the color you actually have much
more color spectrum along the way so if
you go in there with you would your pick
with you prepared in Photoshop you'll
probably find more like 20-30 colors
simply because of the way they are
oriented to each other and they reflect
on each other and which again it's not
something you can simulate in your
computer but it's just something once
you build it it's this additional kind
of fact that you weren't aware of again
the idea of scale these things are
pretty large and it's it takes a good
crew to put them together so we're very
fortunate to work with very good
partners along the way a couple of more
of these so you go from the exterior and
interior position this is um in Cedar
Rapids in Iowa there was a massive kind
of in indoor arena where they wanted us
to do a piece within the atrium so it's
really just a decorative piece but what
it does now it starts to kind of point
towards those windows which is where the
tickets are sold so it's more like a way
findings or signifying a device so it
goes away from just being some sort of
visual device to something that has much
more in terms of its function again we
used a series of colors that basically
then when you start looking at them
close I start to reflect on each other
and create a bit of a kind of
environment which for me also has a bit
of LeBron took effect or this kind of
distorted effect and again depending on
where you are you see these in different
angles and shapes as well
there's something else about the graphic
reading of this as well again these are
three-dimensional pieces but sometimes
they appear like they had two
dimensional pieces funny enough when I
applied to a project just recently I
sent some of these images as as a
portfolio and I was disqualified because
I said it's a rendering and it would
only accept build work so I don't know I
guess it is a compliment that some of
your projects now actually are mimicking
renderings or vice versa again just like
your size and scale again this was quite
interesting because you're able to kind
of pixel by pixel see this thing grow
and come to life along the way and I
just a recent project I installed in
Baltimore at University of Maryland's
this is actually one of the biggest ones
these are three large canvases that are
inside a small atrium and this one we
had the idea to reconnect them as one
piece it's more like a triptych reading
so we have these three kind of panels
that somewhat are kind of talking to
each other so you see this kind of three
structures they're all variations of
each other so we use the same algorithm
to kind of re we kind of configure them
and reorient them and then just a couple
of images that we just received a few
days ago of that piece with people just
sitting there smiling and so on but
again here I think the research was to
go a bit further to also introduce these
kind of stripes that we haven't worked
with before so actually the pixel now
gets animated where before the pixel was
static
so now we're also introducing this kind
of time-based matter to it as well which
is something again you know I think if
you do a couple of projects you have the
chance to really push them further and
further along the way and introduce new
kind of techniques in visuals as well
and what I like to do sometimes it's
also just take these into you know into
my software and just start playing with
colors I feel like this is cool because
you can basically start testing it in
real time and maybe another project if
we have the chance
it could have these kind of colors as an
option as well and then a new a new
project we just installed or it's
actually still in installation process
is in Boston this is called the living
room you see here a rendering of it but
that's the Boston skyline downtown
skyline we wanted to make a piece that
you can occupy and you can kind of
participate so these are five structures
that are sitting on a pivot there's a
frame cutouts and they have different
sizes and scales and they basically are
orientated in a circle and you can
occupy them you can rotate them so you
can really participate and kind of start
to communicate in that regard here's
just a couple of the pictures in process
you see here the plan on the left where
you see the different kind of
orientation and for me it was important
to kind of have this the notion of play
where you can come in and really think
about how you want to occupy them how
you want to kind of engage with them and
how you're oriented and it's just before
it got painted there's in the paint
booth they actually they didn't really
know how to paint it so actually to
paint they had to build a paint booth
around them to actually pull it off then
we we put them on a truck one so I
painted and I painted white on one side
and color on the other side and it's
just a couple of pictures recently when
we start installing them again it's
still under construction but hopefully
it will open in a couple of weeks and
again you see the background and the
right see the background of the city and
on those pieces that you know hopefully
we have some people engaging with them
in in the new future another project is
called drift this is a bridge that we're
currently building in Texas out of all
places so we were asked to do a
pedestrian bridge over a creek that gets
flooded sometimes but it's a very long
creek it's about two miles and there's
just no way to cross it for a long time
so they asked us to introduce
a bridge there so we propose a bridge
that again rethinks what a bridge does
in this case we wanted to not just
connect someone from A to B but we also
wanted someone to kind of stop at the
bridge and sit down and maybe have a
conversation maybe just enjoy the
landscape but again we want to kind of
combine different functions and types
with this project we also wanted to use
a material we haven't really used in the
past we used aluminum and you know
plastic and these things in this case we
want to use timber simply because it has
this amazing effects and we source a
very nice typical Spanish cedar has this
amazing effect of weathering and then
turning into this very gray kind of
color so this is right now under
construction rebuilding is in
Indianapolis in us in a shop there so
these are the two beams that we you know
already put together the beams will get
a skeleton of ribs and these ribs will
then be clad with the Spanish cedar
that's just a mock-up but you can see
here these are built in stripes the
stripes start raining in shape and size
again this is all computational designs
but you see here on the left and image
of how we are milling these things so
they actually not just flat stripes but
they actually have curvature to them and
I actually engineered so they really fit
together well this is also something
where we had to really think about the
penetration of the stripes a lot because
of the curvature that we introduced but
I think after the second mock-up we
managed to kind of get a good grip of
it's now it's happening so these are
just a couple images where you can see
the bridge kind of you know following up
opportunities to sit on either sides and
then you know kind of sit there rest
here and so on again this is almost like
you think of the bridge is almost like a
an MRI scan of a brain or of the body
every kind of section is different which
means that you have to ability to read
transform this bridge
from one side to the other it's about 60
feet or 62 feet long and we designed to
switch with the idea in mind that we
need to bring it from Indianapolis to
Fort Worth Texas which is about a two
day drive and the idea is to really just
pull it on a truck and drive it over so
we actually had to check the dimension
of the truck this is an oversized load
truck so we had to check the dimension
of the truck we had to check you know
the heights we have to check the weight
we had to get a contractor that was able
to actually Crane it from the truck into
position because we didn't want to build
a scaffolding would have killed our
budgets so we had to really put all
these constraints into designing the
spirit so there's not just the idea of
you know the material or the timbered
idea of the kind of how do you
participate with the bridge how does it
structurally work but also these kind of
other requirements how do you actually
make it happen to bring it from A to B
and to install it at the end and then
also how do you maintain it there's a
chance that you can take each piece out
and then replace it in case there's
something wrong with the piece or
there's some damage to it and so on I
think is actually the last project I
will show cloudscape Lodge tape was a
project we asked to do at the Fort
Lauderdale Airport in Florida they had
this amazing large mezzanine space and
asked us to design an interactive area
in other words the playground and you
can imagine you know if you're waiting
for flights or if you would fly this
delayed or if you you know just arrived
or something sometimes there's no way in
airports you kind of just go somewhere
and kind of relax and just you know
charge your batteries or something
especially if you travel with children
it's a bit difficult I have the same
experience now with my daughter
so we wanted to create a space that
offers a multiplicity of kind of options
for participants to engage with
so we created these kind of five
different structures within this blue
environment the floors actually pour in
place rubber so it's recycled rubber and
we had to do it because ultimately it's
signed off as a playground structure if
it's a playground structure you have to
get a commission on board to actually
has to check all the details so there's
nothing sharp there's nothing edgy
there's a whole catalog of kind of
requirements you have to fulfill if you
do playgrounds including the fall
Heights
depending on how you can fall from the
structure and the fall height determines
the thickness of the rubber and the
thickness of the floor so as all these
principles that we had to build in into
this in terms of engineering in terms of
material and so on but out of what was
interesting for us is how do you
actually engage with it how do you
participate with it again looking back
into into the past if you're familiar
with some of Anna Pantone's work they
were able to create these environments
that you can really immerse yourself in
so this was in a way something we wanted
to do as well we kind of go into these
pieces and really create have your own
kind of environment and if you kind of
look through them as a kind of sectional
view you get this kind of very kind of
interesting kind of correlations and
kind of different kind of cuts and
spaces within it and I mean these are
just our pictures we got from our
photographer but sometimes you know I've
managed to go on Instagram and see kind
of like a hash tag of that space and
it's quite interesting how people do
yoga in there or how kids really climb
onto the pieces and start kind of
removing the ceiling elements so
everybody has a different way of
engaging with the space which is
interesting to us because you know we
just give it we basically are able to
create a matrix and then within that
matrix everyone has a chance to kind of
communicate and navigate on their own
but again just an idea how these things
are built because there is wide
monolithic structures again with almost
zero detail because of these
requirements for playgrounds
certifications but this is something
that it took us really a long time to
build it's built like a massive puzzle
we also had to keep in mind that we are
an airport airport has very strong fire
ratings so we couldn't use any kind of
material we're to use material that
actually is fire rated Class A which
means that it's very difficult to source
there's a type of MDF called me light
which it looks pretty much like MDF but
it's just fire headed a that we managed
to get it comes in sheets we didn't
start to cut these kind of you know
puzzle pieces and start to assemble one
after the other
I think the CNC machine was running for
like three months straight so it was
really like a long process and once it
was all kind of assembled and put
together they were painted and then
ultimate in these kind of like smaller
chunks because again access to the
airport was a bit complex because there
was just one door we could go through
and that door wasn't very wide so we had
to keep that in mind when we were
building the pieces along the way and
again because it's an airport there's
certain security measures you have to go
through as well which is very difficult
so if you want to build something at the
airport it's very tough it's not an easy
thing to do but again decided the
structures we managed to put into place
and you know again I'm really happy how
it turned out because it goes back to
this initial sketches that are presented
where you're able to rethink about form
kind of an abstract way and then once
you have the chance to introduce you
know parameters like structure material
size scale you know you're able to kind
of transform these shapes and forms and
ultimately are able to maybe create an
environment where you know kids like
this young boy I can kind of
participates and engage and then
ultimately rests and read a book
so this concludes the talk so in
remembrance of Yong Kaplinsky who passed
away a couple years ago he used to
conclude his talks by saying I kiss you
goodnight
alright thank you
[Laughter]
so thanks a lot Vulcan for this
fascinating immersion into your universe
understanding the motives behind the
work but also the outcomes and how how
let's say an audience can be engaged
bye-bye or the beautiful installations
I would like to mention that there are
drinks upstairs but first we'll we'll
take some questions if there are any in
the audience
thanks very much for the for the lecture
book I was very inspiring I think very
timely so and I think that I'll try to
articulate a question out of a comment
hopefully I get to the end of it with a
question but what is really inspiring is
the the relation between simplicity and
complexity on the work it seems know
that that out of a thesis of engaging
with form no you develop extremely
complex forms find a way to fabricate
relating to a context and there is also
believed that the photographic archive
II know is also part of discovering new
elements of the work so what is very
inspiring for me was the idea that the
work does not rely on the complexity of
argumentation necessarily outside the
form no but I think that the idea that
the relationship designing engaging with
the sides
engage with the pause occupational of
that object through effects the
phenomenology of the space how people
inhabit the light so I wanted to ask you
a few of the perhaps in a hints a hand
side of normally what education tends to
be a bit more related to creating
extremely complex arguments to them
output something that is perhaps less
exuberant no so I wanted to ask you what
are some of the problematics that they
you encounter on working with with that
process know that that you you think
they can communicate so clear first for
you but also for the clients I mean if I
understand your question correctly it I
don't know if I did but I mean I can say
that
the faster you go to trying to build
something the better at least in my
experience I've been working on a kind
of conceptual level for many years you
know in certain practices these things
were always on a paper stage so in that
regard they were conceptual they were
you know like maybe just just before you
can maybe get it built or to a build out
but I have to say once you engage with
building you have to chance to build
it's much more interesting than to
create arguments and concepts in this
case you know it's a chance to build
quite quite a few projects and you learn
along the way and you have to really
deal with other issues along the way
which kind of real life real life
problems when in a kind of academic
discourse you can get away with making
arguments in in other directions so I
know if that's if they are not that
answers your question but it's very
exciting to design and get it built for
me that's more exciting than to design
and just put it on a piece of paper and
put it into an archive
you kind of described you're working in
a taxonomical way in the sense that
there was the volumetric stuff before
and then the pixels and then the last
project and at one point you were also
describing that with the pixels every
other iteration was getting better and
bigger and it was like a discourse on
its own mm-hmm but thinking of you as
the the creator of the heterogeneity
I wonder if you ever think of
hybridizing or if that's ever
opportunity to convince a client with
the notion of hybridization of two
different discourses rather than saying
I'm gonna do a better version of the
previous one if at its simplest form I
didn't want to come yeah no that's a
very good point because you know once
you submit your construction sets or
once things actually are getting happen
it's almost like too late to make
decisions and change it but and
sometimes you have to like when's the
pavilion the pavilion was designed five
years ago right and it just could I got
built it so two years ago so it's like
there was a three year period where it
was the design was ready the drawings
were ready it's just the site wasn't
ready so was sitting here for three
years it was approved it was you know it
went to engineering so all the soft
costs were spent and through you know
three days later I'm I'm looking at the
design I'm like I could have changed I
would change a lot right now
on that design you know it's just I
couldn't do it but Vincent on that
design I would have lost her for
instance think about the the exterior of
that pavilion to have more texture right
right now it's just a series of colors
that are populating it but I would have
much more interesting to have some of
these pixels maybe get extruded and
create a much more kind of interesting
silhouettes so those are things that
constantly happen and even at this piece
now in in Boston there's a couple of
other versions that are that are
designed that are building up on that
piece simply because we learned a few
things through the first one certain
dimensions sizes and so on so yeah
they're definitely like built upon each
other so you have the best practice that
you continue and at some points you're
also able to
murdered some of these passes as well
and that's where you know it becomes
ours are quite interesting but sometimes
I might also become a Frankenstein kind
of decide I'm not sure it you know it
depends a bit hi um very inspiring but
also at the same time if I understand
correctly the design methodology is like
to derive the design from the the
passion about the form and my question
will be if you're designing a like a
building skill it like you're designing
a school or something that's in a much
larger skill than more like you know
installation would you still use the the
form approach as the design methodology
because these forms as I perceive are
very very complex very fascinating but I
wonder once it's been translating into a
building skill well there has to be some
sort of like simplification or is there
gonna be a difference in term of like
steel starting from form but seeing it
from a more different like I would say
like a filter almost like what you're
seeing yes my question yeah no it's a
good question and maybe as Theo
mentioned you know I had a chance to
work in a couple of practices before I
had the chance to open all practice like
future systems even for stem partners as
I'm told architecture those practices
are very similar in terms of their
aesthetic or the kind of interest in and
they have been designing buildings and
building buildings so you can definitely
start with the with the kind of premise
of the form as interest but you always
need to charge it with something right
so either with technology or structure
or program so it can never stand by
itself it needs to have this kind of
other parameters but you can also start
and many people do it just with program
first right so you can have that as
initiator and then maybe bring other
aspects and later you can start with
circulation first it's just in my case
that's the way I looked at the diagram
and how I wanted to kind of pursue it
and as long as all the pieces on the
table it's fine so it doesn't matter
which one you pick up first you can make
the decision but ultimately all of them
have to be somewhat embedded in it is
I think thank you hi Volken thank you
for the very enjoyable lecture and I
have a question there's two very
striking things that come across a lot
of your work the first is form and its
transformation and you spoke at some
length about that
the second is color and and this ability
uncanny ability you have to use color to
create a kind of graphic space and I'm
you spoke about color but you didn't
really talk about where you draw upon
your research in color and where does
that come from and how do you bring it
into the work you know in the inners
with the same kind of rigor that maybe
you do apply to your formal studies yeah
I mean color is a very complex topic
because everybody has an opinion about
color and so sometimes when I get these
Commission's and I make proposals um
there's a committee of you know up to
1215 people and you know someone is like
well I don't like pink oh I don't like
purple
all right I don't like green because the
neighboring schools mascot is green or
something right so there sometimes it's
kind of you know ways to navigate it
logistically but the way I usually think
about color is that it needs to be a
contrast to its context so if a context
has a certain kind of palette I'm trying
to really complement it by just doing
the opposite at the same time also
there's a gradient within the colors
that complements itself so sometimes the
shades of blue and then maybe something
that's in contrast to that but it also
goes and you know by stages like right
now I have done I think three four
projects or the kind of a pink purple
scheme and I think I'm not gonna do that
for a long time now I'm just gonna
probably do something else because I
also got a little tired now of that but
yeah I mean color is difficult but what
I want to do with colors basically
creates some sort of signals I'm sort of
you know iconic moment where it kind of
stands out so that's usually the idea
with color
thank you hi yeah I wanted to ask you
about the assemblage like the first
project that are like smaller pieces and
require more assemblage and what was the
effect on the form or how you think of
the form of the whole because of that
and in the last one
it also has parts in a way but they are
more like embedded and it's not so so
apparent and if that well how do you
think about this kind of relationship of
the pieces and how they are assembled
and the relationship with the whole yeah
I mean I think it maybe goes back to the
notion of digital fabrication you know
it's been something that you know this
discipline has been doing for the last
15 years or so you know you got machines
like you know there's a cutter CNC
machines water jets in robots printers
and so on and each of these technologies
have their own kind of materiality or
trace like if you think about the CNC
machine sometimes you still see that the
cuts of the machine on the material on
the surface so it creates its own kind
of let's say index right so those are
things that you can't necessarily like
planned for but they're just an after
kind of after effect actually we for the
the curved projects we try to engage
with a really good car body modeler or
shaper in in San Antonio and he's like
one of the masters and actually making
car bodies out of single aluminum shapes
so we talked to him with a really good
discussion he's using these like English
wheels to form and shape down he's using
kind of section cards to get the right
curvature very meticulous you know
especially if you deal with metal like
when things expand you know like it's a
bit more difficult and then you can
imagine so we engage with him we didn't
know of kind of kind of you know had lot
of conversations but ultimately we
couldn't do it financially so then we
had to find another way to create these
shapes and forms I would have maybe like
to use fiberglass and do some molds that
would have been also very expensive so
we had to really find that alternative
so we had to tackle the economic
problems really and look into ways to
kind of do things but again if I think
about future system I used to work
you pray familiar with the media center
here in London right which is built in a
ship yards in the Netherlands because
there was about a back in the day the
only people that could build that form
because the technology that shipbuilders
had was kind of similar to what yarn had
in mines building that and architects
couldn't build that so they're here to
find other things so not sure if that
answers your questions but yeah like it
there's always there's always let's say
an effect on something like using
different technologies that sometimes
you can plan for and sometimes it
creates something unexpected I mean
there there are two two things that were
pretty enlightening today in today's
presentation I mean the first one you
just mentioned the desire of not
remaining on paper and rendering and and
at the effort of democratization through
the use of simple flat sheet materials
that are that anybody could could
actually do in the school now with the
CNC we have whereas the previous
generation of your systems were using
super elaborate super expensive say
manufacturing techniques and through
most of time the use of transfer of
technologies with you know automotive
industries or or shipbuilding as you
mentioned um so that is one concern like
an effort of democratization and make
breaking into the real and the second
one is when you mentioned Behrens
previously and and that has some kind of
motive that that somehow shaped your
entire trajectory from from the from
coming to London to to all the decisions
you made in choosing places to train and
and the current direction of your office
I felt quite compelled and it was very
resonant to me it was all you know David
and I for example we also studied in
Belgium and and that kind of the boredom
and the kind of modernist paradigms and
this fascination for austerity which has
now become starett a chic it's a proper
movement now the fascination of boredom
somehow as if as if that's something
that should be celebrated and so what I
really appreciated in the work is that
they're there to clear phases in my mind
one is the parasitic one where your
installations are are set within an
existing an existing building which is
as boring as it gets like a commercial
structure that you are invited to
transform somehow and to fight so the
first set of installations are a bit
like Troian war machines that that
occupy boring corporate atrium and their
other are meant to to to provide what
what the ten thousand square metre
building doesn't do for its users right
I think there's a level of you you
mentioned that the effects of the piece
are a bit later but I think the diagrams
are quite specific in the way that they
try to engage the audience visually they
try to activate the body they try to
let's say push the users to try to find
viewpoints and interesting vistas in the
through the work so we discover a very
banal and boring space and and there's a
pursuit for pleasure somehow an added
form of veteranism' the second thing is
when you move into into architectural
pieces with the bridge and the and the
vaults where all those the principles
that you accumulate through those
experiences or the kind of design
drivers or the motives behind the
practice or they become they're there
they're much more aligned and much more
deliberately deployed on on deliberate
pieces you know and I think it's really
promising to see the bridge for example
and other
other things to come where where let's
say your design sensibility doesn't have
to to to fight any more than existing
but is somehow autonomous and and can
can can provide a can be autonomous from
from from the kind of boredom in which
we we have to operate in somehow and in
that sense I think you know you want a
very unique voice so you know that that
basically preaches a level of optimism
playfulness and I mean things that
things are that have become taboo in
most continental schools of architecture
like as if as if architects are are
meant to order people in work will
always hear about labor like our role in
life is to to put behind people behind
benches and to put them to work you know
and I think I think your your work is
completely opposed to that position and
yeah any other questions
I told you my students are fearless I
just wanted you to comment a bit maybe
on the construction process so you
mentioned a bit about like assemblies
and how you tried to work with the like
the car manufacturer but then you had to
think of an alternative because of cost
I'm just wondering if you yourself are
ever because of the scale directly
involved in the assemblage of pieces and
also if you're there when they're
manufacturing it and putting it together
and telling them like which piece goes
with which one so if you could just
comment a bit on that process yes so in
the beginning yes you know I just need
to understand it myself you know to
delegate maybe later so yes in the
beginning I was also selling myself and
putting them together and you know being
there but now I'm kind of detached from
that process simply because the the
collaborator I work with they didn't
know how or how we can put these things
together
and to be honest maybe a couple of years
ago I would have just talked about the
fabrication in this would have been just
a fabrication lecture but now I'm more
interested like what do these pieces
produce once they actually in the world
for things like you know a DA
requirements which is like Disability
Act and these things like you know yeah
you can design anything but this is
actually confirmed to policy for
instance that's much more interesting
now to meet and how do you put together
because we've done it so many times now
that it becomes a very kind of like
process that we're very familiar with
and you know so now there's other things
that of interest yeah but I mean it was
fun to like you work with the same
collaborators every time or they've
learned
yeah there's two or three different
partners that we've done many projects
with one is in Colorado we've done very
seven project with them
and you know they know my work know very
well and you know I trust them they do
fantastic work and you know it's it's
something that takes time to build but
over time it's it worked out very well
all right let's have some drinks thank
you really thanks a lot okay
thank you so much
[Applause]
