hi everyone so it is a great pleasure
for me to introduce Fernando Canales who
she's from Mexico and she's an architect
designer critic and we are very lucky to
have her here and have all her expertise
on Mexican architecture and housing she
bases she studied architecture in Aveiro
she then did a masters in Barcelona and
then she also has a PhD and she has
published several books one in about
Mexican architecture and then her other
book which was more recent is on
collective housing in Mexico so yes I'm
happy to give the microphone to thank
you Elena thank you very much all of you
for being here it's a pleasure and I
will show briefly my most recent
projects especially focusing on the
theme of housing that we're researching
on the different studios this summer my
practice is based in Mexico City it
ranges from residential client based
projects to institutional work to public
Commission's such as this University
campus in Monterrey and city in the
north or small temporary interventions
like this pavilion for the museum Tamiya
Museum in a park in Mexico City and in a
way challenges we try tries to challenge
our understanding the relationship
between people territory and buildings
sometimes with more ephemeral or
experimental condition others may
in very high dense residential projects
in the city and other times in rural
settings as this house in estado de
mexico two hours away from the city so
in a way it tries to understand
different materials local materials ways
of working traditional ways of working
and always relating the dwelling with
the ideas behind the buildings no no I'm
not interested in architecture as a way
of answering questions or solving
problems but rather more of the
questioning and trying to change the
things how we live how are we building
our cities and also trying to engage in
research I believe writing is also
another way of doing architecture so I
try to spend as much time as possible in
archives in libraries in the site I
that's why I don't have an office I
believe in a very personal improvised
practice this are some images of recent
research I've been doing on housing the
relationship between buildings and the
city this was shown in the San Francisco
Museum of Modern Art last year and
they're part of a new book that akhtar
is publishing at the end of this year so
in a way I tried to find out how
buildings are linked to cities and how
people are linked to construction also
it's a way of trying to put together
bodies and furniture ideas theories
history and cities and of all the images
we have of the latest earthquake in
Mexico City this was in September 2017 I
think this one is particularly eloquent
because for me it relates to the work I
tried to do in this
image we can see the very quotidian
aspects the everyday life that happens
behind the walls of buildings you can
even guess the age of the inhabitants or
I mean you can see the shoes for their
next party or what was their age or
their profession and what really is
dramatic of this image is that in a way
depict the individual needs the
individual desires within the collective
consequences no what does it mean to
design the lives of other people and how
does that really impact our lives and
the consequences in the lives of others
so in a way this image portrays the main
theme of my work that is trying to find
how to think about the space that lies
between a bed and a sidewalk between a
bedroom and the city between different
bedrooms and between the consequences
with the natural resources with
territory and with conditions that are
usually thought of as special in this
case as an accident or something that
doesn't have to do with architects but
in a way I think it's obviously our
responsibility how do we design the
lives of others and what does it mean to
place individual needs one besides
another on top of another besides many
others so I will share today eight
different projects from the last eight
years this one they're all related to
two houses in different ways this one
for example is a transformation of an
existing house this was a commission was
a competition done by the Ministry of
Culture for transforming an existing
abandoned house in the south part of the
city of Mexico City
in order to provide an example of it
wanted to become a prototype of what to
do with abandoned houses in this area
cocaine is a traditional neighborhood it
used to be for weakened houses on the
outskirts of the city a hundred years
ago but now is inserted in the central
part of the city the city has grown so
much that Goryeo can now is part of a
central area and this neighborhood is
usually known as an unguent reliable
neighborhood because regulations have
not changed for years so you have very
big houses that used to be weekend
houses for 14 children
nobody has anymore and regulations don't
allow that to change you cannot build
higher the density cannot be changed and
the uses of the house are still always
residential so in a way it depicts how
cities change faster than regulations
faster than architecture so you have
this condition of Korea can being
characterized very very narrow streets
with very tall walls where you can never
see what's happening inside you you only
have amazing private Gardens of houses
that are mainly empty and everything
that's needed the recent programs are
all happening either illegally inside
occupied abandoned houses or illegally
outside in the streets such as
marketplaces and stores that are
happening informally in the sidewalks so
this idea was to change the use of the
house make it really public and
providing an alternative so the
neighbors wouldn't feel that it was an
intrusion changing the program of a
house to a public space wouldn't mean
diminishing their privacy or having
strangers coming into a residential
neighborhood so this is this competition
grew in a way out of a contradiction
because the house had no architectural
value we didn't even know who had been
the architect it was not even registered
but it couldn't be changed because of
the historical traditional site where
it's setting so we couldn't change the
facade we couldn't change the window you
can touch the the aspect of the house
but they wanted to really make visible
that now it housed a public Cultural
Center a library a bookshop an
auditorium so how can you open up
something that you are not allowed to
touch so that was really like the
difficult part of the of the project
these are the images of the existing
house and the first strategy of the
competition was to take out the wall
avoiding this very closed narrow streets
and making really open in a way trying
to extend the sidewalk inside of the
building and taking also the building
outside having this transitions or
thresholds wider between the trees that
are inside that are always enclosed and
the outside space that never is allowed
to to show that richness that occurs in
the inside so the house is in a plot of
1,000 square meters and it's sitting
completely in half of the of the site
with all of the exterior space was just
residual area was four parking spaces it
had been intervened in the past with the
illegal adaptations and it had nothing
it was just parking space in the front
and then storage areas in the back so
the the project comprises very two
strategies one that's to make visible
that the public new condition how to
take the books outside in a way this
project is an attempt to design a
library for people that have never read
a book or maybe don't even know how to
read that never feel invited into public
spaces they I mean you always
Phil you have to enter with an ID or an
invitation or pay a ticket so the idea
here was that everybody would feel
welcome and it would be really visible
that everybody could come in without
having any anything was needed not even
reading and you would feel the proximity
with the book so how to take the books
outside of a house that cannot change
the sides the sizes of its windows so
the idea was to frame the house to build
a very big foyer triple height frame
foyer in the outside in order to extend
the books and take the books outside to
the street and also to try to come with
the sidewalk and enter the house also
bringing the trees inside of the house
making a connection between the existing
vegetation and providing the what was
residual spaces in the perimeter of the
house making those part of a new garden
so you can see in this image how the old
structure connects with the new frontal
foyer and how the sidewalk completely
blurs and becomes part of the building
there are several patios and it's
several ceiling perforations in order to
have natural light inside so there's you
never know when the tree is next to you
and it's inside or is actually outside
you have this transitions between the
new program so the house would always be
always be penetrated with a series of
patios and also with the idea of
fluidity of the space you have an
auditorium on the back three different
patios and modern services workshops
offices storage facilities and the
bookshop in the front and you never know
when it begins and when it stops in a
way it becomes part of the street and it
also incorporates the accidents or the
conditions
existing conditions of the site like the
color of the leaves or the existing
vegetation even the vegetation on the
garden on the side the houses sitting
besides that always was a very enclosed
space but in a way we try to bring that
also inside of the project and having
double height and triple height spaces
in the inside always with natural light
so there's a play between the existing
subdivided house and then the new
proportions of well-laid spaces and also
taking the traditional aspects of the
existing house like the stairs and
providing different outdoor spaces with
a series of patios in order to house the
cafeteria spaces for reading outside a
small open theater and changing the life
of the city connecting it as I said with
the garden that's just on one side and
that was never part of this public
condition of the city and after doing
that project I was called by the same
Minister of Culture in this case also
with linked with the Ministry of housing
with the inn for a bit because they had
a very big problem of abandoned houses
in all of Mexico especially the housing
projects that were the big housing
estate projects that were built in the
70s and 80s and Mexico has a very big
problem of abandoned houses and in this
case they wanted to donate 1,000 books
and place them in as a prototype in in
one of the abandoned apartments
transform an abandoned apartment into a
reading room making it public and having
the book so everybody could go in but
when I was called to the this project I
was really scared who was going to be in
charge of the space that was going to be
shot inside one apartment one in each of
this they have many housing estates with
the same condition where nobody was
going to be able to hear or see what was
happening inside the space and there was
not gonna be anybody actually in charge
so I said we cannot do that it has to
really be public as in the project in
Korea can you really have to see what's
happening people have to be in direct
contact with the books again providing a
space to read for people that don't have
books don't even know how to read but
how can they become also part of the
project so I went with them and I said
we have to find a public space in this
housing states and make it outside it
has to become part of the public life of
the complex and the response was as
usual it's we don't have any money we
don't have any other space we just have
1,000 books and the money just to paint
the existing apartment
take out the kitchen remodeling and
placing some chairs just some
bookshelves so when I visited several of
these housing states the they always
shared the same condition they had been
illegally occupied and privatized and
abandoned at the same time so public
space has become in many areas this this
image is really common where people have
to cage their cars because of insecurity
situations but they actually don't even
have a car so they become storage spaces
spaces that have been illegally occupied
that were to be public areas and that
now are just places to store mainly
trash and and I mean you can feel how
unsafe it would be to walk during the
night or at any time because they have
become completely abandoned spaces so I
went back with them and I said I mean
you do have space it has been illegally
occupied but we can reclaim that space
and we can use the money you have just
to paint the apartment and to do a pair
small remodeling job we can use that
money to provide and reclaim even just
one of this car spaces so I said let's
do an experiment let's just take 2.5
times five square meters just the space
of a single car and put the books inside
and make that really visible just with
the basic elements and if this works out
we can put two cars together or three or
you can place them vertically with just
four simple elements just using four
walls one roof top it could even be self
built and you can place them in order to
do some even patios or outside spaces
that would be able to provide future
public space and it's a project that's
thought to be I mean nothing can be
broken nothing there's no glass but we
took the the typical concrete blocks we
just tilted them in order to have this
lattice work that provides always open
cross air ventilation you can always
hear what's happening inside you can
always see and and then every material
is just from the local hardware store
where you can buy anything and replace
anything really easily and really cheap
so it's just three materials basically
and they have become the lights of these
areas the safe the only safe public
space where you can always see what's
happening and we have built almost 15 of
these reading rooms in different states
there's one in Tijuana one in Oaxaca
Chiapas Nayarit waraqa and many other
places the idea is to build one in each
state in Mexico Mexico has 32 States so
they become an example of how can we
transform this existing housing states
with very very simple elements very
cheap materials and actually they have
become they have helped
changed the whole areas just by
reclaiming one parking space people have
recognized the importance that this area
belongs to them it wasn't meant to be a
privatized cell or cage for an unused or
broken car or old refrigerator or
whatever that they placed inside so it
has really changed how with just a
single structure it's the only area that
has shade it's the only place where you
could sit down so now they're starting
even to extend that condition to the
outside and now they're not just places
to read there are also the places where
baptisms secure marriages or where
people have different lessons and we
have changed the prototype depending on
the the geographical climates and
territorial condition but also in the
particular needs of the community so the
community builds self builds the project
some need to start trash some find a way
to buy to computers some find like
different furniture so it has become a
project that has adapted during the
years and it's always thought - they can
be flooded
for example the bookshelves just began
like 1 meter 20 yep because they're
always placed in these very strange
conditions of constructions that
shouldn't be in the places where they
were built so rain can go in water
flooding Sun it's thought for radical
weather conditions and for no
maintenance at all now I'm showing a
house that has in a way also that the
same ideas this is a prototype for
social housing and it's built in a value
in a pond but it was also thought as a
prototype that could change depending on
the area and geographical climb
conditions it's a unit of minimum
housing of 32 square meters so it's just
4 times 8 and it is that you can sum up
different volumes the first one housing
the minimum services just for one bed
but having a Topanga which is a
traditional double-height space so you
can also use the upper area for working
or having a baby sleeping there having a
bathroom on the lower floor and you can
add up as in the reading rooms you can
keep on summing up the different parts
and changing the program to two bedrooms
three bedrooms and also adapting to the
local conditions because in many rural
areas in Mexico people still cook
outside they don't have inside kitchens
with stove so they just use wooden
traditional cooking methods and like to
cook outside or some like the bathrooms
to be outside not inside the house
so it's a prototype that can really
change in these different configurations
and you can also switch the relationship
between one module and the other in
order to provide a patio in the middle
or having a patio also that provides
private space within the same structure
within those 32 square meters so here
you can see how the double height space
this was a solution that was thought
because the need of providing storing
the water the rainwater so you have an
area that's double height in order to
store rainwater and it's directly placed
on top of the bathroom and the kitchen
so it's it's the most efficient solution
so that anybody could have water and
then you get the double height in the
living room or the dining room whatever
space you want to provide with more
amplitude and the idea is that they can
conform a community they can become even
house different programs
working space space for storing crops
and for people who work in their own
house so the first prototype was just
recently concluded in Napa noodle go and
it it has it's done with the two models
but as I said the space between those
two volumes can change and can actually
become a larger patio where you can eat
outside or do workshops or whatever
whatever the personal needs are and they
have a small patio in one of them and
despite being them very very very small
and very cheap this cost around 8,000
pounds to build each of the modules so
despite the size you always have a
double height area you have natural
light in both sides you have natural
light coming from the top and it's in a
way almost I mean you have the just
total rainwater so it's it's really
cheap also for future maintenance and
future uses and it has small patios in
order to I mean people are still in
Mexico we dry our clothes outside mainly
so it has also become part of our
landscape is you see all these clothing
lines and and people don't want to show
that private condition to the neighbors
or to the outside having everybody
seeing your underwear so how to provide
that traditional custom with a sense of
privacy and this is the space that can
go wider I mean usually this projects
are built in rural areas or even in
illegally occupied spaces where land
doesn't represent the cost but what does
represent the cost is the volumes and
the construction so you can have a house
that can open
and be twice as large or three times as
large just because of the space that's
left in between one volume and the other
and actually most of the life occurs in
that outer space and now going to the
opposite with urban settings very dense
commercial developers or real estate
standard housing projects this is a
building of twelve apartments in central
area in Mexico City in Colonia Portales
which is one of the most densely
populated neighborhoods and the idea was
to provide small difference between each
apartment even though it needed to be
built very cheap and very fast and
identical in that sense just trying to
make small changes to provide from one
bedroom to two or three or from a duplex
solution of apartments on the top using
the rooftop making small balconies and
terraces in order to have more space
than is usually available for developers
in this areas with that budget so the
idea was that every apartment has a
possibility of extending into an outside
space and also the corridors are always
open we have a very good climate in
Mexico that when usually never or or
sometimes we we don't take advantage of
that because we copy the architectural
solutions from international references
that they're always shut off and they're
always closed but actually we can live
in outside space almost year-round so
the project uses the corridors as a way
of extending the areas into patios
balconies or terraces in different ways
sometimes they're really really small as
I said it's a it's a project that's
really economic in a way we
speak about the streets in the air that
we have been talking about these are now
not streets in the air but yes terraces
or corridors that become public space a
place where children could play you can
have your bike your stroller the areas
that usually new apartments are not
providing and also I mean you won't get
wet but you do have a way of extending
the dwellings in the outside each in
different ways and the terrorists it's a
wider space and you have the duplex
apartments and the top floor and despite
being that the patios between these two
volumes being very narrow you always
have switched I mean the the views are
never direct in order to maintain the
privacy of the inhabitants and now I'm
going to show two houses completely
different scale these are for weekend
houses in rules that think two hours
away from Mexico City and it's it's in a
way I think of this project as the same
logic as Casa product even the module
that could be added up in this case it's
for a single-family but
