thanks very much all for coming and
joining us for the third lecture or
debates in our critical practice series
and we would like to especially thank
even mainly in the school for supporting
the series and contributing to it so I'm
to be a censored out card and together
with and shy been organizing this series
to really explore alternatives ways to
practice the critical practice series is
a call to reimagine the relationships
between the profession and the network
of actors and conditions that surround
us together with architects curators
planners and economists who are really
piloting new models for engaging with
the public realm we will have an open
conversation about common challenges and
exemplary in it's a service we unfold
three themes that we think have the
potential to really redefine the role of
the architect in the future and we've
already had discussions on rethinking
clients forms of Alliance and tonight's
lecture will be on affording risk so
architectural practices often produce
projects through winner-takes-all
competition in the light of the
architecture profession running such
high risks this discussion will seek out
overlooked forms of practicing that
allow for less precarious and more
sustainable form of risk-taking so I'll
now hand over the work to Aria we'll
introduce tonight's speakers and share
this discussion thanks very much
Thank You Tobias hello and welcome to
the third event of critical practice
this initiative was born out of an
increasing need for a shift informed by
financial realities and public purpose
in how we learn and exercise
architecture we will be continuing this
investigation in future events and also
through an upcoming zine which will
feature Steve Tompkins Clement blonde
Shea and Marcus Meissen as its first
contributors as some of you may already
know due to unforeseen circumstances
right near the crab could not join us
tonight and we also learned today that
Harriette Harris will not be able to
attend a session they're both keen to
contribute at a later date we are
honored to introduce our austere panel
of speakers who bring to the table a
critical and diverse outlook on this
theme
Ava French who as of July 2018 has
decided to stop writing her bio at her
own risk and she's the director of the
architectural association in London
Selassie said to Fay who is an
architectural designer and founder of
critical design studios and architecture
and Public Interest design studio
further to this she has been a
consultant architectural designer for
lco basu architects since 2008 seventeen
she is currently in RI be a trustee and
Co vice president for students and
associates a role that has highlighted
the urgent need for the inclusion
involvement of more young people
particularly of diverse backgrounds in
providing the solutions our society and
our profession desperately require both
now and in the future she has recently
co-founded black female in architecture
a network that aims to support and
champion black black mixed heritage
females studying and working in the
updates of a doberman industry
Rory Hyde who is a designer curator and
writer based in London his work is
focused on new forms of design practice
for the public good and redefining the
role of the designer today he is the
curator of contemporary architecture and
urbanism at the Victoria and Albert
Museum at John senior research fellow at
the universe
the of Melbourne and design advocate for
the Mayor of London
his first book future practice
conversations from the age of
architecture was awarded and Australian
Institute of Architects prize for
architecture in the media his
forthcoming book next city has been
awarded a grant from the grant
Foundation for Advanced Studies in the
Fine Arts so let's begin by Ruby thank
you thank you
Thank You ru and to the critical
practice team for the invitation to
speak tonight I've interpreted the theme
risk to be a risk facing the profession
of architecture specifically the risk of
oblivion if we're not able to reframe
what it is that we do and to reframe it
so that we serve the public good if we
can't manage that then I would argue
that we are in breach of the
professional social contract and that we
risk having our professional status
revoked which wouldn't necessarily be a
bad thing but it's a risk nonetheless so
I'll start with this quote which I just
discovered the other day from Albert II
all 500 years ago do everything possible
to obtain Commission's only from the
most important people who are generous
and true lovers of the Arts for your
work loses its value when done for
persons of low social rank so this is
somehow forming the bedrock of our
architectural understanding of what it
means to be an artist and I found it
quite shocking to see it written there
in sort of black and white so
unapologetically elitist and and you
might think legitimately well that was
500 years ago
times have changed we've moved on it's
not as bad as that is it but then I give
you this 98 percent of what gets built
today is so this is Frank Gehry of
course at the opening of the Louis
Vuitton building in Paris sounding a lot
like what we need is an
picture for the 1% oh and up and this is
he did that as well just help so what is
an architecture for all the that should
be a uncontroversial idea something that
we can all agree on but as we've seen
unfortunately that's not necessarily the
case so where does that leave us and
what would a truly democratic
architecture look like I did this book
in 2012 a little while ago now in an
attempt at an answer to that question it
has a very simple structure 17
interviews each with a short framing
essay trying to make sense of the new
roles that we're making that Arctic's
were making for themselves things like
the double agent the civic entrepreneur
the contractual innovator and so on this
and analysis of these roles was a way to
try to extract the essence of that
practice so that other people could copy
it and it could be shared and an
abstracted beyond the specific at that
time this other way of doing
architecture was really quite marginal
we would talk a lot about guerilla
gardening about urban acupuncture
tactics which are defined by their
modesty or by their very marginal status
and therefore could be somehow it easily
ignored by the mainstream but what seems
have happened in the meantime is that
these forms of practice are becoming
more and more substantial they're
forming a genuine alternative for
operating in a new world of austerity
and of global crisis the old model of
graduating hanging up your sign and
waiting for the phone to ring doesn't
seem to work anymore and that's forcing
practises students graduates everyone to
be more entrepreneurial and to create
the potential to address new kinds of
problems and that's the big thing for me
is that it's not just new ways of making
money but it's about redesigning what it
is that you do in order to answer
different questions so what architects
working in this way discovered by not
relying on the deep pockets of
developers is that they also have a
civic duty they like to solve real
problems and not just design fancy
apartments so this is of course public
practice probably the yeah most exciting
initiative to come out of this city in
the last few years and the first cohort
of students this civic duty is not
merely something that's nice to do on
the weekends or when the economy is slow
architecture is a profession along with
doctors lawyers pilots even teachers
that means we're responsible for making
our expertise available to all of
society and in exchange our title is
therefore protected by law this is
what's known as the grand bargain or the
social contract where exclusivity over a
domain of knowledge is granted in
exchange for applying this knowledge to
the benefit of everyone the logic of
professions makes sense you want to know
that the person who says that they're a
doctor has actually been to medical
school passed their exams keeps up with
the latest knowledge and will act with
ethical conduct and not rip you off
that's why doctors form guilds they
argue that they were different from the
random guys on the street selling snake
oil and eventually we agreed as a
society okay enough of the snake oil
guys we're just going to use the guys
who have been to medical school so
that's how we professionalized medicine
and we protected the title of doctor the
same is true for Arctic's as a client or
commissioner you want to have some kind
of proof that this person knows how to
put things together run a contract
manage your money get it done on time
but that's really where the comparison
between doctors and architects ends part
of the deal for doctors is that they're
obliged to help everyone yes we have
private specialists elite cancer
researchers but most importantly we have
the NHS where the vast majority of
doctors work to serve everybody now you
might argue that seeing the doctor is
not like seeing an architect but that's
only because we've kind of made it that
way the doctors wanted it that way too
there was a big pushback 70 years ago at
the founding of the NHS doctors thought
that they would lose money and status
but public interest was put first I can
take seem to want to have their cake and
eat it we benefit from the protection of
title
and yet we only apply our knowledge to a
tiny proportion of society so again are
we in breach of the grand bargain you
would think though that given that we've
kind of rigged the system that we'd be
doing really well out of it but
unfortunately that's not the case either
as this headline from the architects
journal shows rookies are paid more than
architects so what this reveals is a
complete inability of Arctic's to
demonstrate their value to society a
crisis I would argue is directly linked
to our abandonment of the idea of
architecture for all so to conclude then
what can we do about it
ultimately I think we need a kind of
architecture NHS instead of only
operating like specialists we need to
operate like GPS an architect on every
street dishing out spatial ideas like
prescriptions scribbling onto a pad and
tearing them off and tossing them across
the desk what would it mean if you were
to serve four clients a day instead of
four clients a year until that day comes
it's up to us to redefine the way that
we work in order to reclaim our place as
an urgent public service otherwise the
risk is that we are doomed to
irrelevance thank you my name is mercy
and I'm going to sort of speak from my
personal experience as has been said I'm
part three student taking my exam like
in a few next week I think so yeah it's
been an interesting couple of years for
me and I wanted to start by making the
point on in response to the question of
affording register
is willing to take a risk or as I would
prefer to call it a chance on you coming
out of architectural education I was
quite adamant that I didn't want to
pursue the normal route into
architecture I wanted to seek out an
alternative path but there was no sort
of handbook to say okay this is how you
do that and this is what you do or
whatever so I felt the need to really
seek help people who are going to be
able to support me through that and in
doing so I came across a great mentor
and I feel like in in answering that
question who's willing to take a risk in
you I think it's quite important to have
mentors and people who are willing to
support you on that journey as you try
and I know navigate a new path for
yourself so as was mentioned before and
qualifying as an architect it's just a
lot about knowing what architecture is
about and the sort of the distinction
between you as a professional and that
the average Joe on the street if you
will so a project I recently did was a
collaboration between or me as a
consultant for also boosted architects
my mentors LC and in my own company in
my own design company through through
which I am hoping to navigate this world
of what is it to be an alternative
practice or an alternative architect so
did this project recently oh sorry you
seen all my slides now
did this project recently which was a
real eye-opener and helped me to
understand all of that
you know contracts everything that you
need to know that you don't necessarily
learn in architectural school about how
to be an architect and how to go about
it the professional way and I'm glad
that I've gone through the process and
I've learnt all of those things but what
really excites me is how do I apply
this professional knowledge really
sensitive keys to create my own
opportunities and be responsive and
proactive in the way I am able to
respond to societal needs able to
respond to issues of climate change able
to respond to issues of sustainability
in ways which sort of standard
architectural practice doesn't allow for
one of the ways I've chosen to do that
is to start an organization well in
network called black females in
architecture in it it's a way to sort of
respond to several different things one
the lack of diversity in architecture
and diversity in terms of classism race
gender and we set up this organization
because we felt that this would be a way
to be able to tackle such issues and
some of the work that we've been doing
so far is trying to explore materiality
through reuse of plastics and that image
that visualization there is a response
to a commission that we got to design a
pavilion and we wanted to respond to
that brief that we got by exploring
materiality and seeking new ways to
respond to larger conversations and
larger narratives of you know for
example plastic plastic waste so what's
happening with the oceans I had the
opportunity to attend the Commonwealth
Heads of Government meeting last year
and there was a lot of emphasis on
what's happening in our oceans and how
that affects different Commonwealth
countries across the globe so it's sort
of a local scale way to respond to very
very wide issues another thing I found
pretty I'm frying and pretty useful is
being strategic in just getting involved
I as was said I am a trustee of the Riv
a and what that has afforded me is an
ability to meet people from all over
orgs and at all the different levels of
architectural practice and at both
national scale and international scale
but I've also made a particular efforts
you get involve on a local level and
because I feel like it's it's a great
way to to understand what's happening in
your locality and really respond and be
that sort of social architect that
responds to it at the everyday needs of
the people around you so I got involved
with this I live in East London in
America barking and a neighbouring
borough to me is a new home and I found
out about this local organization called
peach the people's empowerment Alliance
for custom house and there they had
pulled together to sort of protest or
you know become an active voice for
their community in to propose an
alternative way to regenerate their
community those there was a regeneration
coming their way but they wanted the
people of the community wanted to have a
say in how the regeneration was going to
happen this became a wage for architects
interested in that way of an alternative
way of working to get involved in the
community establish relationships and
really work with them to devise a new
strategy of regeneration and those are
just a few examples of the ways that I
feel you could kind of circumvent or
find your way around a standard practice
of architecture and put yourself out in
a sort of risk risk a more risky way but
it's very rewarding in in what you're
able to get out of it and I feel like in
general architects are quite risk-averse
and it's sort of a balance of trying to
understand which I am just figuring out
in the journey of trying to figure out
what what risk
worth taking and what risks are too
large what risks just about right and
what risks to small ends should be
passed up yeah thank you it's really
risky to us me to just up for seven
minutes mostly because when I'm supposed
to be there were near the gravel Harvey
hurries then I actually go into a
identity crisis and that makes it a lot
more difficult so this and so then as
you what do you want me to talk I mean
there is an endless amount of ways in
which one can think about risk and you
guys said just talk about the ways in
which he took a risk when when did you
put yourself at risk and I always say
that risk somehow follows desire and
that is a way of saying that why do we
take risks and what are risks worth
taking and so the idea that desire is
something that we don't question often
enough so this book is probably the
first time that will publicly
acknowledge that I took a risk that when
I was at Princeton University our
student and I actually I really wanted
something I wanted to actually have a
moon and for it be sent to me because I
was really hungry for some really edible
even edible objects and so I started to
smuggling and it forced my family to
send things over through a free service
that would actually send books for
intellectual purposes but in fact it was
just meat what actually made me doubt
and question what is that that one
should put in a book if it was not meat
it was to be boards at that time we were
starting a magazine at Princeton student
magazine was pigeon and the question is
like what is a magazine for and for who
and I realized that the editors of that
magazine at that moment in time they
just simply wanted to have a magazine
they didn't care what it was inside the
magazine they just wanted to have a
magazine and so somehow I asked them
what is we should take a risk like what
is the risk that this magazine is taking
and they could not necessarily
articulate it and of course as you all
long I think this is a question that we
are all asking ourselves but instead of
going all the way back to then I'm
actually trying to go very fast into or
present time and actually go into
another concept of risk that is the risk
register how many of you knows what is a
risk register Paul you don't know it so
a risk register is a document that
actually establishes within an
institution all the different elements
that actually might constitute a risk so
what you see in here is the school
director I'm the owner of this risk
right so the risks actually have owners
have an impact mitigation and they have
a risk score and so if you actually
would go through your own lives and try
to understand how many risks do you have
right you can lose your flat you can
lose the money you can lose your
relationships you can lose your hands
you can use your body you can lose your
thought you can you lose your drive
what are those registers and this is
funny because of course when I was four
when I arrived here and the first thing
that I thought was I was going to take
risks was I was forced is actually to
start to fill in into a risk register
and of course the next question that I
ask is not only what is the risk
register that we have and I'm not going
to show you all the slides
we have some of them that actually are
in red right so the ideas that you want
to make sure that in this kind of
equation you have the likelihood of
something to happen very low the impact
even it's high so the severity is number
but so this is the kind of matrix about
how you're going to be measuring your
life and then you're going to get
something like this so this thing here
is the folder of all the insurances that
the a has to actually make sure that all
these risks are covered what made me
think about how many insurances do I
have in my life and in fact the only
insurance that I have I don't have
health insurance I don't have car
insurance I don't have any insurance
except one type of insurance that I'm
still have I have to pay Everly for two
more months but is from the last
building I built nine years and seven
months ago because of course as an
architect you have to get your own
insurance and not only that one you have
to have the professional indemnity the
public liability the employers Liability
general liability business building
insurance and so on and so forth and so
how do we actually think and deal with
those kind of insurances when in fact
risk follows desire what is that that we
desire and I think what you have put
into the table is like do we desire to
have the largest amount of the impact
and what insurance protects us against
that there is no insurance yeah so the
question here is what is that desire and
what are those insurances that we
ourselves can start producing to make
sure that we save worth those desires
and so with the three minutes that I
have left I'm going to go through 300
the slides more or less and so I'm and
I'll tell you a bit more about different
risks that they took over my last few
years mainly as a director of another
institution but how does one go actually
about taking risks and risk that
sometimes we we don't take because we
are afraid to over communicate or to use
the wrong word like or how actually
we go into risk to oversimplify and to
talk about issues that extremely
delicate and difficult but actually we
should as architects or as artists or
our citizens be able to address risk to
over simplify again how do we actually
think about funding structures how do we
go into just simply analyzing capital
through financial models how do we
actually simply take away the
responsibility that we have sometimes to
accept a bill for sources of funding
last week in order to new canonical
histories we had Frances Maurice telling
us about how she actually took the money
from Qantas airlines or she actually
took the money from Hyundai she took a
risk right a reputational risk to do a
project that would take her elsewhere so
how does one actually take the risk to
again oversimplify or over complicate
doing publications that no one can read
there is to be misunderstood to actually
think that one is just a party thrower
and in fact one is really trying to
produce a critical project how one
actually does take those risks and then
mitigates them by bibliographies by
ideas by actually rationalizing and
intellectualizing a particular project
this is the picture while Barry was
saying that 98
percent of the things built in the world
are pure so we didn't talk about
this how do we actually take absolutely
no risk how do we actually do things
that we don't know the risk yet and this
is something that when we talk about the
experimentation what do we mean right an
experiment is something that you measure
but something that actually for me was
very important or interesting when I was
running this institution in New York
stuff and for art and architecture is
that sometimes I didn't know what risk I
was taking and that's also good because
you don't know is there is something at
the stake but you know that there is
something to be investigated and this is
when an institution an education
institution like the AAA provides a safe
space for us to take no risks but total
risks and to actually do things that
have absolutely no sense that actually
pushes us into boundaries of total
madness of an engagement that actually
allow us to be playful so I think it is
important to think about the risk of no
risk and what happens when you do things
that you don't understand the
consequences and are we allowing
ourselves to play in other is that
something that is just to version that
is to elytis that are we not able to
allow ourselves to not be conscious of
the risk we take and I think that this
intim attic that the new generation that
is graduating is doing a symposium on
practice because you guys want to know
exactly what risks we are taking right
you cannot take any more no more risks
so the risk of getting out is something
that for me has always been very
important to get out of these safe
spaces of the lecture hall of the spaces
actually that have a microphone that
have a camera spaces that actually allow
you to have citizens talking directly to
you about what are the real problems and
the real issues and not to really it
somehow over intellectualize but so this
risk of getting out is one that actually
needs to be confronted with the risk to
co-opt to go inside to actually work
with the most dangerous forces if you
want that we can imagine I think we all
understand very well these days that
being a Trojan horse is something not
only acceptable but desirable to
actually be part of the corporate system
to actually break it from within is
something the
we all know how to do very well to be
part of River and to be able to actually
change the river from within is actually
what we should all be doing and the
question then is how do we do that
properly and so of course some of you
that do know that in fact I'm very
interested in this idea of like
corporate it solitary ultimately is a
way of trying to change that the space
of practice this project that many years
ago tried to do was to actually look
into the worst the ugly and boring and
to actually try to redefine the way in
which we think about architecture not by
looking into our iconic forms but
actually by looking into possibly
possibly the worst forms of
architectural practice and putting them
all one next to each other so how does
one take the risk to actually really get
into extremely boring stuff to sit down
next to those ones that one cannot stand
anymore and really try to redefine them
in a way that actually does not try to
produce enemies women and men whites or
non-whites and actually tries to really
start to produce new vectors of desire
something that to me has become evident
over the last few days is that for me is
less maybe about black female architects
but actually an whitening white female
architects are and whitening black know
unweighting white male architects how
actually do we take the ownership and
the responsibility to go beyond those
uniforms but one of the things that risk
sometimes is not obvious this picture
looks like a great celebration but what
I like you to see is that what I'm
holding in here in this folder at the
opening of the u.s. Pavilion in 2013 is
a folder that actually was written
Trojan horse the person who was talking
across this whole was the representative
of the State Department in the United
States what was interesting about this
moment is that they didn't know that I
could not represent the United States
because I was not a US citizen I didn't
have a green card and I actually should
not have been able to apply to do that
project they only figured out three
months after I receive a call from the
State Department asking me how can you
do this to us
and I said I didn't do it to you just
didn't check your document
so I took the risk to actually not get
the project but what I did I took a risk
every that obviously got me the project
that got me into the pavilion and got me
to produce one of the projects that
allow me to really has some important
questions and I'm almost done I want to
talk about ethical ethical ethical risks
and I started talking about how do we
eat things and how those things this was
a party that we did at the Guggenheim
Peggy Guggenheim Pavilion in Venice and
cooking sections who was lecturing in
this in this lecture hall just few
months ago they discovered one thing is
that the Guggenheim Foundation had
produced a lawsuit against a chef in
Bilbao that actually started serving
pasta in a restaurant across the museum
with the shape of the Guggenheim
building and because they actually
started to make a lawsuit in the of
infringement of copyright of image and
appropriation the guy actually who had
produced an incredible series of pasta
had to discontinue it and stop serving
the pasta with the shape of the
Guggenheim so what we actually did was
to serve bloody marys in this party with
a little bit of pasta inside that
actually had been 3d printed and met we
met Amol with a 3d printer and had the
shape of the Guggenheim building in
Bilbao inside the Guggenheim Foundation
in Venice we were actually serving
cocktails of their own of their own
problem and so the question here is that
this was just something that was funny
for us right but the question is how
does one go and take risks that matter
that was a party and that was a risk
that was just a party risk but somehow
it allows you to warm up your your your
ideas it allows you to feel free it
allows you to take things so what I'm
trying to say is that even if one is to
take extremely serious risks as like
some of you might know might not know
this book that was published as part of
this project it took four years to
actually get published because I was
waiting for one manual this is a manual
of manuals but I could not publish this
book without some of the major offices
that I was waiting for
I couldn't publish it until I got that
manual therefore I managed after three
years to see the use and to convince
someone to lick the
manual to me so of course we publish it
and of course it's publish it but with
the redacted text meaning with black
lines and so what is interesting about
this idea of delaying risk is that in
this case I want to believe that
sometimes one publishes a book that
might not be evident as I can have a
risk in its moment in time but then it
might become more risky in any way what
I think is is important and I'm just
going to stop here is to look into this
way of corporate practice and to
understand the way in which we want to
create new risks that are not in RIS
registers that are actually not in
insurance that already exists that we
can create new forms of practice that
are collaborative that allow us to
really rethink the way in which
insurances are not just ensuring
business models that are already there
but business models that we are going to
create a new and so the way in which we
can think financially obviously
logistically and technologically for new
forms of risks for me that's where
things become interesting and so what
are the new risks for us I think the
most important part for me was when I
brought eight people who didn't know
each other together with 90 people
around the world to produce an
architecture office that was trying to
operate globally and we take and observe
and appropriate the history of
architecture and recasting it like
casting it anew when this project opened
at the Venice Biennale we started with
plenty of hopes we took a risk did we
fail we did we succeed just history will
tell us but what is important for me
actually is that one is never really
truly aware of the risk that one is
really truly taking obviously the risk
that we are taking as an institution
culturally when Friday I present a
division for this school they are not
contained in this folder right there is
that we are going to take a very really
outside of this folder so I don't have
more to say thank you thank you
and maybe I can start by asking a
question to the whole panel I think well
many interesting subjects have already
been discussed but through the
presentation from Rory also to Selassie
I was wondering how do you imagine
moving from a marginal for this idea of
a civic duty for the architect
promotional flyer to the mainstream what
steps should we take what risks should
we take as a collective because this is
a collective risk and the society we
live in today is quite polarized
it's a fractured political climate so we
talked about personal risks individual
risk-taking but if we think of it as a
collective as a school as an
architecture community yes maybe large
office how can we take risks and create
consensus around that risk
let Eva catch her breath
yeah it's I think it's a really good
question it's kind of like the critical
question for me anyway because there's a
there's a whole lot of things which kind
of keep us where we are and those are
the in sedimented inherited things which
we rarely question and that's like oh so
the RBA you know registers your course
if you want to do something really
different than you fall outside of that
registration process and therefore you
you're sort of on your own and there's a
there's a dozen other things you're in
London and that's where you get all
these connections and that's where your
peers are and that's where you can be
motivated to do something new but London
somehow holds you back as well because
it's so expensive and therefore you
can't take a risk on a new business
model because you can't pay the rent so
I'm always interested in one of those
forces of gravity which which perpetuate
the old way of doing things which are
sort of invisible and what would it look
like in order to jump out of that force
field and and I think you're right that
it looks like it requires a collective
it requires its own critical mass its
own center of gravity in order to
redefine something and that's what's
that's what that's why I'm so excited by
this these kinds of conversations about
practice because they're they're no
longer on the margins you know ten years
ago it was complete it was sort of
completely trivial to be talking about
otherwise they're doing architecture
because the main way was it was working
so well and it seems sort of
irresponsible but now I think it's
completely flipped and even the
mainstream was looking to these new
examples so yeah I mean I think that the
parallel with living in London is a good
one it's like why don't we all live here
when we could live in Liverpool like and
we you know you could buy a whole
Terrace house for a hundred grand like
if we all agreed to do that together we
would be we could create our own
community and like redefine the sort of
our own cultural networks but instead
we're all sort of like here because
we're all thinking individually and I
think that's the that's the delete
that's required is the sort of
collective agreement to do something new
and at the moment we're so diffused
because perhaps it comes back to the
sort of competitive nature of
architecture where it's it's so much
defined by originality and about
competition rather than a reinforcing
effort to support each other and create
something new
thank you thank you would you yeah I
think that definitely it takes it was
going to take a collaborative effort I
also feel that the schools of
architecture have a very critical parts
of playing it and what I find is
happening is that a lot of students
coming out are very socially conscious
and socially aware and wanting to have a
positive impact on society whether it's
in the specific city that they studied
in or country or globally or whatever
and I feel like that's creating that
critical mass of people that are going
to be able to eventually really change
the paradigm and we're getting there
slowly and slowly but it's yeah I don't
know how long that's gonna take but I
think it's gonna happen thank you well
you actually mentioned it you have like
what are the things that are
perpetuating certain behaviors and
certain forms of practice and the truth
is that we don't have enough structures
in place that allow us to fulfill those
kind of socially conscious endeavors and
so what what are the numerous structures
that we need to put in place to make
sure that kind of emerging consciousness
that that we are all sharing actually
finds fate spaces for action right and
so the idea of the lobby no so what
for me was interesting about the way in
which they architectural lobby in the
u.s. started to really understand ways
in which we can all come together to
really love you but things that we
really care questions of wage questions
of relevance questions of power and and
I think that that's something that we do
need to do more often right to come
together to really redefine the ways in
which we come together because if we
actually try to count how many
institutions do we have in London to
talk about what do we care and what do
we want we have the AAA right
we have the architecture foundation that
right now is mostly lecture based with a
level of diversity that is being
questioned by many and it's an Lea forum
is a space of dissemination of a
particular ideology of architecture that
is great on itself but maybe it's from
another century and but so then the
question is what other forums and maybe
I'm new in the city no but we need to
create a new forum we need to create a
new space a platform in which we can
really start then finding those forms of
Alliance no one that is actually in the
second theme and we need to start
finding for the finding ways in which
how do we go in talking about race
gender social responsibility in a way
that actually is not just focusing on
the problem but actually putting us into
a space already of like resolution now
in a spacing of action and I think that
that what we find ourselves right now is
extremely atomized knowing in women are
talking about women in architecture
[Music]
black architecture communities and
you're like I should be talking I should
be able to talk on behalf of you and you
should be able to talk on people who
actually have chopsticks in their hair
and so the question here is like how do
we go into becoming responsible no your
idea of responsibility of and I think
it's always too much of an easy metaphor
not a one of the architect and a
practitioner that is that it's it's a
lot easier to be a doctor than it is to
be an architect because the ills are
easily identifiable the ills in
architecture in society are not because
the way in which we are taught
architecture is never that
the world has a problem that we need to
solve in fact we are here to create new
problems we are here to actually
imaginatively understand the world
differently and I think that that's we
come from a different discipline but I
think everything goes back to to ethics
what I think we and this is something
that in terms of practice and I would
love obviously this service to continue
is to go back to ethics because many of
the issues that you've raised I think go
back to issues of ethics right how do we
as Akali stand next to each other and
relationship to each other
in in a in a in a society that actually
has forgotten what are those banned
binding principles and and yeah I don't
think I mean we don't have like the laws
on ethics right we don't have I think
ethics maybe it's only introduced when
we do professional practice and I think
that that's a bit too late because it
should be part of our foundations and so
even if we have a kind of social
consciousness I think that also comes
with a with a strange burden with a
strange maybe inability to act or to
enable that because also we don't agree
that we don't teach architecture we
don't have a language of architecture to
materialize that through drawings no
music it is an ethical plan or is it is
not an ethical plan what makes an
ethical plan what next is a kind of a
fair section this is a great master plan
how do we measure that so the business
models from mode modes of ownership this
is why we need to also bring new terms
of drawing redefinition and practice
because the tools that we have inherited
constitute the essence of architectural
practice do not allow us anymore to take
risks like a risk is what now to
actually paint something with the pink
of Pantone like just a deviation of two
degrees what is a risk in the terms that
we have inherited and I think that's a
huge problem this is why we do need new
forms of engagement and new documents
that are really able to talk about the
issues we care absolutely I think this
idea of measuring risk and measuring
impact especially in
social terms measuring social impact is
something that we definitely need to
investigate before we move on to that
conversation I was wondering if there
are any questions already in the
audience that we can take and feed into
the conversation thank you thank you is
there any other question so just but
because I think that's a very I like to
fantasize about many things but one of
them is professional liability usually
is bounded to geopolitical context right
or even professional practice meaning
you are registered architect within a
political context by raba
or the AIA or the quark or professional
bodies that actually represent you in
front of a legal system that is the one
that makes you responsible even if we
live in a global society we don't have a
global system that actually allows us to
practice as global architects we also do
not have a insurances that actually
allow us to produce a kind of global
liability so even if actually all of us
as a generation we are faced timing or
skyping with people across the globe and
we fantasize about having a global
architectural practice we don't have the
legal financial and political structures
in place to be able to practice like
that I mean it's obvious brexit is
looming above us and we actually some of
us will have to really put some big
question marks into our passports but
but that's why I say that's a very far
away horizon but I like to think that as
we move on into all kind of different
possibilities we really do need to start
thinking about the way in which I don't
know Bitcoin and a lot of people are
thinking that
crowdsourcing platforms can really start
helping to provide those systems of
validation and and I think people who
are more savvy than I am in those
technologies should really try to
rethink the system the way in which the
financial system has been hacked we
should have the political and obviously
the social and the legal system from
that point of view I didn't tell you
that that story and do you have any
response to day-to-day steps towards the
future practice yeah hopefully I mean
your suggestion which I have built on
about forming a new critical mass I
think is really it's really key to it
and perhaps there's some competition
versus collaboration is another key to
it especially in a hothouse like this
you know I mean that's the whole culture
down to your bones is like competing
well actually maybe that's not the best
foundation for the new society you
describe I also wanted to I mean it's
tricky to lay out a manifesto in five
minutes but I did want to respond to
Eva's question about some you know
weather architecture is actually able to
be instrumental in the way that I've
described or whether the tools that we
have at our disposal are able to address
questions in this simple in a simple way
and there's this fantastic profile of
the author at Olga one day in New Yorker
from a few months ago and he so he's a
surgeon and he's pressed on the the way
that a surgeon works right and the whole
myth around what who a surgeon is and
what they're able to do which is you
know you you're you accumulate this
insane amount of knowledge expertise you
know these are the most highly trained
people with the best equipment around
them dozens of supporters and they're
able to come in with their scalpel with
their steady hand and and you know
connected to those decades of experience
and cut out your tumor or save your life
in this decisive intervention
and and that's the sort of way and we
think that with it well there's no one
who could have changed your life more
powerfully than that person at that
point in time and and he's reflecting on
this and his is his role as a surgeon
and asking questions about whether this
is necessarily true and he starts to
speak to GPS and to other you know what
we might think is more pedestrian forms
of Medicine you know these are the
people who you know have to listen to
people's back complaints stay in day out
you know it's they're not they're far
they're completely under-resourced they
don't have 20 people supporting their
every move they have to do their own
paperwork after you know fill out their
own tax forms like that you know that's
the that's the unglamorous side of
medicine and but what he discovers and
there's various you know studies which
he which back up this observation is
that it's actually those people that
have the most radical ability to improve
somebody's life and that it's through
that ongoing engagement with that person
and knowing their family history and
through seeing them once a month for a
decade that you can really start to
understand to how that person lives and
you're able to test things out in a
patient way instead of in an
interventionist decisive way and that
you can play around with other aspects
you know maybe it's a mental health or
maybe it's their lifestyle or maybe it's
their you know family or whatever it is
but too slowly discover the cause of
their ills and that actually that's how
you improve extend people's lives so I
would like to put that as a comparison
on the table and to say that as
architects we are all surgeons we are
all extremely well trained and we
believe in the decisive gesture and then
we walk away when actually what we need
to be is GPS and that is requires
patient collaboration with people and to
embed ourselves as part of a community
and not and and and I think it was point
about you know one of those institutions
that support that way of thinking I mean
that's exactly that's the that's the
really big point because it's not
just the way that Arctic's operate but
it's the whole ecosystem of validation
that is built around that decisiveness
which is the click of the shutter for
the perfect photographs for the magazine
for the awards for everything it just
sort of cascades out from from that this
is what architecture is and this is what
we celebrate there is no parallel
ecosystem that can support the kind of
practice that I'm talking about although
many people do work in this way
especially outside of the Centers which
is why I'm so interested in the edge
condition and the more pedestrian forms
of architecture because I think that's
where we can see the future I think
that's where we can see what an
architecture that really matters thank
you sorry for going on a second I don't
know what it is to heal in architectural
terms and I think in the future and not
too distant future a lot of the things
that we consider in the past to be done
by an architect might be able to be done
by algorithms automated fabrication and
so on I don't think that people
sometimes can be very good doctors of
themselves in that regard I do think
that the architects we do bring and if
we are specialists at something I would
like to know what that is and I think
that would be an entirely different
conversation but I think we also
specially start making people dream and
to actually question they kind of
received ideas of the fabulous green
dream home known that somehow
perpetuates some of those inherited
values that society gives us and so if I
would like to say that we are
specialists at dreaming then how does
one how does one think of a doctor of
dreams right so I'm not thinking so much
that society is sick I think that
society needs of different dreams I do
think that the kind of day-to-day
architectures the 98% that is already
built with that architects can be
implemented with technology with entire
new systems of fabrication but what I'm
worried is that we might lose in that
space of hyper pragmatism that I totally
agree I am actually highly sympathetic
with people who are community driven is
that we should not forget how to dream
so just
thank you
[Music]
I feel as though it's proportionate so
if all the architects that exist are
trying to fulfill this desire of
delivering to that 1% it's
disproportionate I feel like more
architects needed to cater for the other
proportion of people just because it's
it's proportionate we can't have
everybody doing the great images that
sit in them in the magazines or whatever
it's just not proportionate it's
disproportionate so I do agree that some
of us need to be the dreamers but it's
not for everybody to be the dreamers and
some of us need to cater to the other
98% and it's just doing it
proportionately but I want to dream for
the 99% like I don't think the 1% they
are fine as they are yeah I will try to
squeeze two questions okay so one when
you mentioned the GP metaphor I think
it's very productive Renan de Graaff I
think he curated we didn't oh I'm a huge
back you know I know
I created a show for the Venice banal
about jacketed as a civic servant so I
think it was oma a guilty feeling so one
story as a civil servant so it was one
of the components so the Venice Biennale
OMA once you know why they feel good
about themselves so they try to look
good so they did that and I think it's
interesting bringing that back to the
institution side like it's not just
about our cadets trying to become
suddenly very good but maybe
understanding which are the
interlocutors you need to start talking
again with and in the end I'm quite
convinced that very few schools are
willing to engage back municipalities
civil council city administration to try
maybe to revert the system and archit
has been hired again into public bodies
we still sell our schools as the place
where you will become the new Renzo
Piano
that is the best model so I think it's
not just about architects but I think
maybe try to understand what is the
ecosystem where this relevance can be
back again electron to establish design
I think it's key that the schools want
to make maybe the not so exciting job to
go to talk to the other city councilor
Civic Council or the elected officials
of an in London at a long tradition in
that so I wonder whether there I mean if
we want schools to be proactive in that
sense there's a chance the second issue
is more a kind of like discomfort I
think risk is a term that is a limit
tricky it's it's conveniently between
danger and opportunity every capitalists
will describe himself or herself as a
risk taker there's a lot of that so I
wonder is not a risk a luxury in a sort
of way I totally Montreal where there's
a very bad weather and the front of
money highest our lady to make to
cleaning he pays that lady lady arena
space that lead in cash and I realized
that's when the weather is very bad when
there's ice and snow she comes later
than usual and the reason is that she
walks slowly from the main place because
she cannot afford to fall and not to
work so she's not taking any risk so I
wonder whether that's term that I mean
it's it's a double agent so on one end
is about a danger that we but also we
like as architect in a certain way
that's negative about taking it so I
think that it's interesting to locate
that within a wider frame is not that we
still are in the privilege of being in
the condition of discussing is can
taking them whereas the majority of
humans cannot take any risk whatsoever
thank you
tobey's oh yeah um I guess I go question
about competing risks because obviously
is young people maybe sometimes
precariously employed living in London
with all these kind of external factors
weighing down on us it can be we have
risk which we need to imagine our own
lives at the same time as human beings
on this planet we know that as a result
of climate change there's an increasing
risk that we're going to not be able to
negotiate away so my question is about
maybe for all you guys like where you
see architects may be negotiating
between competing forms of risk so the
great existential risk is facing
everyone immense of the individual the
interview individual day-to-day
management of those risks so I was just
following what Oscar just said I think
if we if we look at yours your statement
or your motto law which is risk follows
desire which is kind of a translation
from let's say a form follows function
somehow if if so but the thing is desire
is a kind of desire is something that is
also good for you but also bad no you
you run you run to danger which is the
the definition of risk you you run out
to danger but the danger is can be good
and or bad for yourself and for others
so it links to what you just said before
about the ethics know and how we
redefine what's good and bad in in a
society where the earth is you know in a
in a bad state so I guess the desire
also is not just the one
of architects but the one of the million
people were attracted by urban centers
or Europe and take huge risks through
migration to come into the kingdom and
how can we let say we reassess the
values of our society in an environment
that is not stable second two questions
are quite similar which is about the
comparative risks the small risks and
big risks the the risk of paying the
rent versus the risk of planetary
collapse and and maybe it comes back to
sorry to keep drawing on the same set of
points but these sources of gravity
which which maintain the status quo
paying the rent is is one of those
sources which will stop you from
addressing the big risk in a way I feel
and that's the excuse that assets use
we've got to pay the rent this is bread
and butter job we don't we don't
necessarily do but we do competitions on
the weekend but actually the the stuff
that deserves the most attention is the
exception to the rule it's the thing
that you do in the margins and I think
that's a kind of you know it makes sense
in the short term but it's a dangerous
strategy in the long term and and you're
right to point out that we need to
somehow keep an eye on those two things
so what's the business model or the
practice model or the how do you lower
your overheads to the point where you
don't have to worry about paying the
rent and you can work on climate change
that's why I'm always interested in
people who like you know moved
Liverpool again urban wasteland but you
know seriously you could you could sell
your flat and a few light a flat in
London and like buy a whole street you
know I'm not even exaggerating so yeah
and then you could be a landlord make
loads of money and your rent because you
tricked all your friends to move there
too and work on climate change I don't
know that's why that's where I think
these these the business models and the
practice models intersect with the with
the kinds of questions that you're able
to to address and that's where those
where this all hits the ground for me is
because the two things are related yeah
thank you so listen would you like to
respond to a question especially I
thought the question about engagement of
schools with councils I'm honest about
this is something yeah that's I felt
like that was pretty important cuz I
it's again the thing about okay it's
quite might be a bit mundane but imagine
what it wouldn't be mundane if we were
involved in it in the first place we
have not a lot we've lost a lot like you
mentioned about there's no architects
within within local authority anymore
that has an impact on what our everyday
society looks like what uh you know
schools look like what all of the things
that get built without the architect
because the access isn't involved we
lose value people don't value us in
society anymore people don't really
understand who the architect is or what
the architect is we don't understand
what we are who we are what we can do
what we can't do where we should go
are we restricted within the confines of
this this box is an architect only
supposed to do X Y and Zed it doesn't
necessarily need to be the case I feel
like architectural schools of
architecture teach you so much you are
inherently way more than just the
architects you can do a lot more than
just what is perceived to be
architecture or perform a lot
than just the role of an architect we
have things like terminology that's
coming out like and place makers all
sorts of things and if you look into it
a lot of those people are coming from
architectural backgrounds and if they
are not coming directly from
architectural backgrounds they're having
coming from a place of having something
to do or and a desire to engage in space
and place and really and truly if you
strip it down I feel like that's what
the architect is about
that's what architecture is about take
away any sort of style or or ideas of
form of function and ideas of what is
modern has a more traditional
architecture whatever it's about place
and space and I think that's something
that every human being relates to every
human being sees a doctor and knows that
if I'm ill it's the doctor that I need
to go to everybody doesn't see the
architect as if I need to think about
space and place that's the person I need
to go to why is that because we've
stripped ourselves out of that every day
and placed ourselves in a situation
where we just want to be the Renzo Piano
or whoever else and that's problematic
and we sit and we discuss about all the
people don't value architects people
don't understand architecture what we're
gonna do about it
but you've slipped yourself away from
being needed or being somebody that
every day every day person can relate to
so how are you sir possibly going to be
able to have the impact that you wish to
have on society and I don't know if that
answers it before we move to worry about
me I asked Tobias to so I also had a
question but but maybe we can say
so I'm just thinking you're each
representing three very powerful
different institutions representing each
kind of a bigger body of institutions
and I'm thinking what are if we think
about risks is both this kind of way to
be a first mover through normalize
things outside of social accessibility
if that's one kind of risk then there
might be another kind of risk that's
about opportunities like getting to the
bleeding edge first before anybody else
discovers that this is a risk that could
be taken with less risk maybe that is
perceived so what are those two risks
within each of your institution so an
educational institution one that
organizes the entire profession in the
country and one that is very much a
first mover but from a let's say from
also like a private actor in this stage
and so yeah I was accused to ask that
from each of you
those two two forms of risk which is
just to say risk for us is that we take
our audience for granted I think and we
when we get too complacent I mean I
don't like to you know we should
celebrate these things but I do the show
we've just opened a week ago has sold
every ticket a hundred thousand tickets
in a week and like you know that's quite
a tempting thing to want to pursue like
we should do more of that but then we
risk alienating everybody else and and
offering things work for different kinds
of people which is not really the
mission of the museum so so I think it's
hard
again you get addicted to these things
which give you a good buzz but we need
to be developing our programs and
pushing in the other direction away from
Dior and that's the that's the sort of
two risks either side did you describe I
need to be very careful our
I think part of it is like you say
entering into something that you're
quite naive about and you're able to
take certain risk without anybody who
actually realizing that oh this is this
is a huge risk we want to let anybody
else do this but I think you seize that
opportunity to do that quickly get in
and do what as much as you can with that
opportunity that you have for the space
of time that you have it leave enough of
the foundation to be able to address
certain issues that you're just not able
to influence in that space of time an
example of that might be so myself and
some other there's like good 50
something people on the Riv a council
and there's only three of us who are not
yet architects so only three of us under
the age of 30
we decided that there's an issue here
there is no joint after space for
students graduates and early career
professionals let's try and do something
about it
and we have and surprisingly we gotten a
lot of support from it within the
industry in the institution and outside
of the institution and it's very
eclectic so obviously we need some funds
to support it and who knows when that's
gonna happen but the wheels are turning
and okay that's going on with within the
institution that doesn't stop us
continuing to do the work that we're
doing outside and get really the walls
turning so that when the institution is
ready to align itself everything is
already in motion I don't know if I want
it being very careful of what if you
need the space for that in less
bureaucracy come to us
but we have a bar and they were a lot of
questions in the wrist register that
reads that are in red I don't think are
the biggest risks I think they are is
that an architecture school any
architectural school but also this one
has this actually not to understand its
time its own time and also to fail to
actually shape it meaning I think school
needs to be able to do both and I think
that responds as well to this question
about what are some of their words and
tells that architecture schools need to
start doing that they are not doing and
I think engaging with that space of
reality if you want from policy to
politics to business models it's
essential I mean we have some unit
within the school that are dealing with
that kind of boring revolution know that
it is really happening around us without
us that we really need to make sure that
we that we tackle non but I mean I think
it's one of the questions that was
raised before is like who can afford to
take a risk no and I think one of the
things that we all have known is that I
mean I've been living in the US for a
few years and you know people of color
can take less risks that actually white
people just simply because of very
well-known police brutality and actually
because of preconceived ideas about how
people are perceived in in a space we
men can take very different kind of risk
than men but also we are educated in
such a way that we could say take by
nature not by nature by culture less
risks because men are educated and
encouraged to take risks even if they
want it or not right
so the problem here is how do we educate
ourselves to take the right amount of
risk maybe there should be a class that
is on risk
maybe then actually I just figure out
another class we're going to have next
year but I think to be able to establish
the right priorities know in terms of
like is it global warming or is it me
starting my own business
and how do we actually have those
competing risk constantly as part of our
consciousness I think it's a very
difficult difficult conversation how do
we constantly put ourselves against all
the different relevant
before time in education when in fact we
don't know that education is always a
kind of a form of atomization of forms
of knowledge and then at some point you
are supposed to bring them all together
as part of your unit a work or
development I think that's a very
important question can we afford to have
a study of like form geometry color that
actually doesn't go all the way back to
understand the politics behind it and
I'm not so sure that that's possible and
if you ask me I'm very much interested
in making sure that even when we look
into questions of a color theory one of
the best advances that I love about a
show I saw last year is that it said in
this was in Los Angeles and said you
know the color purple is to black people
the same that the blue Yves Klein is to
white people right and so and that was a
beautiful sentence that I mean obviously
I guess that in the UK is different but
it specific to a particular cultural
context and the fact that when we write
books about color theory no one we are
like the shirt that you are wearing with
this pink Pantone a fashion of this year
now is like like we are so homogeneous
energy monic in the way in which we
think about culture and even risks that
they think that's a real danger so
anyway I always follow the risk of
talking too long but I think part of the
in translation initiative to really try
to bring different languages and
different forms of thinking into the
school as a way to really try to to
start thinking from I think the biggest
risk that we can take is to be the other
and I know that that's a kind of
old-fashioned concept but I never grows
old no how can we the other and who is
the other that we want to engage today
and I think that that's a constant
exercise that I think any architect has
the responsibility to speak on behalf of
those ones who cannot sit at the
decision-making table even when one I
mean
poorer venture know I mean like the
Pompidou Center they really try to think
about the project that are contributed
to the city of Paris in a way in which
it transformed AZ of the museum and
pretty
a public amenity I mean I do think that
even architects when they sometimes work
for the 1% they I would like to think I
really do like to think that architects
at the end of the day we believe that we
are when working for the 1% we are
trying to serve the 99% and if that was
not the case then I would have stopped
being an architect no but the question
is that I I think it's also maybe we do
need to all come together and to
acknowledge that but maybe the wrong
things is not that 1% is that that we
keep on fighting among ourselves when in
fact we should try to work come together
and to really start thinking of this
hundred percent and make sure that
constantly in every single project in
every single business model in every
single exercise we do the man that there
is a clear understanding of that hundred
percent of society and I think that that
if we are able to unite everyone around
the goals and the things that we want
maybe then we might be able to be more
powerful instead of excluding all those
lovely white dudes ok a question what
I'm totally happy to but I think it's
I'd like to bring people together and
then to say ok what's what's the next
what's the next game what are the new
rules what are the new codes like
talking about a river or a n carp or all
the accreditation systems at some point
I was very much interested in producing
a new accreditation system that would
Warren architectural schools asking them
if they actually had enough vision ilysm
within their pedagogical structure how
do we produce an entire system of
measuring that allows us to be fair to
be ethical to be like and I don't think
that any kind of professional validation
does that so thank you very much but we
have time for one last round of
questions there is one at the back of
the room
hi thanks very much for a great talk
we're talking about a lot of kind of big
risks here and one of them is which I
actually don't consider a risk in fact
because I think it's a fact and a
challenge and we will all face it and
there's probably no insurance for it
which is climate change I don't think
it's a risk actually and I think it
shouldn't be perceived in that way but
I'm more interested in something a
little bit maybe quite few steps before
it which is intellectualist risk and
being in an architecture school I'm just
wondering how do you create space for
people to take intellectual risk and not
follow the safest option or the best
path or the one that brings more cash or
the best projects how do institutions
teach people to actually maybe follow
through the ideas that have a potential
for either success or failure someone
told me that the the unit in the school
are supposed to be a safe space in which
one is supposed to take risks I don't
know if that's true or not I've only
been here for seven months and I would
like to think it is but the question is
that if we were here to define we have
spent now an hour and 20 minutes talking
about risks what are the risks worth
taking and what an intellectual risk
might be and I think that's when I was
saying before that like just sometimes
one has the luxury and the school has
the luxury to sometimes be able to take
a risk that is not immediately legible
right that actually might be registered
as a risk later on that actually might
be worth pursuing and
and be considered as relevant later on
and I think that that's what our school
provides but that cannot just be it
right the matter the problem with that
is irrelevance is actually a the
inability to understand the purpose of
what one is doing so I do think that
within a school there needs to be a
range of spaces that allow you to take
those risks of what you actually define
as intellectual risks I am Not sure I
would define them as intellectual risks
necessarily I think some bad within that
I would say we suffer the aesthetics of
intellectualism sometimes things that
sound intellectual but there is nothing
intellectual about them but but I hope
that we do know but like thinking
thinking by itself is a constant risk
noises and I think it's maybe it's not
so much to think is to doubt and I
always love that the card sentence is
editor the card in his scribbles he
wasn't saying I think therefore I am
he said I doubt therefore I am but of
course I think he said it I was like no
that's too has it done like this but I
think therefore I am
and so am i mother say I doubt therefore
I am because doubt is a critical act to
doubt put something that is there and
actually questions it to think sometimes
like I love my nephew when he's like
half asleep like what I usually please
like no I'm thinking like okay so I find
thinking I think a lot of a lot of
Dreams hide I prefer doubt for that
matter and so yeah there is plenty I
hope there will be plenty of space for
it I think that what a school is the
place to doubt and to doubt the
inherited structures of power and
knowledge and to create new ones
would you like to add to that I'm just
doing I'm thinking what what is the
school maybe it's a question for you
ever what what is this school which is
not safe if it doesn't create a safe
space woody what is the exposed school
what is the precarious school the risky
school what does that look like is it
possible or is that not something to
entertain no actually I think a school
needs to take risks and and the risk is
to produce that safe space if you want
in which people can take those risks
inside there's a double risk right in
which sometimes you're not in control of
what happens the moment in which you're
in control of everything that happens
then you're just training people to
become certain things that you have
already pre imagined and I think the
wealth of an architectural school is
that you produce a series of encounters
and conversations hoping that the
students also will be able to refine
those conversations by their own act of
thinking and inducting and so on so um I
think that the safe space is one that
allows people to put in question that
what they are being given and to and
that is not only by the tutor the
professor but obviously by the textbooks
and the forms of practice like one last
week on Thursday Wednesday I had a
conversation with the students and one
of the students she said are we here
going to respond to the architectural
profession or are we going to define it
right or to actually are we going to
expand it and and and obviously for me
the answer for all of us is obvious what
is the mission of this institution has
been within the ecology of architecture
institutions I think there are different
schools that actually have a different
mission and our mission is to expand it
and to expand it to be in the edge is
always at risk now because you may have
actually
and obvious and dangers but it is that
you keep on expanding it's a hoping that
we move into much more interesting
spaces of action in which the power that
has been concentrated like I think what
has happened over the last few years is
that also institutions that were
supposed to push that edge have not and
we have just concentrated a series of
conversations and run the same elements
of power and discussion and I think what
we really don't need is to really expand
and to destabilize and so that I think
everyone in this room maybe it would not
do not agree but would put him down the
system of all words the system of
recognition that is in place the way in
which we evaluate vias and and I think a
big part of our path is to really start
bringing new ways of recognition no
singular hero or the idea of like the
building and and what how can i building
when the biggest the world of
architecture when it's highly polluting
when it's actually like questions of
labor I mean you know you can stop
putting so many question marks but but
we won't watch and you know if CBS know
in or CBS that we're stop writing my CV
to my own risk
right like how many awards do we have in
there it's like we all know that in the
structures of series that we send to our
law offices we need to feel that section
a work I don't have that problem I mean
yeah I I totally agree with your
definition of expanding practice and
expanding architecture the harder
question for me is which direction do
you expand it and I wanted to bring in
and actually it's harder to see the
overlooked ignored territories and and
often they're I'm more unglamorous or
their marginal or their you know there's
no money to be made in that territory
and they're the territories that I'm
sort of drawn to perversely perhaps but
I wanted to but because I've just
remembered that slice he presented this
peoples empowerment alliance of council
house which is like one of the most
incredible projects and it's again it's
not one of those projects which I don't
want to talk for you I see but you
didn't have time in your presentation
but today it's you know to make an
alternative master plan for alternative
regeneration plan for a council estate
is just one of those territories which
is which i think is like right it should
be in the center of what we do but it's
completely ignored and actually to go
there and to do that kind of work is is
expanding architecture but it's not
doing it through scripting or parametric
ism or and I'm not talking about the AI
here I'm talking about what is
celebrated as innovation in in the
architectural world and actually the
other stuff that slice is presented is
equally imminent but in a different on a
different axis or something yeah and I
think I think the success in that though
is that it's very people centered it
wasn't something that the architects
came in and decided that they were going
to do they were supporting the community
to achieve what they wanted to achieve
and I was very fortunate to be able to
have participated in that more so
because of opening my eyes to just and
reassessing and analyzing okay what
purpose do I want to have or what how
could I have how could I impact a
society or contribute in a different
type of way that's not the traditional
kind of way yeah it's a bit tricky
something that you said I'm thinking so
if you you're on the edge and people
this free speak there are free space
free thinking intellectual you know that
you spoke about an abyss and all this
kind of stuff I'm thinking okay so
you're in an architectural school you
need to be assessed just from a very
pragmatic point of view how does that
then then work because I feel like
there's a lot of people who in my
experience were great thinkers in
architectural school but II never really
ever reflected in say the mark that they
were given for a particular project
because some
has to be subjective it's subjective
right someone's going to have to sit
there and be like I mean quite you know
buying what you're selling type of thing
how do you reconcile that situation I'm
not quite sure does he actually like
it's funny because two weeks ago I was
one of the units that is I took a risk
and I brought a very boring unit that
deals with housing social housing in
Paris and and I guess that within the
kind of structure of the school that
many of the students were like okay how
do i how do I take a risk in something
that is so boring no and and and and we
did go through an entire series of
sessions and today I was talking with
one of the students that I couldn't say
two weeks ago and you know we have just
passed failed within the school and
there are things that we can learn very
fast but there are things that we may
never be able to learn and so I think
the way in which the school assess if
you actually have learned enough the
fundamentals of what architecture is
supposed to be in terms of typology
structure and some of the measurables
that actually are part of world let's
say accreditation system and will
fulfill those ones maybe just you know
by the day by day just enough beside the
way we have pass and fail we don't have
a gradation of like applause and so on
but what no one really great is actually
how much of a critical position do we
take on those on those structures on
those typology on those forms and so and
I think one needs to someone who runs
the school and someone what she has to
produce a pedagogical structure how much
do we want to give of an equilibrium
between those pre-existing topologies
those forms that actually as architects
we do need to know versus those spaces
of reflection critical debate and
reinvention because you cannot reinvent
that what you
no and I think what you're asking is
like hey are you making sure that you
reinvent what you know what we all know
right and I think that that's that's
really what one needs to make sure that
happens but I think that's what this
school is at least its aspiration is and
that's what I've seen some of the
projects doing but how does one go and 1
validate write and say this is enough of
a visionary idea this is enough
questioning of a typology of housing is
because there is a group of people who
have been working on that subject matter
that actually can see how that project
by having a group of experts and people
who can actually build those things
would actually produce an entire new set
of conversations around what housing
means or actually the development means
so it's in a certain way it requires
that the people that evaluate are have
the ability to also see and project how
that would play off and I think that
that's pedagogical and educationally an
extremely important aspect because we
don't teach with each people how to
think not and how to find forms of
knowledge and knowing but not that just
a specific form of knowing right and I
think as we have so moved like what is
ultimately architecture education is not
just teaching people to make buildings
as you said before is it is to be place
makers is to actually engage with all
kind of very different set of questions
and to teach that is it's not something
that actually I kind of validating body
that says is the diameter
according to like the structure no it's
something else right and I think at that
this school has a great trajectory that
I hope I can continue I was just going
to say how do we then take that into say
the real world quote-unquote if you
speak about awards and who gets the
ordered for what who receives what kind
of a waterfall can that same rationale
that you've explained to be applied to
when we're talking about actual built
projects in society because it seems to
be a disconnect
it's because I don't feel like from what
you see and what gets whatever award it
doesn't seem like that same thinking is
applied no and it's to the detriment of
absolutely everything one of the one of
my unfinished projects is actually to
make an entire protest about the award
system that we have in society but you
know like it's never late like I mean
someone would pick it up and we will do
an entire exhibition but I don't have a
big problem about the way in which
awards perpetuate kind of different
stereotype forms of thinking about it
thank you very much I would like to
propose to continue the conversation
about the visionary GPS over the drinks
at the back thank you all for coming
[Applause]
