welcome to the architecture Association
[Music]
this evening we are continuing the
discussion that we initiated on Friday
my name is jumping machine and together
with annsofi
around scope we run a unit here at the
IAA in the diploma program and we are
the founders of independent organization
called territorial agency that is
convening this series and part of the
series also convened by some colleagues
across the school so you will see that
we try to organize the series in
multiple voices the series called plant
the planet and the alliteration is
really there to hide a divergence on one
side the planet is on the move
is no longer made than a fixed object
would not think it as a finite condition
of planning that is subjugated to our
policies it is traversed by multiple
energies and dynamics and on the other
side planning is becoming a more and
more esoteric practice one that concerns
itself with putting things in sync
managing timelines and pathways rather
than allocating clarity in space and in
time it's more about being on the move
itself so we have two situations where
the current ecological crisis cannot be
resolved it used to be in the good old
20th century that we imagined to be
appeased by living in nature today we
find there all kinds of troubles so the
question is really here one and that
stems from series of discussions
initiated by students at the
architectural Association a particular
group that has self organized
in what is called the AAA action and in
conjunction with a number of similar
initiatives across the architectural
education realm in Britain and formed
the architectural education declares
paper that is calling for a radical
revision of our curricula our policies
and the way that we cooperate and so
this is just a another response but is
thought in conjunction with that series
and the series is also a sustained
documentation it's a sustained
documentation so it's not a
cross-section is not a survey of what is
happening in the field because the field
is not a pre constituted one it's not a
subject we are on the contrary inviting
friends to the table and everyone is
welcome at the end of the discussion
this evening we are really welcome to
join the table and continue the
discussion in order to sustain this
argumentation we want to say two things
on one side that we have to name the
current situation for what we think it
really is that is the warm war at the
end of the Cold War the notion of just
fizzled out and became immaterial we
think that we should name it clearly and
at the same time as we name it we should
call for not only a truce but a way of
being at peace and the question is we
who with whom and this is where the
discussion is gonna take us so it's a
laying out of the beginning of a
thinking together of what an
architecture of peace might mean in the
21st century just first some thanks I
mean first to the a a for us being able
to do this but also to granham
Foundation who actually funded us in the
first part of its plan the planet and we
have
a seminar here a day a few years ago and
I think we have found a great way to
continue that researcher Jacqueline
turret in order to really look with you
students what the situation is that
we're talking about I I think we really
ought to thank the students who love
spring initiated all of this new
thinking and who really debated quite
serious things here in these rooms on
Friday it was all about
intersectionality it was new forms of
politics and it was how to embed an
ecological understanding on how to deal
with decolonization so it was big topics
on the table and it lasted many many
hours and many many people were here so
it's really great that these things are
in these rooms and it's a serious
interest there and that is also why we
are very happy to have the Chia Petrie
used to here tonight because he's the
curator from serpentine calories and she
is directing her general ecology yeah
and we think it's great to have you here
because you proved how to infiltrate
these thoughts in an institution and
especially in your case and art
institution and that's why we look
forward to hear about your general
ecology or the Serpent's eyes general
ecology and your projects I think from
which one the Sun and Dima Dima in the
literal Pavilion in Venice art biannual
which got the Golden Lion is a really
outstanding project and you basically
took the art audience by storm welcome
to
[Applause]
and of course thank you so much to both
of you john annsofi for the invitation
and of course to be a I felt because
it's quite terrifying to speak to
architects because you're all much
smarter than me I thought that we could
start by playing a song because it then
relaxes me and then everything goes much
better
[Music]
[Music]
so that is a brief song from Sun and sea
marina which as annsofi said was the
Lithuanian Pavillion at the Venice
Biennial and those are the words of the
longer version of the song which I'll
tell you a little bit about later but
the this is the ridiculous version of
the PowerPoint because it just has nice
images that I really like so um I
started to believe in magic spells for
example I started to believe in magic
spells a bit a while ago and understood
and I suppose the more academic way of
calling that is the performative so
things that as you're talking you speak
something or you present the
representation or the symbol of it but
the action of it or the fact of it in
the material world also happens at the
same time so believing in magic spells I
started - is is is I suppose a way of
looking back at the last two years of
general ecology project at the
serpentine what it didn't know I was
trying to do what it did know it was
trying to do what it did
and also what it's still doing and sort
of trying so two and a half years ago I
think yeah I had a child and it taught
me a lot of things that I didn't know
before things like it's really
interesting she's communication because
it's a thing you know if what you need
to get your head around and also and
that communication doesn't really need
an enormous amount except for the
question of care and being with or
spending with together so something like
communication is actually a sum of
observation care and time and has in
fact very little to do with the symbolic
linguistic framework and I also learned
a thing or two about what it is to think
past the scale of one human life now
you're actually only thinking about the
scale of two human lives but
nevertheless you know what my lucky end
up being 120 years is a little bit
longer than 75 years and therefore it's
a useful defamiliarization of the
question of time or at least that's how
I over intellectualize the experience of
being a new mother as a result of this I
started to write a project for the
serpentine galleries where I was already
employed as curator of public and life
programs so all the kind of discursive
conference performances films and all of
this and I started to write in the very
first conversations but started to write
this project as something that would try
to set itself the task to embed
questions around the environment
intraspecies questions questions around
ecology in a very very very wide sense
but of course we're narrowing now as as
the kind of I suppose public perception
of the environmental crisis and
questions around climate justice kind of
intensified through weave those things
into and out of everything else that we
did at the serpentine now if you go to
an art institution and you say I would
love it if everything we did was about
the environment from now on until
forever
it wouldn't work so I was trying from
the position of a curator which if you
think about it in an art institution is
kind of you know it's not even middle
management it's sort of lower-middle
it's like the semi mezzanine floor of
middle management and at any rate you're
let's any agency is in the field of the
representative or the representational
rather the symbolic and the discursive
how do you then start from that position
and try to do that and so the way that
the way that I went about it was I had a
little bit of budget from the public
programs a little bit from other things
and I started to slightly funnel things
towards things that yes they sounded a
lot like public programs and in fact
promoted themselves and manifested
themselves in the shape of conferences
and talks and films and performances and
things like this
but that they would instead of being
sort of one eye
separate from each other in some way
work on the event scale they would
actually repeat and continue to repeat
more or less the same set of questions
and concerns it's not new nobody has
invented anything here but the idea was
also to create around it's also a bit of
therapy here so the idea was to create
around the serpentine which is an art
institution that prides itself on
working on let's say at the
interdisciplinary edges of the
contemporary art field but it was to
create a community of interest in
practice and also of networks and
individuals and experts far far greater
experts than myself around the gallery
that would over time then invite let's
say the gallery itself to start to think
of itself as a institution that had
something to say or at least a platform
to give to those kinds of conversations
so at this point once you have the
institution thinking of itself as one
that has anything to say useful about it
then you're kind of halfway there
because what you've done is it kind of
slow and not alone certainly this had to
do with a huge cross organizational
effort but you've sort of you've done
the thing that you were doing to you to
the kind of extended body of the
institution all right so you've you've
sort of managed to think of your body as
a little bit wider and that bodies
become begins to think of itself as a
body as well so once that happened and
we were in a phase at which we were
trying to determine what what the 50th
anniversary of the serpentine was going
to be and that is happening in 2020 so
next year I suppose the environment had
also been on everybody's mind I mean one
of the things that happen in between and
that definitely did help this whole
thing was winning everything an award
via and independent projects that
however manifested within it the
potentials or the the way in which
certain questions around the poetic and
the musical could intersect with
architectural questions with questions
around space and viewpoint particularly
in an opera performance such as this one
so I'll just describe this to you really
quickly the what you see is an intern
have you have anyone been to see it ok
so I can has anyone seen it see the
little implement all the hands went up
and then I went live Oh came down so
this is an indoors artificially lit
beach in which the sort of actors
singers vacationers that you see are
observed from the mezzanine above so
those columns are actually holding up a
precariously holding up a mezzanine onto
which the audience stands so they're
looking about five rows I suppose five
plus the height of a person above the
ground onto these singers and there is a
soundtrack and you heard the piece of it
and what the hour-long loop it's it's
kind of like an installation so you it
the whole opera performance loops it's
about an hour long but it just keeps
going on and on and on and then you
never see them beginning our end that's
the kind of conceit I guess and what it
narrates with the libretto narrates is
the individual thoughts and musings and
worries and whatever of people on the
beach as you would imagine them to be so
kind of trifling pointless a little bit
annoyed at times and you know just these
kinds of things that are perceived and
underneath us is kind of veiled but
sometimes not so veiled anxiety around
pollution volcanic ash clouds a world
that's changing a world that's dying and
so on so without being incredibly
didactic necessarily about it but being
quite humorous maybe it sets off a
situation of defamiliarization
of your own relationship to the
incapacity to cognitively make sense of
something as wide and complex and
unequally distributed as climate change
that's what that's how that's what makes
sense that's how I would tell this that
story but I'm sure the artists would do
something else another series that we've
been doing it was called the shape of a
circle in the mind of a fish and that's
you see they're part one this is the
whole from part three the shape of a
circle in the mind of a fish is a joint
project with a brilliant writer and
editor called Philippe Aramis who's been
working on animals and particularly
animals and zoo in zoos and how they
figure in contemporary art for quite a
long time and what we did was we started
to set up these kind of conference style
symposium also with art and performative
bits and poetic bits and a rod that
tries try - one at a time try slightly
open certain assumptions of
anthropocentrism the first one perhaps
addressing something something like you
need language in order to communicate
which we've already spoken about the
second one which is not here was caught
with subtitled we have never been one so
the shape of a circle in the mind of a
fish part - we have never been one which
was perhaps undoing the asam or trying
to pry open the assumption that when we
meet when we say hi we're talking about
an individual and when we say the planet
we're talking about a number of
individuals and so if symbiosis and
cooperation and coevolution are much
more than norm than the exception at
science and all the other knowledge is
besides that were annihilated before
Western science know very well then
notions of competition and individualism
in terms of our political structures and
all other kind of forms of governance
are actually not notions that self
justify by presenting an image of
quote-unquote nature that is actually an
image of themselves so what other forms
of being together really and all of its
extensions can be possible if we begin
from the idea that we ourselves are
collab
relations with an enormous number of
cells bacterias parasites and so on and
viruses the third one the shape of a
circle in mind of a fish with plants was
a lot more to do with distributed
intelligence and care and with trying to
unwind the question of distribution and
communication by thinking about
communication with a vegetal world and
plant intelligence so and we're working
now towards many others but to cut a
long story short all of these things the
audience grows the Venice thing happens
and all of these things kind of lead us
to a situation in which by no means as a
result of only the ecology project but
we're talking about emergence here so it
emerged that the anniversary program for
the serpentine in 2020 would be entirely
dedicated to the ecological back so at
that point you start to ask yourself
well then what can you do that is real
what can you do that actually can make a
I don't want to say a difference because
I hate that kind of solution is
conversation but that can sort of really
hold its feet firmly to the ground
whilst doing what a night institution
does we're not going to reinvent
ourselves between now in the beginning
of 2020 there isn't very much time what
we do is present works of art well how
can we operationalize that work in order
for those for those things that we
present or that we support or that we
platform to be able to do what they do
so we're planning on working with an
enormous number of sort of activist
organizations also non activist
organizations organizations that do a
lot of ecological or embedded work we're
planning for things that are part of
this let's say we're calling it a meta
initiative that holds within it lots of
initiatives we're planning for those to
deploy themselves and manifest
themselves and be looked after by
different strands of our programming and
and to manifest in completely different
ways so you might have things that are
completely invisible for five years and
then finally emerge as a piece of
infrastructure you might have something
that is
absolutely poetic and performative and
that acts on that kind of culture action
level and so on but the idea is that in
each one of us of those moments we're
going to ask ourselves what is the kind
of magic spell that is held by this
particular project or initiative so I am
going to stop but I wanted to say
something which is that someone called
it social practice once at me and I so
gosh it would be the worst social
practice I'm a huge I have colleagues
that do this so well and have done this
for so many I call the psychological
practice I call it let's assume that
we're always already within a within and
to then figure out what it is that that
position within that within is and where
that agency is so not so much the
structural possibilities of that within
but but maybe even more what the
institution or the structure offers
while it limits offers by way of
limiting and where that agency comes and
then how do you work a little bit like I
always say if you're going to work if
you're going to do any work on mushrooms
you have to work like a mushrooms if
you're going to be thinking about a
parasite you have to work like a
parasite and in order to find out what
that actually means you can you'll know
when it happens just like you know so at
that point I I would probably leave it
there except for saying that then that
brings with it the question of what does
ecology mean to me and what did I call
it general first of all because I'm not
an expert so general it was of course
inspired by a book by Eric hurl that had
to do with the kind of generalization of
ecological principles and cybernetics
thinking really brilliant book if a
little bit media theory heavy but
ecology to me has to do with a lot of
things and this is why it's not a
definition but it's a set of connections
fuzziness and the perhaps is special
advantage that comes with a kind of
blurry view so artists are really
amateurs at everything they're not
necessarily specialized service amateurs
are also lovers but when you're an
amateur you can in the fuzziness of the
things that you're looking at you might
might just have the chance to see more
the connections or the things that are
similar than than the distances and the
differences and the big joke that I said
everything that you probably need an
intraspecies communication together
microbiologist and an oceanographer to
talk to one another so fuzziness
messiness messiness from a netting point
of view and although there isn't a
single kind of point on the one-to-one
scale of the planet that doesn't hold
within a kind of incredibly messy
incredibly friction full entanglement of
economy ecologies and an enormous amount
of things with core ality and the sense
that if we're talking about solutions to
the climate crisis were in the wrong
line of business it's a question of
really relearning forms of part making
puzzle jigsaw exercise impatient and
also that there will there is never ever
going to be such a thing as a one I'm
saying the obvious here connection at a
distance of course systems goes without
saying that the notion of the ecological
that I tend to work with thinks a lot
about systems at the same time that
thinks about the environment and thinks
about systems as environments and then I
would probably end with this question of
like metaphors are real they really are
if you start to think about it symbolic
representations of things you say the
genealogical tree it has a relationship
with an actual tree and we just have to
work out what that is
I mean it's I'm not gonna going to it's
not as big if I'm saying now but if you
start to think that metaphors are real
then all of a sudden if she's if you
think well what does it
remember that question that happened in
Venice when I started to think about
this like what does a fish eye view what
a bottom-up view of climate of sea-level
rise could look like and all of a sudden
if you start to think well what does a
from the fish point of view sea-level
rise look like well it probably won't
look like sea level rise it will look
like what the things that dissolves in
the water will be right so all of a
sudden you change these things and then
you start to think about their material
actual illness and then a bottom-up view
which could be a
political statements like what is it and
how does that get them how does that
have something to share with metaphors
non-tropical yeah they're not not on the
Tropic yeah the condition through which
you're equating processes across a
number of entities somehow you say look
that there might be a tree that we and
you're saying it's not a metaphor oh but
you've seen actually metaphor is know
going on that it seems to me that you
try to have a material approach a
materialist approach to what is a
contemporary condition say look it is a
tree native it is following the same
practices of life and of form given and
communication and ecological function as
a tree but still you are within the
linguistic so I'm interested in that
condition because it seemed to me that
the amazing work that you've been doing
and leading over the last years is
trying really to dissolve and somehow
let many of those entities
interpenetrate one another vanish across
borders and somehow become the solvent
so what does it mean to have a form that
is similar
we present across a number of entities
rather than thinking that they're
entities that are self concluded and
then saying that the similar what what
does it actually change in mind when you
have to approach let's say the
Zoological Society what does it mean
that they will somehow start
infiltrating certain time and you will
start infiltrating them rather than just
working together I don't know I I can
tell you if let me try and answer
different levels of that in a messy way
which given the talk is gonna be totally
intentional there's a very simple
question around institutional
collaboration and really it is just
working together but institutional
collaboration is actually very much the
exception in most fields and certainly
in the contemporary art field because of
this question of competing for fun or
attention and so on when you're sure the
sort of funny maths of the whole thing
is that when you're actually sharing an
audience because you're doing something
in collaboration with someone else that
audience actually doubles because it's
counted by both organizations so in a
way it's sort of worthwhile you then
also think about collaborations in the
sense of oftentimes well from the point
of view of an art organization
oftentimes you find that our tends to be
sort of invited into the scientific or
the political process only as a way of
data visualization or I suppose public
understanding of science or sort of -
Joel - you know something is really
intense it can jolt you out of the
general that happens when you're looking
at a graph or whatever and I really
don't think that our does that at all
well I mean I think it does it but it
doesn't necessarily it's not made to do
that necessarily and when it's used for
that then it it almost to me reinforces
the dis the distance between this
whatever graph and the artwork it almost
reinforces the distance because it
creates a kind of relationship of
translation whereas the strange and
fuzzy and weird things happen when the
process is interpenetrate like the
thought changes on both sides and that
is true for you know these kinds of
institutional or artistic forms of
collab collaboration but maybe also
could potentially be true at the level
of like dissolving oneself or dissolving
you know like I was really interested in
why you called this how to think with
others actually a mom wanted to ask this
question so I and my colleague really
comes from an observation of two
elements on one side of course your work
and the work of serpentine galleries and
at large and it seems to me that what's
going on at the moment in the general
ecology project is significant as an
institutional model because suddenly the
institution is not thinking itself as a
body it's thinking itself as a series of
multiple simultaneous non-hierarchical
collaborations and I think that is
really exciting and of course this is
not yet completely public and the public
intercepted now and then only in
formalized moments but the underlying
collaborations are really astonishing
but you know there's so many collaborate
there's so many practices in museums
historically that have been working with
collaborate
for a very very very long time and it
might be that they need to exist that
there are certain forms that can be
public for those forms of collaboration
and certain other things that can not
what I'm interested in is perhaps inside
it's like almost like a work inside
because it feels to me like there's a
lot of practices these days that work in
these kind of embedded strategic
parasites mushroom-like way and there
isn't so much of a language to address
those practices not to like historic
size and killed them but to share that
sort of methodology or that kind of
prototype so if you're like if you if
you're maybe an artist but you work a
lot with local government who you have
someone in residency and you know if you
do all these kinds of things you might
know what you're doing and you might
have this kind of like oh yeah I
recognize you thing but then you do but
you don't we aren't quite at the I don't
know then it goes back to your question
of language we're not quite at the level
where we have the kind of toolbox to say
well if you want to do this within an
institution and this is what you do and
so I've been trying to incredible thing
is really you are avoiding completely
the usual attitude which we also see and
we've experienced on Friday in the
discussions and that is to make ecology
a subject to identify an issue as if it
would be something that you have to
clearly delineate and say now I'm gonna
study it in detail I'll open you know a
course about it and I'll become an
expert and then you discover that you're
not an expert you should give up your
architectural studies and move over to
Natural Sciences and but what is
interesting is that you're taking the
question as a organizational question if
so the question the second part of why
we would like to call this even thinking
with others how to think with others I
really to do with the fact that the
moment of the other is no longer a
subject
it's no longer a body that is clearly
identifiable the question of authority
becomes far more interesting yes it is
not only something that you recognize
within a grid of pre constituted
differences but becomes something that
is completely brought up by a common
salt or by common formation and that's
maybe the interesting element for many
of people in this room who are
preoccupied on how to establish say a
turn in architectural practices in order
to confront the crisis it's not as
simply I were no longer building
concrete where suddenly building in
we're no longer cutting down trees in
order to have roads wagon around it it's
not the usual modus operandi we have to
dissolve the condition so the question
of the other is an important one but to
me the most important element is how to
think with the other and your question
of the little puffer fish know what is
this circle in the mind and there's no
way that you will ever know what is the
mind of a puffer fish what is the mind
of an ocean what is the mind of a
railway system what is the mind of
complex technological what is the amount
of an institution but I think I'm really
impressed by the way that systematically
the way that general ecology project
operates is by dissolving by opening up
multiple relationships so maybe you can
tell us a little bit more about those
three parts about language but what's
the other two are you made it up oh I
don't know so I first one was language
the second one was how to think here was
yet
so the alterity question I guess there
is a kind of psychedelic or plant like
answer maybe a a homeopath inspired
post-colonial possibility and
lots and lots besides but because Bravo
was speaking last week it's fresh in my
memory he spoke about the necessity to
acknowledge or recognize the other
within before any kind of real work can
be done in relation to decolonizing
thoughts and also modes of governance so
that is I suppose one of the things that
the general ecology for an individual
kind of needs to be doing and the site
and the psychedelic version of that is
if you start to not necessarily
acknowledge but recognize and really
know the kind of consciousness and
intelligence of plants and I'm not
saying this in a kind of crazy hippie
way but really like Merlin Sheldrake is
about to publish a book that shows that
essentially mushrooms have neurons
mushroom systems of neurons we just
don't call them neurons because they
don't look like ours but it doesn't
really matter it's there's forms of
forms of intelligence forms of
generosity for sharing caring today in
the plant world as well then all of a
sudden you have like a really
cacophonous amount of information or
sounds that come at you from any walk
down the park or even if there's a plant
in your room right so you you aren't
really alone anymore and I guess that's
another experience of pregnancy it's
like you realize that those are two
brains thinking in one body and so the
one brain to one body relationships is
all of a sudden broken and therefore it
can be broken an infinite number of
other ways so I suppose that alterity
comes very much from a kind of Eagle
breakdown the language question comes
from disciplinary habits so I think the
space or the scale question would apply
and that kind of if you emerged out of
the architectural discourse for me I was
language because that's what I studied I
studied literature and poetry so I was
like for me it's the metaphor that's
kind of the point but then that's just
an accident
but the second was how to think how to
have an interspecies collaboration how
do you talk to plants but also how do
primates communicate with humans how do
we make music together with them how
does the internet operate when we have
interspecies and inter machine ik space
but the second element is that we've
never been one which somehow takes the
initial premise of the beginning of your
series of convenience and cuts right in
the middle of the problem it's not on
one side there is one species on the
other side there's another one suddenly
we are traversed constantly and this is
then for I think architectural thinking
a major challenge because in one way or
the other
we are still obsessed with a machining
notion one of the most favorite way of
drawing in architecture is an
axonometric and exploded axonometric as
if we will be engaging with the
construction of an internal combustion
engine and we will draw everything made
of parts reconstituted that need to be
reassembled there's no logical thinking
whatsoever there's not even a
thermodynamic think you know it's just
elements that need to be reassociate
and architects like that because we
somehow I think always under the
geometrical the geometrical is a pre
given and then we have to reassemble
these reconstituted elements but
suddenly when you describe the world of
general ecology nothing holds on what
you thought was a species speaking to
another species roughly said a very
intelligent sign human
science is talking to a very intelligent
group of dolphins and it's completely
mesmerizingly in yeah but it's funny I
think that is extremely interesting you
know it's funny because we're but we
don't perceive it as such right so it's
like it's all nice and well to say we're
constantly traversed and there's a sort
of mesmerizing or a psychedelic kind of
sub or subatomic if you like like
quantum under bit where we actually
aren't all the things that we think that
we are but most of the time we are we
cluster around the thing that it is
needed I guess the the I guess at that
point it sort of comes to faith like the
the enormity of the climate disaster and
the enormous complexity of it is
completely in its outside of the realms
of the possibilities of the cognitive
brain or the cognitive activity of the
brain in general like we're not gonna
get there and so what are the modes of
belief what are the kinds of artistic
forms what are the things that can push
towards something that you don't see
like electricity but you know is there
and you don't put your finger in the
plug right so it's like how can you
bridge the gap between the things that
you know you're never going to get but
without necessarily putting a God there
but or a goddess but just putting the
planet on the other side of that kind of
conversation and so there is a sort of
it's funny because it sounds like the
most like unactive astrology project on
the planet maybe but but what it tries
to do in the end has a kind of of course
there's an activist hope someone called
it active hope to me the other day I
thought it was really beautiful
there's an activist hope that has to do
with a lot of things with like not
becoming incredibly nihilistic and
therefore you know there's an activist
hope and relation to the fact that we
can actually get it even when we don't
get it because we get music because we
get divinity because we get the infinite
the possibility of the infinite and so
on so what does that mean in terms of
the built environment I literally have
no idea except for the fact that this is
a it's a circle to us and or I you know
pees work of art or whatever but if you
start to think of it from the past for
fish its view it's actually a dance
because it's really small and therefore
it's probably not going up and looking
what a nice little circle of me so it's
like that that movement is embodied and
then Rupert Sheldrake Merlin's dad told
me
apparently that if you that for him the
shape then then you go paranoid and you
discover that there's loads of circles
and fishes lives and there's lots of
shapes of circles in fishes lives and so
there's dolphins that make these circles
that they swim through with like
language and play and you remember Diane
and then Rupert Sheldrake said well you
know the fish looked up what they would
see as a circle past the surface of
which you can see the other side and
this is maybe an interesting comment for
architects but that the top above you
the called this is that circle you could
see the air so you would see like a bird
flying in and then around because of the
nature of light around that circle the
rest of the surface of the water would
be mirroring so you'd see the bottom and
then inside the circle you'd see the
other side no it's fascinating I don't
know where to put that question today
how do you start from watching
Attenborough fascinating rightly so by
the puffer fish circles starting
articulating then a completely different
organizational structure in extremely
established institution right in the
middle of London I think that is what is
at stake for us within the architecture
Association how do you make the jump in
in our mind that has to do with the fact
that we don't recognize the other it
that we inhabit a polysynaptic
condition but also that this science and
the material conditional
indistinguishable you can we're no
longer in that condition of let's say
post-world War two we're in in these
rooms
there was an idea of the cybernetic as a
condition of imagining and the signs of
science that is that really difficult
but those implies that the because we
don't recognize the other we are most of
the time we don't recognize that we
ourselves are conflating in two
conditions multiple modes of being
multiple ways of organizing our
relationship with and our attachments
and our association with others which I
think demand a lot of attention and the
cure the caring that you were talking
about the beginning it's phenomenal when
it's applied to one's own institution
and institutions don't operate
automatically it's not a till have
inertia they can collapse at any moment
if we don't pay attention but also very
importantly any institution has two ends
one of them might be the state of aim
and the other one is its own survival
and resilience right so you have to also
know which bit you are going for first
with an enormous amount of care and love
etc in collaboration inside it's also
permacultural like in the sense that
some things you might be able to respond
really quickly to a certain piece of
news or to a new attempt or a
documentary or and make an event but to
change the way in which we say relate to
our own carbon footprint or whatever
takes a much much longer time and I
don't see that as a firm hypocrisy I see
that as an invitation so if an audience
member came to us and was like yes but
what is your carbon footprint and what
are you doing about it the answer is
actually thank you because that is a
much slower much harder work to do that
we're doing internally that we all want
to do
but with that in kind of encouragement
that can also be called public scrutiny
or whatever in mind it sort of helps you
further I guess and also it helps you
make the point that your own resilience
is also dependent on those things it's
like when you know you have to remind
like we like we do actually need a
planet you know like the account you can
defend consumer society or this shop as
much as you like but we do actually need
a planet and so do you and so there's a
kind of like once you make the jump
between the resilience and I don't not
sustainability but like between
resilience and the thing that resilience
is kind of held by then you have another
way of looking at yourself differently
because I would invite at the table
immediate also those well just want him
to be quiet because part of thinking
with the others is also recognizing that
it's not always that action in
particular public action has to be said
in a an ardent way and only link to
public speech on the contrary I think
that we're in a moment where not to act
is as powerful as acting so please close
a little bit the circle come and think
now see you can dump my bag on the floor
if you like
it's supposed to be a seminar of the
road
well I just wanted to ask you if any of
this made any sense in the sense that
I'm very happy to also talk in a much
more precise like concrete well I just
like the mess that happens when we don't
so okay I think I mean also lots of
questions for you in the sense of like
for example the descriptions I'm gonna
fall out this check the description of
today brings up a lot of things that I'm
not very familiar with around it built
environment in urban space and I wanted
to maybe ask you what like first of all
why the urban space is the question I
mean maybe that's more question yeah I
don't know it came up also fried and
there was a heated discussion about the
urban versus rural
I hope position I think that is a share
position across the school is that city
and it's beautifully to word with four
letters it's so small but it has to
carry so many ideas and practices that
we call itself the city but we mean all
other kind of stuff but yet I think that
the majority of say will fall into the
trap of reverting to the city versus the
rural dichotomy and dualism and the
rural and the city being also formally
and architectural distinct as if the
city will be this area with high density
surrounded by an area and say more or
less with low density with a lot of open
fields and forests and so on which is a
very interesting notion and it's quite
interesting also to see where the notion
comes from it's a very recent it's a
very recent notion and that coincides
most properly with the loss of that
condition and in that in this particular
country the loss of the distinction was
then the motive for radical
transformation of a polity of
relationship between property and market
so the urban is a shortcut to discuss
very complex set of relationship with
larger spaces of operation of
architecture I think that's my version
of does anybody else want to answer the
question why do you why architects
what's the built environment does it
need can I attend to give my own version
of Wight's urban and why we have urban
resistant nature I'm curling whilst
getting the notion of Technology in my
unit and personally my definition of
like wider is the clear distinction
between the urban and between and
nature's precisely there is a a
distinction between us like I and the
others I think urban like a
manifestation of human production
projecting outwards in and at the center
of the ribbon like the Capitals like I
mean capital in the in the nations as
the capital city the big cities major
cities are the most concentrating part
of this kind of manifestation of if you
haven't in a better term humanity which
of course we're something that sounds
positive but but something that sounds
not that positive is like you're like
you're eager you're you're right earnest
that's again something that's naturally
existed so it seems to me it's like a
phenomenon that's just happening because
we like as a human as how humans start
to become different from the animals we
have our sense of us our sense of
individuality and we are building that
kind of individuality a sense of
ourselves by producing stuff by
contrasting us with
others and I think urban is like a huge
there's a term called Accra Malaysian
like you know a huge collection of all
the others it's because I like
collective unconsciousness
yeah that's I'm thinking funny this
metaphor is a real thing because as soon
as you said capital I was like okay
capital money yeah check capital city
fine the relationship between capital in
capital we got and then capital is also
what you put at the beginning of a
sentence and it's quite interesting to
think I don't know whether it's like
very fresh though I have no idea where
it goes the capital letter is what
announces to you that something is
coming so it's like what is it that the
City space announced it is announces or
announced that is coming or what's
coming whether it's the kind of
artificial ization of the environment or
the densification
you know what it is that it begins and
he says no we are urban he says as we've
always been
urban but now we are urban the majority
of humans are urban so not only we have
become urban in our social structures we
actually moved and changed our
[Music]
day-to-day lives into urban behavior the
majority of humanity used to be equally
distributed on the planet in the
temperate zones and we are now clearly
on coastal species living in but he says
in a very surprising way in as usual in
plain English the fact that urban means
that most of us have air conditioning
air conditioning at home air
conditioning in the car a conditioning
in the air planes air conditioning the
airports in the cube and so on and air
conditioning is interesting because it
allows you to somehow regulate internal
conditions that are good for us but also
makes us I think that it's irrelevant
whether outside is a scorching summer we
have air conditioning and on top of that
to the urban means to be extremely
mobile but other species can't move so
this summer was extremely hot in 20
years from now that will be every summer
like that and we can move wooden switch
on but we can switch on electricity to
have air conditioning we can move our
environment or we could imagine and
because we are even gigantic migrations
but the plants count not in such a high
speed and this is when I think the urban
plays a major role on one side because
we've urbanized so quickly and
unfortunately there is no second first
dry and we tried it at the beginning and
we got it wrong completely wrong is
there gonna come again a first trying
organization of humanity we've done it
wrong the first the question is really
what do we do from here so I think
that's why there's a preoccupation in
architecture about the urban condition
and many of our colleagues are even
investing a lot of efforts in
understanding its etting its origin its
conditions and interconnections with
other forms of architecture but still
it's an open question about that I think
I suppose if you think of temperature in
the same way as you would think of like
toxic elements then you'd find yourself
in a situation where air-conditioning is
quite similar to cleaning up certain
parts of the world and shoving those
toxic elements to somewhere else right
and that's exactly what happens the hot
air just gets pushed out now Pavan Ali
of course says if you're if you like I
do live in and work in the northern
territories of Australia and you know
that where I am is well where I am where
she spends her time is the end of the
sewer pipe from the forms of toxicity
and so the latest book that she's just
finished I don't think it's published
yet has to do with this kind of radical
proposal that says well you know
left-wing kind of real liberal ideas
around cleaning up things even this
t-shirt is all nice and well but
actually what we should be considering
is taking a share in those toxic
leftovers and not only a share there's
no externalities and there's no
externalities like the whole thing is
and also you take a share of it it then
ends up in your milk and the baby and it
kind of goes back into the earth so like
accept that this thing is a sort of
constant endless cycle remarks questions
Carlos I think is very interesting what
you set up and in terms of your
description of the collaborations and
opening of a conversation and so on I
like that sort of definition that John's
made of open I think I think the urban
condition is is open to discussion by
the way we think in the urban condition
I think we should separate that from
urbanization which i think is a real
problem I think the conversation so far
has been very positive actually but it
seems to me that urban is up for grabs
in in a way the conversation that's been
had at the table is actually questioned
what urban is rather than the other way
round
I don't think open is to form and I
think there's a real issue of
urbanization that this conversation is
taking place here at the same time I've
sat in this room
one has said well we've got to build
Africa so we're gonna organize it we
yeah we mean we society as a whole you
know these cities are growing people
moving towards some therefore you must
build them and it's quite interesting
because I think that is a total of
negation actually of what you are trying
to define by urban so I think the urban
condition the way that urban adapts and
urbanization are three completely
different things and maybe there has to
be some militancy against the
urbanization is not open up a dialogue
maybe needs more direct approach or more
direct action is what I feel about it I
think so I think the word urban in a
generous sense is probably a very good
word to start off these discussions that
are actually more open-ended image that
you have on the screen this is a really
an interesting place it's part of a
probably the first completely integrated
production site in the world it's in the
arson alley in Venice which is the first
completely integrated Factory
but you treat it as half exterior half
ET Ren and I like them big Uwe T of that
I like the fact that it's not clear
whether you're dealing with that space
is a condition that needs further
explanation or whether you want to made
it explicit that actually that's not
really an image let's not pretend but it
could be in a few years the pavilion
also is not just in the air sonali it's
in a military zone of the earth sonali
and that zone had never been open to the
public before and because our fixer in
venice was friends with the colonel we
got them to rent it to us for the first
time and they didn't quite know the
medina genuinely the military apparatus
of italy didn't quite know what was
gonna happen and certainly didn't expect
these really bizarre and entirely
performative situation
which have been outside where you have :
L coming this way and bikini go in the
other direction night sir and it's in
those moments that you realize it okay
well without doing something that is so
dramatic the gesture there renders
absurd the whole apparatus of the pin it
there and we get punished all the time I
was saying this at the tour at the talk
and we get punished in the way that you
get punished by like the kids of one of
the artists were found playing with a
ball in the fields that are so you know
like what is the field what is the stage
where where is the beginning allowed and
where is it not know and how does these
things are like they're all performative
inside the balloon outside so the kids
are found playing in their bathing suit
outside with a ball in the field the
playing field the king of Belgium happen
to all fast it's a big embarrassment for
the menina they punish us by locking the
toilet with the running water so all of
a sudden we don't have running water in
the pavillion that continues we have
smaller other ways but you all of a
sudden realize like running water is
quite it is it I mean this is a joke
situation kind of of course but you sort
of realized that you're at the interface
of something that is much more bizarre
than a theatre and they're getting the
locals that have never been the locals
that live around the corner that had
never been into the zone to see the zone
is in itself a gesture of disarmament
without necessarily calling it so we're
trying for example and then there's
where after life of I mean this is
getting quite specific but the afterlife
of the sand is now hopefully well that's
the plan is to open two new playgrounds
Sanders from Lithuania yeah everything
that came everything came in one truck
well this is what I'm going to is
everything that came to lift to Venice
came in one truck you can't get Sun
from Venice because it's came in one
truck but the idea was to never send it
back so what we're doing now is
negotiated working with the city of
Venice really to open two new
playgrounds in a city that has very
little infrastructure for kids so we
were trying to whilst remaining quite
humble you know it's not a zero carbon
project pressure remarks question at the
table it's just a sort of a simple
question to you but I'm interested you
spoke through that you're from like a
literature background and then through
the the action of artistic projects you
using the metaphor of nature and like
urban or architectural environments and
I'm personally like I come from an
artistic background not architectural
and I'm very fascinated by the idea of
working with metaphors and I'm just
curious to hear a bit more from you
about why you think they are so powerful
as opposed to just say presenting this
say like at the beach I know understand
the circumstance but why do you think
specifically a metaphor is so powerful
you know what the really amazing thing
that you've just said that I hadn't
realized before is that the fact of
putting a beach inside a closed space is
actually a form of metaphor and that
hadn't even occurred to me before so
clearly it wasn't my intent I mean that
has to do with the conditions of the
work itself which is I guess we probably
come down more into a question for the
artist but when I met the first so
powerful I feel like because we live
within them all the time because we say
the leg of a table and and because
language in general is a kind of have
these kinds of distances all the time or
closeness --is and through those moments
in which you misunderstand something
that might be said on a symbolic level
and you take it literally or vice versa
you actually find out that they're
connected somehow you know and even the
leg of a table might be made of wood and
when you chop the tree down and maybe
your
dropping its leg down like maybe those
are things that need to be thought about
just a little bit more you know it's
like mutilated relationship that we have
with material production where we
actually mutilate them maybe I mean I'm
quite suspicious of the notion of
empathy why ah no I mean it's a great
thing but like do you but I've I'm
suspect no I'm suspicious of the notion
of empathy and I've the reason why I'm
suspicious of the notion of empathy but
not at all of the notion of care for
example it's because empathy you'll hear
the word empathy mostly in discourses
around technologies which are supposed
to give you empathy by alienating you
even further from the thing that you're
supposed to have empathy towards so like
3d you know like like VR will get you
right in the middle of a conflict zone
and therefore will make you have empty
yes but actually the message there is
take up a thing and put on a machine and
don't look at the people right in front
of you but look at the thing inside so
you know it's like the language of
empathy is then kind of is used with
like Hollywood films that then exonerate
you from the feeling of you know I mean
the question I have is and we're trying
to find common ground and loss of the
rhetoric of the sort of cybernetic
arguments throughout history rely a lot
on emergence that we describe empathy is
quite similar to the way I'd imagine
emergence performs someone doing it was
any differential between basically what
I'm asking is there's a danger of like
to go on from what Carlos was saying is
it the you know the open is open for
urbanization is is it emerges new
extends continuously and I'm asking what
the difference is between urbanization
and the rhetoric of your of your
practice
that's a really tough question because I
feel bit bears
it's a really tight kind of them the
sinew between those limbs it's not it's
not so different it seems quite similar
I didn't like public speaking by the way
so I'm sorry now it's I I kind of into
it you're the it's just a really
difficult question and the other thing
that I would probably say is like when
you're working within the context of a
within sometimes you might actually be
like tripping into the political
opposite of the thing that you're trying
to do and that that's okay because
politics aren't so clear at the moment
until you drip and kind of but to know
that you're kind of treading thin and
dangerous ground I think it's also quite
important does that make sense
maybe not maybe I misunderstood you but
like urban Isaac
how do you avoid in thinking from within
the outside it seems to me that all
these conditions especially the
evocation of the cybernetic the
cybernetic is a beautiful collage of the
cybernetic conference which is just
nothing as an esoteric seating calling
for the other that has been voted to
pretty protein it seems to me that
didn't add discussion on the cybernetics
in even the second and the third level
of cybernetics and that is for the
uninitiated which I think it should be a
compulsory study at a cybernetics of the
third rank this is it started upstairs
at the bar I it seems to me that the
question is always this modernist dream
of a complete circle of a completion of
the circle and suddenly everything else
disappears
you're completely within what I'm
interested in the border between the
inside and outside I think that's where
architectural thinking really lies and I
think that situations like yours are
interesting in architectural thought
because they question the border the
questions not simply by connecting and
into connecting and opening up but the
question really what is the board and
you mentioned yet suddenly it's where
they killed where the children can play
football and suddenly what used to be a
rough run established assumption in the
Venetian space of what is the military
becomes where the children can play ball
I think that's a very interesting
transfer and an opening up of a
different kind of border and one that is
not contiguous maybe your question about
urbanization whether this can also be
seen as a practice of urbanization
true I think you are touching on a real
important point but the question is how
do we maintain that condition of
ambiguity of not knowing without
immediately reverting to yes it's
urbanization hence we should block it
you know it came back to homi Bhabha
again there's two things that you
brought up and basically just gonna
quote him one of them was this thing of
the border of being interested in the
border and he was he was saying
something along the lines of a kind of
interdisciplinary exchange is necessary
not for the sake of itself as an
aesthetic exercise but because the
problem his worth the problems exist
exactly in the place in which those
different disciplines kind of merge and
converge and me and so there is no such
a thing as a possible disciplinary
approach to it and then the second one I
forgot but it was really good question
again yes the other thing that was asked
I thought it was really interesting the
journalist brilliant brilliant person
who was interviewing him asked you know
given the encroaching language of hate
and politics and all of this how do you
and given your work on dissolving the
boundaries of the self and recognizing
the other nests within this how do you
fortify yourself against this thing and
then I'm just like yeah you know they
this is the this is the this is a
question to the theoretician of the
notion of hybridization and and these
kinds of porous boundaries being asked
about how you fortify yourself how you
fortify that kind of thinking against
something else in crow to you know and
so you also and then all of a sudden you
realize that the fields of that question
are kind of outside of where the
question was trying to be in the first
place which is kind of like saying the
child but the point is that the military
and the ecological are the same so you
might be surprised at the military it's
somehow withdrawing for ten minutes from
the disused
old hangars but the military is always
there because there's no way that we can
imagine an ecological thought without
using and perusing and going through a
military approach the entire apparatus
of ecological thought the fact that we
have to evoke the cybernetic command
system in thinking it's part and parcel
of the problem and I think this really
difficult part where we are trying to
use the series about planning to stay
with it for a while you know to
understand that you cannot really give
it up the question is really is so
closely interconnected to the military
to the industrial that we can only
imagine the conditions of climate
disruption from within an industrial and
if you are in alliance in some kind of
tentative and perhaps unstable and
perhaps also quite fragile alliance with
those forces that instead operate from
the activists so we don't quit temporary
without or literally outside of
parliament if you can create some kind
of situation then which this within that
feels a lot like it's selling itself for
you know it has a kind of temporal then
what is it that can all of a sudden go
through this border you know what can
what can how work like that's a loop
home because if you're working on the
ecological from the very embedded very
within very symbolic and so on and sort
of hypocritical as it were from the from
an activist standpoint but then you you
you are able to maintain some temporary
fragile alliances with those standpoints
themselves and i'm saying this from a
within ever with
the the wall has porous boundaries and I
think it's kind of a little bit like it
kind of comes down to what the problem
in politics these days it's like there's
a chunk of there's a chunk of politics
that doesn't care if it disagrees with
one another but somehow all it needs to
do is win the election and then it does
and how do you maintain the kind of poly
vocal phenomenal brilliance of the
emancipatory potentials of although you
stop being Trump right you know it's
like but you started with the chorus
yeah so what is a polyphony well I guess
it's like it's it's the same temporary
fragile harmony that happens when you
sing together but you don't pick the
same pitch to begin with you might end
up in harmony by accident and to kind of
let make space for that accident I guess
is a thing that one can do
I don't know if it's a question or with
it but one of the biggest issues that
comes with urbanization is that it
functions or evolves with
cost-effectiveness like it's built on
cost-effectiveness which goes against
what is efficient for the ecology for
its sustainability etc but why is it
that artists I feel like it's almost non
interdisciplinary that people need an
exhibition or exhibitionism in order to
kind of have their you know attention
drawn to something I don't know why it
would take an indoor beach or an artist
bringing an iceberg from like ice to
melt in front of the tape like I don't
know why it takes so much like why does
it need VR for you know for you to feel
empathy towards people who are dying in
a conflict zone so I think maybe my
question is doesn't this go against what
you guys are talking about in terms of
interdisciplinary you know creating
harmony but what you kind of exhibit is
the exact opposite so just the VR bit
personally I don't agree with the notion
that you need to put on a set of goggles
to understand what it means definitely
not I completely understand and no I
don't completely understand but feel
with the question that you've just
mentioned and my personal answer to that
is because when you win a lion for doing
something like this they let you do
whatever else you like everyone well and
so it's a position of enormous privilege
and that whatever else you like might be
take the shape I mean this is not I'm
just inventing here but might take the
shape of a certain kind of
[Music]
you know working with or leveraging the
institution to create some kind of
artist auction that then benefits the
activists or I mean who knows you know
then you can do lots of other things
that don't look like this and that you
might not even necessarily get to see
accept it as a story and those are the
sort of things whoopsie so those are the
kinds of things that we're also thinking
about in terms of the anniversary
initiatives for example so given
something like this how can then we
extend the categories of the aesthetic
to include something that might be a
kind of mutual leveraging of two
institutions in order to benefit a third
or you know these kinds of thinking
about policy like how do you change
policy how do you change the forms of
governance both inside and outside of an
organization like those are just kind of
I feel like they're they exist as
potentially artworks or palms but they
don't like them I guess they're
indignation the feeling of injustice
always comes with delay effect I think
that's what you described how there you
do put up a beach when it's obvious that
you should have been completely outraged
since at least the 60s didn't you get it
yet no and I think this is the delay
effect no it's obvious in front of
everyone that we should not be living
our life as we are doing hence we
shouldn't do it hence we shouldn't speak
to each other about how to get out of
here we should just complement each
other through our outrage and our and
this way the problem I think I think
that's where I think the question of is
of the capacity to act from within that
condition so I think that the real
difficulty is how do you get those who
are pushing against you and play with
them
manager I also think there's a real
power to using art and architecture to
also tell story is that through through
something that's like you know as
exciting and charming as a beach and
listening to an opera you actually even
if you aren't aware of these serious
issues you suddenly learn about them
through kind of active storytelling I
guess my question is linked to that in
it links to a point that you made
earlier John about speed and Cheer you
talked about mushrooms having neurons
and I was in a I was in a great meeting
last week with a landscape designer who
was telling me that trees have nerves
and that if a bird sits on a branch on
one side the other side is aware of it
it just takes two weeks for that message
to move across which I thought was
amazing and I just I think there's
something really interesting about the
different speeds at which neurons
communicate or nerves operate across
different species and I think sound is
something you've used in a lot of your
work to try and tell that story whether
it's through the general ecology podcast
or through this amazing piece and I just
I was just curious as to how you thought
sound could maybe be a vehicle to to
start into species communication or if
it's a way to start to manifest these
different speeds at which things move
and communicate it's true there's been a
lot of sound we did a we did a
commission with Chris Watson which was
kind of getting you into the salmon
cycle of salmon and then a number of
other things for me that has to do with
a kind of centering or some kind of
embodied sort of soft
soft possession I guess because of
course it's sound its vibrations and
vibrations move your little enter your
body and Susan maybe speed is an
interesting one have you have any of
them have you probably all read the
overstory Richard powers and some made
it's really good book about trees and
there is a sort of sci-fi narrative sub
narrative and in it in which you know
whatever like an alien species comes to
earth and because they're so fast human
speed movement appears incredibly
appears in fact so slow to them that
they don't realize its movement at all
even though they might acknowledge it as
such because your planet like our plants
move and we can really see it but we
also don't see them as moving and as a
result assume that the human species
doesn't have any feeling chops them all
down and use them as furniture I mean
it's a it's a when you see it like this
you got oh really
yeah this kind of DN trope was entering
but it's it's not it's also just not
possible most of the time so I don't
know how that connects with the sound
it's a good question you haven't thought
about I think I think God I like to say
actually just what I was trying to say
about what John thought about the urban
I think your piece here is fantastic in
the neural questions it asks regardless
whether it's done by an artist or
whatever it does and if we could
actually produce spaces or urbanism that
had the same resonance it would be
fantastic so I mean the comet are saying
as a compliment to your piece I think
your piece is totally the opposite of
Martin Parr
I love Martin pass so please don't get
me wrong but it's not an observation
it's a piece that actually asks every
single question we should be asking by
just looking at this image and I think
that's the strength of maybe the the
dialogues that can take place which is
actually very hard to do at the moment
our conventional way of looking at
urbanism and things like that where is
this fabrication of a space in Venice
that seems to ask all the questions
should we be tourists should we should
we worry about the environment is the
Sun the beach all the things that is
asking I think that's the strength
really and I think that communication of
not not critique but of having an edge I
think is really very important in terms
of fact sheet racing the conversation
art it's been mentioned several times I
think it's about creating the change
from within one structure which is
already set in place for me I wonder if
that's actually possible and I question
that
and it's you know we talked about you
know transforming from within the urban
first but also the urban is set on on
perhaps values which have already become
too powerful to transform maybe they
will or as well I think with with in
this notion of transforming from within
the industrial I mean is it I mean we're
already
I think reshaping this idea of the
associations which are built around us
you know is it about completely undoing
everything and starting from completely
outside of the system which which can
create a really meaningful
transformation you know when you say it
like this I'm like oh my god are you are
you as in me they are world equivalent
of some one thing like business can
solve itself like please pray god no
it's a very it's a very specific
experience story about a field that has
relatively low stakes I guess and I
think it's an entirely different story
when you're talking about capital like
you know the financial times and we can
fix ourselves kind of thing that was
just a tiny paranoia
I need to rethink everything it's a
question it seems and this is also
reason why we are having this year
there's a number of issues that we need
to tackle with courage one of them of
course is independence how much does a
notion of independence lead you to the
anti politicking of the contemporary
politics where everybody needs to
disengage from institutions and somehow
by automatic symbiosis and there's no
chance that the far right the outright
is using exactly the same language you
will self organize how much reaching out
to the other is equivalent to the
intrusion of the World Bank or the
financial institutions into pre-existing
politics so we are always lying at the
edge of condition no one side you think
that you're moving towards an
independence and how beautiful that
would be and suddenly you recognize that
you are approximating something that you
really a bar on the other side you are
calling for consolidation or what was it
embeddedness and the immediately will
recognize that that is also something
that it doesn't work so the series is
really a thought as a seminar without a
preconceived set of language we have to
build our own lexicon we have to build
our own structures of thinking in order
to surpass this difficulty and have
courage to think anti-politics
at that time so difficult what does it
mean not to act when every what is
calling for action and so I think that
the doubt
although we should all be in the street
tomorrow I think that is where the
entire actually it's getting late
and someone last Friday said we don't
have much time okay so we accept that we
can be complex beings we don't have much
we can we accept that we can become be
complex being in the context of a
friendship or a love affair but all of a
sudden when we relate to the political
we're supposed to be entirely consistent
beings with one message and one strategy
that is just not possible
so how to do away with this question
that you are either consistent and
therefore impossible or strategic and
somehow shift and shift strategically
and hopefully semi consciously in an
incredibly messy political landscape and
then start to sort of go okay well let's
kind of start from that respect and see
where that goes somehow good the more
you know the less you know thank you
[Applause]
