okay I'm BOM Hong Kong as you probably
know by now
it's due there a bit of problem over
there so if you go there now you be
aware your mask that's you should be
okay
the title of my talk as you can read
those characters up there if you cannot
do that then I would explain to you
later okay the stories forget about the
why why is he only there is there should
be track that's we English anyway
suppose you are very young boy five
years so a nine years old and in the
morning five o'clock you take your
underground and everything else to come
to school hey whatever and then on the
other side of the river this is the
river it's your school and the water is
a bit high on that day and you need to
make a decision whether or not to cross
it to go to school so what would be your
choice and so on that day the boy and
his mother
choose to cross the river and a few days
later the body were found because the
water was a little bit too high so that
was the beginning of our investigation
and our our one University one village
or bridge to China initiative can we
architects find ways to help these
people but ways that are more
sustainable than just built a normal
bridge so we went back to Hong Kong and
we we told the students in our
University and the the problem and they
all say why don't we just do our next
CEO building a bridge fall for them so
they call it a bridge too far after the
movie you probably know the movie
because at that time we don't even know
whether or not we could do it the the
river is about hundred meter across and
for an engineer is easy but but over
there there's almost nothing so for a
bunch of student trying to walk on it
it's quite almost impossible I would say
so the student then start to investigate
what is DITA now actually was the bamboo
bridge that they make every year which
you see here and how the water behaves
and how people who used the kind of
bridge then we contact my teacher and
Jenny hunter how many of you know Antony
hunts no probably some of us do remember
him he has retired but he was the
engineer for foster and expensive
architects so we want to see he was my
teacher actually and I went down there
and say I need to bridge can teach me
and say you forgot everything I've
taught you is it yes so so we start
again and as you can see the sketch
there are some of them upside down and
despite him or some of them are by me
and the problem with him is such he is
very good but he's very expensive the
weight he designs he's also very
spensive so we we cost one of the
earlier prototype that he designed it
cost a few million Hong Kong dollars so
I went back to him and say no we don't
have that much money is that how much we
have a say well $2 50 that's all we have
that's include your fee
so I say okay you say right let's start
we start the whole syncing process and
say okay what what what these are this
is what how the villagers build their
bamboo version of it and every year the
water comes and then they will be
destroyed I say why don't we just use
that as a basic principle knowing how
they do it and then we just do it
studied better in such a way that the
bridge will survive 95 percent of the
time or 95 percent of our time the
bridge will be crossable but only 5
percent of the time the water would come
the plank would then be dislodged and
then sink to the water next to it and
after the water is gone then you pick it
up and put it back in in doing so you
don't need a big foundation you'd only
concrete you don't need a bit of stone
and some steel wire and that's how the
bridge should be done so we look at it
say it's very sustainable in an
appropriate way to design something that
works and that starts the whole process
of us using natural material to help the
villages but but the design of it is
quite difficult in terms of engineering
calculation for example we designed the
the plank in such a way that if we were
to use a normal way of design that plank
it will be about 300 mm thick and there
will be a 1 tonne so nobody will be able
to carry to the to put it back so Tony
design it in such a way it's only 130
it's very clever so we design whole
thing so that everybody can work on it
manually and then we bought on site
number of student workers these are all
the students I told them that if you get
washed away then we'll pick you up later
don't worry
oh by the way there's one story that I
need to tell this star this case I gave
you they normally use a poor protecting
with a bank so the best a gabion
manufacturer was in Italy so we went to
Italy say can you donate us some of the
cages so that we can work on it the
Italian guys in the promo responsible
for your transport cost okay we can
donate all the cages to you and good
luck
then we were worried and then when we
were worried and you say hey come on and
say you know Italian how to behave well
cages are now me in China don't worry we
should be back to Italy okay
so we went back to China and find the
factory that the company actually make
the gabion nowadays they all made in
China now so we ship it that from his
factory near Sun high instead of Italy
so that was how made in China is now
well known ok so these are the cages
they are guaranteed to last 50 years ie
after and gone the produce to be there
and and then these students are very
nice and they try to help us moving the
rocks and we try to help ourselves by
moving the plank onto the pier by the
way there we do it we did a statistic
analyse how how the students help us we
finally realize that the biggest student
will carry the smaller rocks and a
smaller student will pick a big rocks so
you see that the size of the rock is
inversely proportional to your IQ
so that's what's the final a plank and
how the whole things work together
that's the end of the day five days of
work we it took us five days to do this
particular simple bridge as you can see
it's very similar to their bridge but
it's just that it can come across with a
problem 95% of the time and this this is
how we test the bridge so by putting
everybody it up there and take a
photograph it is survived and that's it
then the bridge is safe luckily we
entered the competition with our IBA and
we won that year Norman did not win
anything because he's so he got that
water think elite or some other but he
asked me to come go to his office to
give a lecture and you look at me like
that and he says why your 2,050 bridge
can rival my twenty billion bridge okay
and it doesn't wobble and then another
the lecture he actually stuck his own
charity building schools poor for Africa
somewhere not very good okay anyway so
we know that he was trying to build
school so we tried to build school to
make sure that he has hard time so so
this was the original school that show
you know roughly how it works where talk
and small and but then the the kind of
new school that the government was
building was was not appropriate because
it's very cold in the winter and
extremely hot in the summer so after the
school was built actually the students
went back to the original school to have
lectures and then rent it out for
storage so they have some money says
there are campaign so we thought maybe
we could designers house better school
for them this is what architects should
do I mean we should try to find ways to
design our buildings to to do better
okay let's go better whatever so we look
at the I'm question all of you do that
nowadays after the lectures in your
environment or sustainable whatever
that you check your whether they tie and
once you know like this letter data you
know exactly what to do so can anyone
tell me that the first thing you must do
for this kind of weather is come on guys
is what the only thing that you have to
do to make sure that the building works
is thank you
this morning so just to make sure that's
somebody answer the question so mosque
because of the high temperature swing
you only need to use a lot of mass to
stabilize the temperature once you
stabilize then 40 degree and 10 degree
become 25 degree your interior we're 25
degree okay so so that is how we should
somehow find a way to look at this curve
where the tie and say yeah this is the
few things that you must do of course
there are the things like they lighting
and also fresh air that you need to
incorporate into your design but that
comes a little bit later so we then
measure some of the buildings that they
have and then we find out the actual
traditional building the caves
actually are more stable whereas the
school that they built by using brick is
not very stable so so if you if you if
the school is built like that at the
bottom then you will be too comfortable
in the winter and in the summer Paris on
the other hand if you built it you with
like a cave it is better on the other
hand I mean the cave can only be very
small in terms of volume then you don't
have daylight there you don't have a
fresh air so you have to solve some of
the problem by combining the traditional
wisdom and also the modern kind of a
scientific know-how then you can find a
way to design schools better I think
okay and then and then the other thing
is that if you as I've learned from my
teacher if you want to your building to
be cheap then the local has to know how
to do it otherwise you have to we can
employ somebody else from outside to
built it it would be very expensive so
we know exactly how the locals are built
buildings using earth and tools and
things other so we learn from them this
is this is actually a part of a PhD
thesis of mice one of my students try to
see what are the kind of techniques that
one might use for this kind of situation
from very very simple so so so every
time you do something you improve the
performance so you just need to do some
analyze and also calculation simulation
to make sure that you know exactly what
you're doing but there are many many
different methods so which ones you use
depends on how much money you have look
at that graph you can see that the cost
you can see that if you do a few things
then the cost we increased by say 20% by
the performance go up by above five
times whereas if you spend two hundred
percent more then the performance go up
little bit more but then you spend lots
of money so unless you have lots of
money then you have to decide where to
stop your your your designs technique so
we find that actually the somewhere here
would be would be the best so this is
how we look at the performance and also
cost-effectiveness when we come to
designing buildings natural material as
I told you it's very cheap because they
just gather it from the field and then
you just model a little bit but
sometimes you have to use modern
material to help you like the [ __ ] of a
polystyrene and things either then then
you'll be you have to combine some of
the more than material with the
traditional material but the traditional
materials about 90 percent of the of all
the materials so the embodied energy is
very low
this is the kind of design that we make
a very simple modular so that we can
replicate it but then on the other hand
we have to arrange the modules so that
they become form different kind of
outdoor spaces for the winter and also
for the summer for the children the
level changes according to the
topography so it's a very simple kind of
building that we have designed for them
and then we ask the villagers to the
beauty themselves the workmanship level
is very low so your design has to be
very rough or breaker tolerant to kind
of local workmanship kind of a way of
doing things but as you can see mostly
built with natural materials low
embodied energy but very effective so
this is the final bottom after a few
months of the villages building it and
you can see the two courtyards the
smaller kaga has a trees plant in it but
they need time to grow so this is how it
looks like eventually and we did a
calculation that we did measurements to
compare with the calculation we found a
key in a summer the indoor temperature
is about 23 degree constant so it's very
comfortable and then in the winter when
outside is minus 15 the inside is still
about a 5 degree so we just need another
jacket or something
and volume is calculated in such a way
that every every lessons of 40 minutes
and after every lesson they all go out
so they open the door the fresher comes
in the field the room and then they come
the companion they wonder if the
children will warm warm the school for
you each students is half a kilowatt you
know that yeah ok ok that's the same or
one cow is five people ok so if some of
the student doesn't come to come to
school you just bring a few cows into
you
your castle will be okay so and the
daylight is a provider on top you can
see so the lighting and air quality and
everything else and thermal quality are
insured now the one thing that that
happened is after our school was
designed a nearby school 11 children
died of carbon dioxide poisoning
burning coal in the classroom to keep
warm okay and keep died and then lots of
people asked whether or not we can
design a better school and this is the
better school because you don't need to
burn cow dung into your car in your
classroom and and I and then we we gave
Foster another hard time in 2009 with
one another our iba in that year he also
also run another 1/2 billion time so you
know asked me to go back to to his
office to give a lecture because our
schools only 30,000 pounds so we can do
so many schools in oh by the way they're
the same year the nasty by what who was
it by one of this is funny architect
[Music]
now he also got an award so he's okay
okay and then we decided to set up the
charity to continue our work together
with our students this is what we got
the bridge to China charity to make sure
that we can do more so the students
steal your projects or some of the scum
not some one thing they are going to do
in the in summer it's going to be by
this charity and then sorry about the
Chinese but and we do a lot of good
things and then we involve about 20
universities around the world to to
build more bridges I think and to today
we have built about just an 100 not many
but then thousands of students have to
have participate and experienced what we
can do to help people these are some of
the examples are they all designed by
students the only criteria they said
they have to be very cheap so if the
student design something very expensive
they have to ask your mum their mum not
my mom
so and then we have one ordinary fiction
or Sir David and he told me that
actually is not the bridge that matters
it's the people who build the bridge
that will be will be forever it's very
true because Richard comes and go but
the people's idea will stay if you will
train the people well and now if you
train enough people I told lots of
people that I only need to train to
students and if they can train two more
then no time at all everything will be
done so this is how small efforts can
can sustain and then we hit a problem
about ten years ago earthquake and this
is how they move in and out of the
village and this is their house when
they go home after the earthquake and
this is the village at the surrounded by
the river so there was no way that they
came so that was a situation nobody went
to help them and we cannot ship anything
into the site and we cannot even bring
anybody like a contractor or what bunny
on to the site so why going to do and
there are both 35 houses or corruptor so
can you do something so this is the old
lady that we try to initiate our help
and then we find we try to find a way to
use natural material because there's no
way that we can bring in any new
material like concrete and things like
that into it a small bat of Simmons okay
anything else is no no go so we tested
the we try to utilize the destroyed
house and then we construct it in such a
way that it can be low bearing we also
push it push it to see how they which
sister next earthquake and things either
so we did the test on site to make sure
that we know roughly how to use those
those to recycle the material and then
we also designed the building in such a
way that in
to each other so all the elements are
looking to each other the timber the
rocks and mud are all common kind of
come together and then we improve their
tools and look the way that they work
and we publish a booklet to teach them
how to do it and but that's not the end
of it each house is not it's not a kind
of standard house
each family we went to the student went
to a survey and if they have more people
and their house is different so it is
their house it's not the house that we
design for them so they recognize their
house some of them want the house to be
underneath some of them won their picks
to be on the one side so when you design
for people we understand that to be
sustainable you you have to design for
that for them that they they want they
the space they want not the space you
want or not the space as it easiest but
then on the other hand we we have to
find a way to modernize it so you can
see that two things but there are one's
kind of structural system but many
different spatial interpretation and
then we gathered all the villages and
teach them how to do it properly so this
is the first house for the lady we teach
them how to prepare the material how to
lay down how to put certain things that
we teach them how to do it because after
you are gone then they need to know how
to do their building next time and then
three months later the old lady's has
new home
and then the villages went back to their
own home to build their own houses
the three red circles are the buildings
that we built the rest are by the
villagers themselves so we send our
students to supervise them a little bit
and they just build their own home and
self help and no help from the outside
and in in about six months time the
villages the bridge was rebuilt
and we also build them a bridge see our
students are building a community center
and then this is the this is the work of
the pious or whatever that they like
dancing so we designed something so that
they can dance this is how this do this
is all by students so we we try to kind
of melt into the community in a way by
by designing and building the structure
for them and we also went in the village
to do a few things of water supply and
eco toilets and things and this become
the the World Health Organization first
what we call the health village in China
because their work and I said you have a
certain things that you must do to
qualify that so this was applied to
become the health village so become an
example so surrounding people can then
learn how to do it properly we also of
course to performance evaluation the
outdoor indoor temperature comes without
saying but the cost is much lower than
if we if you were to employ somebody to
to build the concrete friend house for
you
it's about only about 200 instead of
1,000 so one fifth of the price and now
of course the satisfaction is high
because it's their building
yeah their house not our house I like
this this particular photo very much
because after the reconstruction they we
start their life and this is how they
plant next year's call and in front of
their new village so called okay but
lots of people ask once they have money
they therefore forget about the houses
and go for this kind of Spanish villa
and things are that they may but and can
we do something so we start
our investigation one of the village
where the arrows is you can see that
this is the seismic hazard map of the
world the red areas are seismic zones
and many millions of people live in
those areas but we work in the that spot
there this was another quake that we was
caught to respond to and this situation
after after the earthquake and this is
the old lady again I like helping old
lady and no people so if you get oh
don't worry
I'll come to help you but I will be up
there somewhere I'll help you
spiritually okay thank you so so they
[Music]
what do they want they don't just one
house they want a new life they need a
life that is better than what it used to
be they they have to stand up again and
live life and that's the more important
thing than to build them a house a lot
of time we we go in NGO will give them a
house that they don't want look horrible
and then and then and then say you are
one of those people ok so I give you a
small house and Allah know you don't do
that you have to give them what we got
the dignity you they must be very proud
of that new life so that was the
motivation behind our detector
intervention so we we set up a few
principles ok we must reuse the material
it must be safe and we must teach them
how to do it properly and more
importantly we must add to their life
somehow
so we team up with a few people one
professor in Cambridge who is she's is a
seismic to be system kind of expert and
then other people to design to design
something that will stand up Union in
the next earthquake and then we have
already taught learned how to use local
material local worker and techniques and
this is the lady I've talked to them and
first thing
you have to do is to see where the
problem lies of the order of the houses
so with I set the problem and then we
come back to the poetry to see how we
can improve the material by mixing the
different kind of material different
kind of soil together to perform in such
a way that it become almost like
concrete so this so you have to find a
way to make sure that that yellow lies
within that the Graybar then you should
be okay so after otherwise you have to
we mix the soil in there's something to
it you have to take away something to
make sure that they behaves so this can
be done typically using material science
understanding that is easy but you have
to do it and then the design as I told
you has to be modular but also has to be
spatially useful so is the most
important space the the module approach
allows the building to be very very
Richard but then the spatial
organization has to have to conform to
or satisfy what what what occupant wants
so in this case already so this is how
we design this very very simple building
extremely simple if you do this in your
studio you probably get c-minus
[Music]
or d+ you know student we need to design
[Music]
you get a B+ this is C - never mind
about the C - okay let's start with C -
C see how he goes and then and then and
then we test it so that he what we
trying to do is safe so these the two
diagrams are different kind of seismic
resistant
seismic waves pattern so we have to test
different pattern of a fir tree to make
sure that when earthquake come in
different ways they will survive and we
test a number of them and then he
survives and also satisfy the China a
degree or whatever requirement so this
is this is satisfied with national
standard first time first time the
building consensus by national standard
before that it cannot happen and then of
course we also do the cost performance
analyze that you have seen by using our
understanding of the psychometric chart
you all know psychometric Shia good
thank you
this is again a cold weather eye you can
see and dry okay we have two teachers
the workers how to how to mix the
material how to pound upon the wall
because how you how you hang the war
matters a lot you have to compress it to
a certain extent that it become almost
like concrete and and everybody has to
know how to do it we add some straws and
we improve their formwork because if you
have the party very hot then the the
traditional timber formwork doesn't work
anymore so we have to use aluminium
formwork so we introduce a modular form
work for them to work on it so it's much
the quality is much higher therefore
and we taught them how to do it and this
this is the owner of that particular
house is a son of that lady and now he's
our contract
so he's now making a living by building
discount houses fathers so we're
introducing skills to them to them and
as you can see we introduced also new
tools now electric panda so therefore
the the song can be punked very very
compactly at this is how it works and
this is N and M product or the square
house as you can see very simple this is
the old man and this is the in-between
space that the old lady now enjoy
because I we talked to old lady she
don't need the work and yes we do need
to work for her whole life so okay if
you want to old lady to do new work so
what kind of environment you need you
need somewhere that is Co enough or warm
enough and also bright enough okay so
this is how the workspace work and this
space is the temperature is so constant
that she has air conditioning how we are
run in the winter is warm in the summer
school and because the very bright and
the some of the leaves falling onto the
under those roof the skylight
cannot when the sunshine on three kind
of dance I believe it nowadays she not
only use this space for needlework
because so many villages like this space
when the outside temperature is so high
so she charge people to come to his home
to drink tea now
which is very good okay so she's without
and then end it with okay and then and
she now has a house that kind of money
and they the the we did measurement I
mean you ought to measurement after your
your design
I hope and it works very well the cost
it's only half of the normal cost using
concrete and brick and other things so
the performance good there is very
strong than everything ah
and also it it was the featured in a are
and and and we got the world building of
the Year Award 2017 so it's not c-minus
for sure I can tell you one of the
judges was a year which II that's why
and then and then and then and then we
also nowadays drawing up the new cocoa
practice for the local government so
that they can regulate some of this work
and make sure that things are more
properly done in the future as I told
you we don't build them just house we
give the oddity light back and with
dignity she's now the proudest person in
the whole village because so many people
go and see her house and she charged
people
[Music]
and and and and and from then on we also
start to do many things for the locals
based on our one University one village
are using the university know-how and
combined with the the village people's
wisdom we try to find a way to do
village better and there are a number of
principles so I don't want to bother you
a unless you want to do a PhD with me so
so these are all my PhD students kind of
structure of whatever basically it's
just if you have to fake pages so that
the PhD become bigger at the moment we
are doing about 250 on site we have four
construction team or formerly only
villages so they they now help to design
building construct buildings and also
make a living and this is our latest
research center in climbing built
entirely of min the main main structure
of grammar one thing I want to show you
is nothing to do you can come to China
and we can teach you how to do this kind
of wall and get your hands dirty have
fun and go to the only this house and
this is very fun you know in China
there's a problem that villages a lot of
the man goes out to work yeah
the villagers left behind the people the
woman the children recorded sinful
village is almost empty in terms of life
the red helmet group is out there
China's the first or woman construction
team okay so we organize them so that
they they work to build the Dell
neighbor's home and we taught them how
to do it and we have to resize the the
formwork and the tools so that they can
handle everything
after a few projects we find out that
they are more reliable work harder to do
exactly the Meno is a oh yeah
so nowaday we have two of those teams
sooner or later they will replace the
entire men's construction team of our of
our of our project they are very
reliable and and and they also very good
ok they take the money home the men take
the money to the casino so ok there's
another way to revitalize the village
[Music]
economic social kind of a structure
things that so the women are now very
proud of themselves
so when men comes home this is how it
work actually learned it from the bank
for the poor right something poor people
bank so they lent money to the woman
they don't man yeah always always yeah
woman more reliable you lend it to the
man is finish sorry man this this was
the first house that the woman teams
finished the quality was much higher
than what the men could do and we now
use it as an example we show the men
team how it should be it should be how
it should be done but they never they
never want to know ok
they come back to the words that I start
my lecture actually this verse was by
somebody who is very has a lot of wisdom
not me okay not me okay they say okay
you met two big things when you when you
start your architecture whatever career
he must do egg things and I show this
equals to my vice-chancellor and he is
very good career so he wrote the words
for me but then he was from somebody
else okay how many of you learned how to
okay alright so you know exactly where
you go so I don't need to explain
anymore
right because my finger is not long so
we stopped there and he goes there and
get those and and then and then come
down there so that it was meaning a
things that you must do okay I'll show
you how and you're not in any pocket you
also need to do things in your life to
make sure that it becomes meaningful
okay
the first is a posture we start with
something that is worthless something
that is so simple something that nobody
took any notice of some so sometimes you
have this up with something extremely
simple and don't start with something
complicated something that is beautiful
in its own in its own right and then you
can see that these are the area that
they still do this kind of houses and I
can tell you the half of the world
population lives in those area so if you
can solve that problem you solve the
problem for half of the earth population
our utopian people okay so it's not
small things that you are doing if you
can solve the problem okay so don't know
unless rate the the potential the
significance of something very simple
and of course you have to apply your
knowledge you learn enough to know
exactly what to do how to mix different
kind of things to achieve a certain kind
of performance and you have to feel the
material squeezing you taste it oh yeah
[Music]
you don't know what you see you play
with it and then you know how to have to
work with it okay
what what other things you must add to
come to mention all these some things
are a very simple thing but most of
these things I can tell you the
villagers know how to do it
so you you have to be humble and learn
from them I think to be advocate working
in the field first thing you must do is
to be very very humble I'm sure the next
time you go to site you know that they
can lay bricks faster than you yeah
things are okay nevermind
okay and then then you have to of course
apply your scientific understanding to
test it and then how to view something
that is I would say simple but corrected
okay when I design this building lies I
told my students that the only thing I
want to express yourself so if you see
this Phillipe is here that's all they
see they see nothing of this dosage
geometry they do seek gymnastic they
don't see Natalie this year that's okay
so this is another building and this you
can see that all my buildings are
fundamentally what the material won't
say then we try to find a way to design
a building to achieve a poetic view my
teachers always show me my teacher was
the dean hodes which he always told me
is a since you are with me my man has
got to do something more useful than you
know read a porter elsewhere when they
say elsewhere is elsewhere to do
something environmentally friendly and
achieve a certain performance is easy
but at the same time if you can make
sure that it become correct it's far
more difficult I understand what he was
talking about for many many years and -
I didn't start to do something the
toilets of the earth as his own language
he should not just compose sentences
yes compose point with your with your
with architecture skill and this becomes
something that he I think is its most
important to do and I can tell you that
engineers very often can't do that
because they don't know that this is
important but it's our key that I
strongly advise you that don't do
building just compose or
forget it okay never mind
okay and then that doesn't mean that is
only quiet it means yes substance he has
a theory there's a reason he has a
vision
yes something behind that is far richer
than the materialism
okay so we incorporate into it
lifecycle understanding sustainability
understanding human understanding and
then kind of habitat kind of people use
kind of understanding at the end of the
day if she is happy then your
architecture has a lot of meaning
otherwise he says very little meaning
even though it is very strong so
actually we're designing this house this
is the space was the one that I spent a
lot of time the amount of light the how
this running come together how to toilet
first into this is the toilet is on one
side but if you open a door directly to
the toilet you know what happened so
actually within that doll are two doors
so the toilet doesn't come to the space
so you have to do such small things to
make sure that this is a space this is
not Corazon okay this is this is a next
time you come to coming to see our
Research Center this is how we said one
part of this Center looks like inside as
I told you my building is a user so this
is the photo the buildings
okay so easier you only see them and
this is the highest quality work that we
can now do in the world a lot of people
come and see how what kind of quality
that
that chemical and we use this to teach
the villagers that actually earth
children can be extremely beautiful so
when they come to this building they see
this and they see some other things that
we did they they compare and say with
something I want this is not poor this
doesn't mean that III cannot afford it
this means that I'm more than able to
afford it everyone I want to do
something better
okay now we with the very beautiful
things we start to teach people how to
make walls how to make buildings this is
not by us yeah yeah after he sees us
doing some building he he tried to do a
building but he's very expensive this is
us this house now then after we start to
improve people's life by making moves
and homes and we have to write copes we
have to standardize it we have to make
sure that everybody know how to do it
properly so we're now teaming up with
some engineers to write national
standard on building in China it takes
long time you have to do that otherwise
nobody will copy you you have to
standardize it and you have to do this
is one of our earlier cultural practice
how to do it but this is not official so
we have two official eyes it so become a
national center and we have to publish
something to make sure that we spread
our knowledge this area as you can see
and then we have to teach the village is
how to do it teach others teach students
how to do it the next generation has to
know how to do whatever you happy
you have discovered a goody movement of
course at the man and woman okay the
good thing about you is you can see that
all the woman's are working or the mess
are looking so this is how different
they behave when they come to the
training session these are the better
one that the worst one either at the
back smoking and we team up with a lot
of universities to do a few things at
the moment we are working with Habitat
for Humanity they have a number of sites
in China that utilize our our
methodology and workmanship to to build
the house they are much bigger than us
so they can build more they do 100 exam
but we have to teach them how to do as I
told you this is our research center and
then we have to find a way that our
detector and life is in harmony your
architecture has no meaning and to
people using that I cannot say that any
more than I need to emphasize your
architecture has no meaning whatsoever
and few people use it so a lot of time
when you see a photograph of
architecture without people you know
what meaning we try to give you our
photograph I always have people
otherwise oMG doesn't look good and then
we are not doing the entire village not
only just the house itself also the
space around the house how the whole
thing organized so this is one of the
few villages that we are doing an
unblocked so this is the design it's a
small kind of organic layout and and
outdoor spaces are now important for us
and we also try to incorporate the
United Nations sustainable
sustainability design coaching of them
under each one of that we have to tell
in animation what is of our our our way
of doing achieving them so this is this
village that we are going to design will
be the first you and foodies subscribing
to the Un Certain STG go finished and
then maybe next year will present it in
the UN habitat whatever they call okay
and then the next word is that you have
to know me work in China but work
everywhere else on earth so we are
trying now to do do a few things in the
poor in in Cambodia and surrounding
areas so we are not spreading out to the
other south of the boundary so you have
to find a way to make sure that it's
become international okay so you talk to
people so we are now working there one
day we need to work everywhere but yeah
of course cannot do it yourself so you
have to find a way to combine you with
your academic pursue and your young team
and things that so these are the few
people that work on some buildings
around the world
as you can see Anna our nice guy this
lady's from Silla she built this guy you
probably know this one already
and then there are others by other
people escape from Ambridge this is from
MIT and that means Japan did this one
one day whatever you also work on this
card natural material I always find its
beauty a little bit too articulated but
anyway that's his way of doing things so
you have to combine different people's
expertise and form a group so every two
to three years which kind of meet up and
share with each other what we have
achieved so the whole message kind of
seemed more kind of widespread now the
last but not least the most important
signal someone taught me is that you you
will die soon
[Music]
[Laughter]
but but on the other hand the most
important thing is that you have to find
a way to sustain your effort that your
next generation knows how to continue
because you cannot finish it and this is
the reason why we work with young people
a lot and this is the man who taught me
that this is the most important thing
you should do is you not know yourself
you should teach people how to do it and
then they can then be inspired to teach
people how to do and they will do it
better than you that's what he said I
say okay so I have one student here who
had being inspired but these are the
people that not this one this is my vice
chancellor he come to me deep he he come
to the toilet you just do it that way
anyway but but these are the people whom
I think we should inspire so are you you
you are the kind of people I wish to
inspire one day you need to find a way
to help people and then there are there
is a structure to it okay from very
simple things very beautiful things from
teaching from material from everything
poetry okay but the beautiful keep
people back life and dignity that's the
kind of thing that would inspire you so
environmental sustainable design it's
not having code at all this is about
human that's something that I think you
should learn okay is never about an
environment never about temperature
never about sunlight is about human and
their life and if you can do that then
I'm quite sure you know what this equals
the personal property for me and then I
show it to somebody and he likes it so
much that he want me to be into him so I
gave it to him
[Music]
two million it's Nick next week after I
come back from zero I'm going to ask him
to write another one and give it to me
again
thank you
[Music]
[Applause]
if you have questions you're not
technical one good question good
question the first thing we okay if the
song itself is good enough that all of
the cam did the great are they doing
anything but most of them I was eight
ninety percent of the time two dozen so
you have to find a way to mix things
okay so sometimes we have a plan
sometimes you have immediate survival
some time we see many so it's all
depends
most of the theories in the shear stress
fibers because bland but since it's so
composition will be naturally I mean
lower yeah and next part collection is
you know this these were rural context
like the would you translate because if
we can't have four centimeter walls
[Music]
especially is how we make sure that our
sweida the text is simple is very
impressive
troopers are cheap to be a ok if we can
achieve through PA you can uses the
country in which is in that kind of size
will be system situation okay if you say
you have you need to four five okay so
basically you need soil and then you
just it so easy to create most of the
time is okay so that is a basic test
that you must you must do okay that this
kind of the building is better to be
hotter in area of the hell you have
you have a lot of labor force ie people
have nothing to do now because the
maturity service is free but the amount
of labor you need to construct it is
higher than normal because the world's
sick and therefore the labor cost aside
if you need to pay for the labor cost
the cost we have the reason why are you
being so cheese because the uncles and
aunties do it at the woman do it
so they can do it themselves then it's
very cheap so I thought you cost before
miss economies are very different so at
the moment we factor safety of the
population growth population first and
let the city operations
so could it be then reduced by perhaps
could this be
yes I think he is trying to do that and
then on the other hand if you do that
the cost is high so they have adage of
using the natural material if it's not
as quick as because there's no other
choice it comes like this already so so
if you do an experiment at the moment we
have not found a way to do it justify
using in situation
[Music]
yeah yeah I think it's quite inspiring
to see how the environmental science
gets translated to architecture that's
very like intimate and also very
meaningful and I'm just curious to see
your thoughts on how some of the bigger
firms are tackling sustainability a lot
of them are putting more and more focus
into that and I was just wondering if
that's that there's a huge problem with
the performance gap with some of the
newer buildings and I was hoping maybe
you can shed some light my next lecture
in Brazil was about City apartment and
house city should cope with something I
think my feeling is that they tried to
solve a very complicated
do you think that's because you know in
interpreting usually a lot of the
projects are very scale very fast and
greatly and that sort of loses some of
the the human section that humor
understanding of in building is very
lucky you want to make sure in some part
of the world if you want to make that
building very sustainable you solve a
problem is very complicated so we try to
solve a very simple problem and once you
solve that problem you sophoclean
assembled so he perfected that what we
call the cost before means that
nervousness but now if you can
[Music]
so I think most of the time you use that
simple thing to express your the
buildings that simple thing is very
meaningful when I've already so you
[Music]
[Music]
because you believe in all these
stereotypes cover band that can be
applied to you know because they're you
know the f55 is sort of wondered why for
example like Hong Kong as a context is
very hot humid and I'm just wondering if
they do some preliminary studies or
analysis when you go into a new project
and sort of identify what are the
adaptive opportunities for that
particularly we never use the world
standard as the basis of say okay this
is a free by the way but the most
important thing is having folks in the
village you look at how people behave
how they dress how they say you probably
know and guess what kind of environment
in the day they were happy yeah
especially how they dress how they dress
how they position themselves and how
they who
you know to a certain way of living so
what can you sketch you say okay this is
the way that they see under the truth in
that kind of environment then you know
how to design a current problem they
want so I suggest exactly that those six
unit from books up or four fundamental
understanding but you know and look at
people how they have the use face
especially in area or in culture that
you and the Germany and the time is 2014
we have been told very hong kong 26 so
do you find a way to be comfortable
they usually define the many mobile not
the optimum comfort but more in your
minimum standards and so on
you should keep that so on the safe side
but it does not necessarily have to do
with very good quality lighting is the
best example minimum values even and but
it's not the case
I did not show you some of the size and
how's this hole that we're building we
have it the way that we tackle that
problem is that we know that we know
different people have different way so
we reacted design if it's false in the
school that children can find that they
have comfort
[Music]
so so why are you spaces with different
kind environmental conditions then those
spaces those those are buildings that
we're likely to be more satisfied
because people find those spaces so one
of the thing is that if you can design
moving that ebook and can see fine and
which I thought the spaces say what we
design all those things make sure that
the outdoor space has changed around
revisions so in some way
I
I never
your lectures cold yes yes
No all right I understand that part of
the reason that I asked is I lived in
Papua New Guinea for a year and there
was a 7.5 earthquake and hardly anybody
was killed and they used the school they
trained the squatters to renovate the
building's they live in I mean these are
different versions of what you're saying
because different materials
you're not naughty ok I switch just
finished part 1 of my lecture now exam
you'll be here forever no I won't give
you a lecture but I will just I will
just freak through the slides on our
bamboo that maybe this is actually not
exactly these are my students who gave a
lecture and I use his video so we use
bamboo to build bridges in the area we
learn from that
yeah I'm not going to talk so you just
see how the process looks like you
cannot talk about them buthow talking
about pencil you know now they're using
bamboo to do this and we have been using
bamboo for thousands of years in China
this is the first group of people who
investigate bam-boom about 6070 years
ago at that because at that time there's
no material only bamboo so this was and
the best bamboo Rothman's this man here
he built this bridge using these tools
about that so these are more modern
interpretation okay so we did something
here this is the situation then what
type of bamboo how to test it again you
have to supply your scientific
understanding this is the design this is
construction
the spiritual this is the foodie food
bamboo bridge this is how we celebrate
this is the first 17 litre bamboo bridge
fully bamboo it's I think the the first
in China the longest is how we celebrate
this is a very good story and tell you
after we build a bamboo bridge we wonder
how the main Chinese consul should come
from and they invented this they put it
there now it's a bamboo temple and they
donate money we have many works we have
now money for maintenance for the next
200 years and they make it into a
community center funny how people look
at some simple architecture yeah yeah
this is a bamboo temple now this is
another bridge and then we did more
tests on durability we now can find a
way to build bridges is 30 years that
last 30 years and anointing is the most
put technical things okay right a lot of
people told me that bamboo is very
strong in tension yeah very weak in
compression yeah wrong
bamboo when you try to join them
together is very strong in compression
extremely weak in tension so every joint
that we make is compression because
jointing is the most difficult part of
bamboo structure so this is and then we
investigate about 20 ways to join things
with compiled compression so you can see
this is all by compression not by
tension
because if you tear the bamboo is very
weak extremely weak one one piece of
bamboo is okay why we try to jaunt
through together it's always compression
okay this I have to teach you this
because it took us five years to find
out a different way to join them and we
have to use the different a lot more
truths and there oh man this is our
second this is 22 meter has been bamboo
bridge fully bamboo and because the
floor is now not now now you become the
cinema and at night you know what
happened because the the throw is bamboo
yeah so it's perforator is very cool so
they sleep so like this so for 20 people
sleeping there in evening and for this
we are now building a much bigger span
this is a this is the the second bamboo
bridge are you have you seen this one
this is largest bamboo span in the world
thirty-five beaches there's also by us
in Beijing so this one's been
so if we can do spend like this with
bamboo totally using bamboo and then we
can do a lot of things inside is like
that forget about the decoration we just
look at the house come through so this
is the longest spent bamboo roof in the
world down and we are now writing the
China's national standard bamboo
structure at the moment as I say once
you find out new things you have to
codify it otherwise nobody will copy you
the more important thing is difficult
thing is how it comes to the to do come
to the end
who doesn't like a few things one of
them's water if moisture come to the
event buoy will rot away in three months
we are now building anti-seismic school
buildings using bamboo ok never my about
this man so this something we are not
also now
houses do experimental some part of the
world quickly pop this is so good
because you don't need the performance
especially uses so if you working
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
