hi everyone thank you for coming for
those of you don't know me I'm - a
Fergie's from the head of say a is
public program and I'm delighted to
introduce tonight's lecture radical
democracy and architecture politics
positions planning by gar behind L I I
think I've waited a lifetime for someone
to show a clip of Zoolander in this room
I never realized that was my ambition
until just now but I think that is one
of my favorite clips ever so I it's I
didn't even know that was going to
happen so I think that's a pretty
exciting sneak preview so this talk is
part of our ongoing series new canonical
histories where we've invited architects
artists and theorists who are rewriting
the architectural canon or retelling
history from a new perspective and
they're doing this to give us tools to
not only reimagine our past but also to
reimagine our future tonight speaker has
been doing exactly that through her work
with an architecture and urban planning
as well as through her theoretical
research tonight she'll speak to us
about how to tackle the challenges of
the post democratic city a condition
produced by neoliberalism and
nationalist authoritarian policies
working together to co-produce post
democratic public spheres and it's a
condition that she's tackling through a
radical democratic conception of
architecture and urbanism so Garbo
Handel unfolds these topics with regard
to a their current anti-capitalist
struggles of a housing and public space
in Vienna be there work on
intersectionality and housing and see a
magistrate Commission non building plan
which became politically articulated in
an alliance with a bottom-up urban
movement to tell you a little bit more
about Gabby before I hand over to her
she's based in Vienna where she teaches
at the Academy of Fine Arts but she's
also a visiting professor at the
University of Sheffield and her work the
work of her practice addresses public
space buildings collective housing urban
planning in urban research well she's
currently based in Vienna she has
traveled the world and studied in
Princeton the Academy of Finance of
Vienna and also Tokyo gaidai university
and from 2013 to 2017 she was chairwoman
of the Austrian Society for architecture
and she's also the author of numerous
publications and curators of exhibitions
and symposia so on that note please join
me in welcoming garbage
thank you very much man easy for this
beautiful introduction and thanks to a
for having me here and thank you all for
being here and I hope you can spend an
hour with me and then hopefully am more
of discussion I will come back to the
clip suelen that we just saw later on
and I'm sure it will stick with your
with you throughout my lecture radical
democracy in architecture I want to just
briefly introduce myself as what I would
call a rather normal architect or I
really want to say that in order to make
it clear that what I'm going to say from
now on is based on 10 to 15 years of
practice I have an architectural office
in Vienna we are doing and you see here
just a couple of things actually what we
concentrated on from the beginning was
to work on public Commission's public
space public buildings urban design
exhibition design anything that actually
is not necessarily kind of a private
interest however we to consider housing
to be a public interest so housing also
is within our interest and our portfolio
and what I won't show today at all but
it is a bit kind of related to what I
will show and what we will talk about is
that we are also working several times
have been working on politics of history
actually on the history of remembrance
especially on national socialist history
in public space this is a whole other
field of work that I cannot show today
but it relates of course to the question
of a positive critique crisis so why
would an architect be interested in
radical democracy I do think and I it's
not only me of course we are facing a
couple of crisis of democracy and for
sure two of them one being what we could
call the post political neoliberal
crisis what study theorists have called
post democracy which is based on
consensus which is based on so-called
there is no alternative Tina conditions
but we are also and it's maybe kind of
newer also facing a crisis of democracy
in terms of right-wing authoritarian
politics and me I'm coming from Austria
I may absolutely say that and you decide
for your place how far that is a crisis
but we're also facing a crisis of
planning and and also to my students the
question really how can we actually plan
in a post political City when what what
is proposed to us seems like consensual
technocracy
how do we actually plan in within the
new governance of austerity when the
state should become slim when shared
city and smart City actually becomes
Logans forever reducing German square
meters for those who cannot afford it
and which is really something that I've
been dealing and discussing and debating
about recently a lot when we're facing
negotiation urbanism which basically
means there's planning deals between
private large scale investors and the
public cooperative planning processes
PPP public-private partnerships I'm sure
that says something to you building
Improvement Districts something that
Austrians don't believe that or Viennese
don't think they have in Vienna that
they only protected on to London which
of course is not true at all and/or also
privately owned public space pops so
what I will wrap all of this in to is
the abbreviation of P P P so P P P
stands for me for this sort of
negotiation urbanism so what that has a
result actually is a large scale or an
ever-growing commodification of the
urban space of public goods
privatization of housing and this gets
us right into the central topic actually
housing is I would say the biggest
crisis at the moment
european-wide partly worldwide I'm
invited into several places I have been
invited to actually talk about what I
will show you now because I come from
Vienna and Vienna supposedly heaven of
housings so within this context what I
did the last couple of years was write a
book which is hopefully soon coming out
and it's called the other PPP it's a
reaction to what I what we could kind of
frame is short kind of in in the short
PPP public-private partnerships to say
ok let's tape that and let's win back a
notion of public let's win back a notion
of politics planning and popular agency
as another PPP and I will get you
through these three piece if you miss on
politics politics so I'm not going to
speak so much about the political but a
political theory by writing about the
political has actually made it I would
say easier again in architecture also to
think the political think it not so much
at once in party politics but actually
think it in terms of based on conflict
in terms of based on the the notion in
fact of how to how to tackle issues that
so much relates to architecture and
urban planning for that I want to give
you an image of this praised Vienna this
is in the center of Vienna first
district and it says here you don't have
to live in these apartments to love
Vienna owning them will do it doesn't
even say owing them
it says owning them will do so this is
not at fasting and nothing and I didn't
make this up this is one of these
posters of many such posters that you
can find again worldwide especially in
the same city centers this is where
David Harvey would say this is it's
basically putting excess money
especially from the financial crisis
into the city centers placing them and
and using apart
as commodities and not really as
apartments in terms of the need of
housing so when I start with politics
and we'll be looking at facades it may
sound weird but actually I'm going to
show you a second inscription facade
inscription that we can find in Vienna
many more times and it actually always
says something similar it says and I
translated to you in big red letters
this building is built by the commune of
Vienna by the city of Vienna in the
years so and so in this case it's 1925
226 by the means of the housing text and
the housing text moon Bosch Toya is
sometimes even written in larger font so
basically imagine that you walk through
Vienna and on four hundred buildings
you'd have this lettres they're very
abstract it's one of these in script
it's these inscriptions that you don't
see anymore yeah because it's like you
became so used to it and however if you
really look at it carefully there was a
time and this is the time I will speak
briefly about to get you into kind of a
canonical history or rewriting of
histories and it's the time of red
Vienna when basically from 1919 to 1934
and social democratic government of
Vienna developed four hundred of these
buildings always ever again riding in
big red letters proudly that it was
actually financed by a special tax can
you imagine any government today to
write a text proudly on the facade
surely not and that is exactly what
actually my my project in brief is about
I I do believe that this architects and
Urbanists we need to inherit lost
futures of the past of history yeah and
there I'm basically building my theory
on Jacques Derrida's idea of inheritance
is always the reaffirmation of a depth
but a critical selective and filtering
reaffirmation yeah if we if we if we
look back at such a time for instance
it's red Vienna then we will not inherit
it one to one and I will show you why or
maybe somebody much
to you Matt Fisher who wrote about lost
futures and critiquing or saying there
was lost futures in the past that would
get us beyond whiteness and paternalism
for instance of the wealth of state but
it is the lost the welfare state itself
is a lost future so the interesting what
what we could gain from it is a renewed
concept of the public maybe a more
powerful one and also as I'm interested
in rebel cities sanctuary cities new
municipalities red Vienna specifically
of course gives us an alliance historic
alliance two such cities today so what
red Vienna red Vienna I already
mentioned the time the period it was a
time of a redistribution and a
large-scale communal building program it
was based on Ostrom axis politics of
hegemony it would we would learn we
could learn an idea of a public or of
the institution this is where I'm
sometimes move who is of course also
familiar to you who's claiming to say
okay if we want to radicalize democracy
we have to do it with and with him
within and outside of institutions and I
would propose red Vienna to be an
interesting institution to study and
read Vienna is a big house like as a
housing program actually teaches us
politics without purism it's actually
less pure than for instance the neue
Frankfurt it's not radicalized in its
politics and it's not a state system and
you can see here if you think of this as
mass housing of the 1920s and then ready
enim looks much different to mass
housing of the snow Iban of the new
buildings time of new of Frankfurt in
the 1920s for instance and I want to add
somebody else and this is actually my
girl a totally hot skin who is was one
of one of the first architects and
female architects in Vienna she became
she got well she became 102 years old
imagine that and she taught me something
I actually knew her personally
lucky the luck to actually meet her and
have some spent quite some years as her
neighbor and supplanter with her and as
an architect of red vienna and new
frankfurt
she was critical of red vienna of she
was supporting the alternative within
what we would call the alternative
tetris movement I'll come back to that
but she was also firing throughout her
life for women's rights for minorities
rights and she was fighting and that's
to say God even sadly most famous she
was a clear anti-fascist resistance
fighter against the National Socialism
and they nearly got her killed and so on
so I would say she told me there's an
architect if there is an architect you
can actually not separate split yourself
in terms of saying okay well politically
we should do that but at akattak
architectural II I have to do that but
she was clearly stating was okay well
anybody have to take a position it
politically and architectural eat
together and maybe you know people who
actually claim that that you could split
such sides okay I want to run you slowly
through are the preconditions of ready
Anna to show that it's actually
something that could be even today in
the precondition of red Vienna there was
a huge housing crisis we could say that
something that we face in cities today
just as well but and that's different to
many places 'im there was and the
government's then actually continued
that they already inherited strong rent
control and good protection of tenants
what does that mean if you have strong
ranks if you have rent control rents
limited actually turned out that the
private there was no interest in private
and like all is it no private investment
in housing private investors didn't want
to build housing because you couldn't
make profit from it that of course
increased the housing shortage which was
a problem and it decreased the land
prices now if you had such a situation
today that
housing crisis in the private industry
doesn't want to build what would the
government do what the politicians do
they would say we have to we have to put
out incentives we have to help the
private markets to build samba to read
vienna actually said no we will do it
ourselves we will actually actively lend
a purchase land we will invent Texas
yeah like I already mentioned the
Vienna's housing takes a luxury texture
that was literally texting luxury goods
luxury any any luxury activities for
redistribution they were improving
Social and Health Services invested in
culture and recreation because they also
follow this a concept of hegemony that
you basically with culture with social
interaction that you get the population
to actually support you in your big
scale political program and of course
the most so to say the thing that states
the most that is still without in Vienna
until today is the 64,000 that they
built in this yes and 34 it was
destroyed because of an ostracism moment
as of Ostrow fascism ruling and then
four years later it was National
Socialism that of course had a
completely other housing policy so how
did it look like
Vienna had takes over any tea but takes
over reality by itself doesn't do
redistribution so you can see here a
very famous poster of for the so-called
house the luxury text yes so we see the
red hand kind of taking the champagne
bottle and of course I'm not saying and
this is exactly what I mean by
critically inheriting we can not redo or
redraw something like this anymore well
we can certainly not I would say see the
red big man saying okay well I promised
you so much housing and I will ever
build more so this is exactly a kind of
historic paternalism condition that we
need to absolutely critique on the other
hand and this is the filtering process
that there does speaks about
see what is interesting in it for our
current times plus future and there was
a lot a lot of information also for for
the population for instance as the third
poster shows to actually inform the
extremely progressive housing text that
would actually take a lot of money takes
rich people a lot and poor people very
very low so we must atone I got through
I made made drawings of course to show
however more housing was built in this
time then sighting of housing became a
real political statement what you see
here is a plan of 1932 were all the
black dots are actually showing this
different communal house ISM so there
wasn't
except for this time the first district
a very central district there wasn't the
district where social communal housing
wasn't placed it was even important that
it would be placed in all the party
streets just as much as in the workers
district you could call that even an
antagonistic statement this is the very
famous Karl Marx Hoff
so it was not only placed specifically
in in the 19th district which is
approach where this thick district its
enormous Liebig and it is as you can see
aesthetically it's it even presents
itself like a castle or some sort of
really a defending architecture that was
critiqued for instance by man filter for
and so on and so for a road a book yeah
Vienna rasta where he was very
interested in tone with with the
aesthetics and the politics of of red
Vienna but a kind of strong
architectural form in the city and I
think even a vittoria really also
mentioned it sometimes you could
actually read it as an antagonistic
statement and it was of course very much
disliked by the by the political
opponent read Vienna was also reacting
to the existing city this is a little
posters claiming that
along the so called girdle with a
fill-in of houses they would build the
Ringstrasse at his poly teri arts which
means that the ring starts bending
bushwa beautiful vulva in the first
Center to actually build a similar
Bulova for the Paula teri ins just kind
of a ring forum or as if Blau
beautifully works out in her book red
Vienna there's large scale structures
that are really open in the city and
they're basically like an album whole
cities within the city but they are not
at all kind of disclosed structures but
actually open up courtyards and if you
walk there today
it's beautiful gardens that are open to
the public so red Vienna was more than
just housing it had also libraries
schools kindergartens and swimming pools
etc giving you a very really fast
we are not today and this is of course
interesting because not only did until
34 was 64,000 apartments built but today
420 thousand apartments in Vienna are
either council or subsidized housing
that means that like we have two million
population in the city of that 60
percent of the Viennese live in
municipal was subsidized housing in that
what you would call social housing and
75 75 percent of the Viennese rent and
renting is of course the total opposite
strategy to a right to buy or something
that based on Margaret Thatcher some
idea of like housing the privatizing
housing is is opposing in the 70s for
instance and these famous adela
buildings were built they have kind of a
career at the moment but you don't see
here on all of these buildings they're
swimming pools on the roof so this idea
of having swimming pools on roofs of
affordable housing is something that you
can actually really learn from Vienna's
social housing vivienda Housing Policy
Vienna is also a city and now I
sound like the advertising person of
Vienna it will change in a moment but
why I'm doing this is because I believe
it's important to see the good and kind
of the critical side so Vienna because
Vienna is growing just as any other City
and quite fast it's using several in a
city but also further out areas to
actually develop further and this is one
large scale city development called
finished at Aspen or Aspen urban lake
site you see this master plan for 20,000
residents and what the end of date is
and I think it's quite unusual it built
the subway there before one single
building was built so you'd have the
subway run throughout the city yeah
through this development you see here
into the greenfield and then the houses
started to weaken to be built in so I'm
just saying this this is a heritage of
red Vienna in terms of understanding
that public transportation that public
housing and social housing and so on is
in fact public of public interest and
public tasks so when you what you rent
or what you pain in social housing at
the moment is around 750 and less or
more leverage but unfortunately on the
private markets you pay the double so
what I'm saying in Vienna at the moment
a lot of people actually are lucky with
within the system and a lot of people
are very unlucky that are outside the
system and because of the rapid growth
and so on so social housing isn't going
down and private housing is actually
increasing in relationship so that is
actually really creating a housing oil
crisis in Vienna just as much so we
cannot just say everything is great but
we must also critical in critically
inherit that means reactivate lost
futures but critique paternalism
critique what I will show you what is
embedded in in Vienna but it's
astonishing until today of this time is
can you imagine that red in red Vienna
rent was around four percent of the
income of people do you how much do you
pay do you pay it's incredible yeah
actually this number is so low that
historians have been fighting to say it
was politically stupids because to be so
low made actually ready and not be
dependent on rich people to continuously
be able to be 'text because if you don't
have this Texas to actually get money to
continue to build this very low price
renting so that doesn't mean that it has
to be very high but the question is if
it's sustainable but it did cover only
meant maintenance and operating costs
and it isn't at the moment an enormous
driving force for people to say actually
can this is utopian yeah utopian in the
past to say what could actually be
possible what is bothering until today
is that already then there was an
allocation system that basically
viennese first so you tell FAC aynd of
points that you're a point system of
classifying applicants for the dwellings
and these actually put people that were
already living in Vienna that had
residency and so on first and that is
something that we like critical
architects like me in Vienna critique
until today and it has just been
actually strengthened it just has just
been made even harder for people who are
not from Vienna and especially in this
constant discussion about migration to
actually access this system which is of
course at the end of the day highly even
racist and and not to be not to be
supported and then you know it's all
this what but of course ISM that goes
now for all our historic building or
historic housing programs offer for this
time red Vienna was also extremely
standardized a very small kind of it had
classical turnkey apartment sciences and
there was a new paternalism embedded not
only in the images that you just saw but
also they did not allow self-initiate
self-built self-organization and there
was a certain fetishization of work
which of course gets is a problem until
today because even today we have to ask
ourselves I mean there is no such thing
as the proletarians anymore as this
large body of of people but but to ask
ourselves what's the relationship who
are what is this new precariat
precarious people that would have would
be the subject of today's housing
policies however in Vienna Davos
alternatives alternatives in the
alternatives is for instance a stateless
movement because housing was so extreme
housing crisis was so extreme that
people started to Scotland and actually
built themselves it was a lot of women
as women also buildings and Families
just being there and acoustically doing
that which then read vienna kind of in
its paternalistic motor managed to get
within the system organised
however like collectively
institutionally organized self building
by for instance here you could put in
hours of your work rather than money but
what is important is you cannot you
couldn't build your own house but you
had to build somebody else's house it's
important to have these little details
to say okay how do you actually build
collectivity this is the time when other
flows invented his house with one wall
you know like basically saying okay you
can stack buildings together and have
just one wall and for instance one
alternative within this moment was the
so-called house with one kitchen which
came alike which was a result of a
feminist movement saying okay within
this entire house you'd have a central
kitchen where you'd cook or somebody
would cook for the different families in
order for if women not to have to cook
so and this is now this was the historic
part of the lecture and it gets us to a
work that we're currently doing which is
a commissioned by the
workers chamber Vienna to actually study
concepts of justice in urban planning in
housing public space and participation
and what we're doing is we're looking
back so to say hundred years into this
red vienna we're projecting from today
and from the past into the future and
actually creating a future concept like
a utopia of how a justice sitting in
city planning could be named in order to
kind of look back and say what would be
the steps to get there and believe me of
course this is very difficult as much
fish already said it's motive it's me
it's it's easier to imagine the end of
the world and the end of capitalism
well like but the idea is and the
Commission is and I think many of such
studies should be commissioned to say
okay let's really imagine how it should
be because we very often know how it
should not be and this is why for
instance like for publication I wrote a
little manifesto and I think we also
need to write many more manifestos in
order to really say okay we need to
write it down and take it out there so
this is just briefly a care and so
called care manifesto claim traffic
probably claim public property as public
and turn public housing into democratic
duty acquire Ivan Landess Commons and C
selling public grounds raise the number
of communal and cooperative housing in
rent to everyone without discrimination
explain why housing is a public interest
and duty and expropriate the expropriate
us and that's of course something that
is very difficult to say in especially
when I when I give talks in the US it's
even more difficult but it's not about
expropriating in terms of taking of
stealing something but it's
expropriating and i don't know if you
heard about 60% of the Berliners being
for expropriating large-scale privatized
housing companies basically to say okay
the real expropriation takes place by
those who actually make
by somebody else's need of housing so
this was the part of politics and now
you're asking me you're going to ask
okay yourself okay well she really
places out a manifesto it's extremely
brave and very could be stupid but I
want to actually show you what how
within our planning situation like
anybody in that what we are doing
planning and with regard to popular
agency how could we actually deal with
such questions I'm sure you're aware of
this beautiful question of Giancarlo De
Carlo who critiqued this time exactly
this time that I'm talking about where
Vienna or also snowbound in Frankfurt
Devon feels the existence minimum the
purpose for the exchange existential
minimum to say okay well if architects
were actually just asking how you would
design such an apartment they really
forgot to asked why well what like why
would you actually design a place in the
most creative way and make try to make
people believe what try to make people
not see that they're forced to live in
very small space so what I was looking
into our like also other people did of
course was the history of withdrawal of
planning which got us into also our
planning mess so there was a master plan
critique since the 1960s that says well
top-down master planning is
anti-democratic and tabula rasa I think
we all agree from the funny enough that
was of course also critique from the
rights to say it's not liberal enough
it's inefficient master planning so that
actually this is now going to be it's a
very short kind of wrap up there's okay
comprehensive turns communicative you
all know kind of have imagined concept
of let's let's be kind of all all the
same I level on a table and and
communicate and that I will show that
that that's problem in planning and of
course our planners and architects and
I'm sure you all architecture students
experiencing experiencing planning
dilemmas and especially in the 1960's
and 1970's the idea of like that all
planning works very powerful even
advocacy planning for instance or
planning is generally functionalized by
advanced capitalism architecture is an
appeasement strategy for so it's social
injustice so it seems that critical
planning is impossible it actually says
seems that we should go home and stop
planning right and this is really also
what today my students are asking or we
are all kind of of course asking
ourselves and this is the famous hand of
La Cava scheme in its Lou la vie and of
course this is exactly what what has
been critiqued how can we have this hug
we cannot be this godlike figure that
destroys half of Paris so in order to
have a new city but what we have today
is this is the hand of investor in
Vienna on a large piece of area to be
developed and and he is part of an a
very powerful part of a communicative
cooperative planning process and
something there's a tendency or
something happened and I would call it
that instead of advocacy planning we now
have advocates planning yeah we have
actually a tokens make the rules for big
planning decisions in in urbanism
there's just to give you some examples
also in yenna we have like just there's
just been a revived concept for flexible
guidelines for high-rise buildings which
basically I'm not against high-rise
buildings yeah but the more you flexible
ice guidelines the more easier you make
it for very powerful players in
participative projects to actually
demands their high-rise building for
instance there's concept of negotiable
when planning deals I'm sure that's all
like basically we could say London has
has played it up for us
yeah has already has shown us why it
gets to insanely enough
Vienna is also heading this direction so
coming back to planning dilemma the
reactions in the 60s or 70s were ok well
either normal planning well that would
be said because we're all planners or
architectural or we do situationism we
retrieve industry into disciplinary
autonomy participation cooperation
process all don't get me wrong it's all
interesting things interesting ways of
actually doing architecture very
important reactions to the Cobo see his
hand however and here I totally agree
with a REM koolhaas that it also got us
into a situation where lots of cities
are being built a big scale and the
question is whatever happened to
urbanism where are the concepts of
urbanism
however where I don't agree with her
Remco loss is that that would be the
moment to actually define new
fundamentals of architecture being as
you all know from the Biennale of 2014
being through a wall ceiling roof etc
and he was rightly critique critiqued I
find for missing economy for missing
grounds politics and so on yeah so
basically I'm the same as we cannot
again kind of just say architecture is
the disciplinary mode of knowing how to
design a floor or a wall and again don't
get me wrong I think it's very important
to know how to design a wall in the tour
and this is why I showed you in the
beginning that this is what I do and
certainly I'm not absolutely not a fan
of the idea of manifestos
done by somebody else you all know that
for instance all free markets rather I'm
trying to set up a planning theory or
arm actually this is what I was writing
about to say planning could be a
contingent setting in dispute saying
that a planning is not settling a
dispute
it's not about planning appeasing
but it is a setting in dispute saying
it's a setting that has been struggled
over a position which remains in dispute
which is disputable and that's something
that makes it possible in times when you
say it's actually impossible be
impossible to plan we still need to plan
that's similar to the post foundational
paradox which is saying okay if there is
no given foundations there's ever more
but evermore enables and necessitates to
do now new foundations to do new
foundings yeah it that means that
basically we we must plan yeah evermore
even so we know that it's great that we
have a critical relationship to it and
post on in post foundational theory with
Oliver market as a theorist of this of
post foundationalism he distinguishes
between an ethical democracy unethical
politics that would mean that we act
uncompromised that we have only clean
hands that everybody gets happy and as
you know something like this doesn't
exist
yeah we cannot plan that everybody gets
happy so planning is positioning and
what he basically does is likes turning
around and say what we need is a
democratic ethics saying we have to be
ready to acknowledge that our hands will
get dirty they don't have to get super
dirty I think I'm not talking about
mafia planning here I don't know it is
about getting involved in finding
possibilities we are not and if you do
that without doing this without losing
sight of justice or justice or beat
equality in solidarity
it's a pragmatic way but it's not
cynical and that's really important it's
pragmatic in terms of minimal politics
what is possible
how much is possible and that now
having said that and
that was basically already most of the
theory I will show you some examples
where I believe that if we think a new
public and if we reconsider mode of
planning then radical democracy is
certainly about popular agency and
popular agency also or like architecture
opening up for popular agency how do I
mean that going through that a bit
faster because it doesn't sound it
doesn't see it doesn't need to see sound
like formula or a recipe but I do
believe this as architects we do need
some unlearning and unlearning of our
privileges I mean think of everybody
here sitting here who are we what does
what are our privileges ourselves we
also need to untrain some expertise I
don't know if you I'm sure you've you've
yourself found yourself in the situation
is if I to seem to know who you're
planning for or what to seem to know and
actually not know but and I'm not
romanticizing here non-identity because
I do think that with a lying we need to
while we need to untrained expertise we
need to use expertise expertise in terms
of partisan planning in terms of taking
a position and what I'm most interested
in positions are alliances in new
hegemony yeah basically how can we work
together with queer and metal workers
and and end to actually say okay it's
about setting up intersectional him
gemonese and what I would call
presumptious demands for instance okay
what if we demand knowing that it's
impossible but demand luxury for all
yeah and I will just give you exactly an
example of where we try it where you
know this could be what was one of a
measure so measuring is something I'm
really interested in and we all measure
is architects and this is why I'm
famed this wording for Mason fallen
which is for Mason is a German word that
is the same at the same time
presumptuous and miscounting and foreign
is the word for demand demand here is
related to and is to like loss concept
of that you need that within agency a
demand is creating an agency and one of
my references Sarkozy I would say
politics arises from account of
community parts which is always a force
count a double count or a miscount so
basically there is something about
productive miscounting and now I come
back to actually cylinder for whoever
was here and just before when you if you
remember sue lenders senior Selina
actually looking at this model in the
scale but let's guess one to one hundred
or maybe and and he's very furious and
says how can we actually teach children
if they don't even fit into this
building
it's much too small then this is the
moment where he actually in this seem in
this in this moment of the movie of
course playing up a kind of joke but to
take that serious it's like okay a he
acknowledges or actually this
acknowledges the fact that everybody
seems to know that this is scaled down
so no and then with like playing out
this joke I think he's still argues for
that we do also easily take for granted
that kindergartens are very small that
square meters or one budget for schools
are very low and and and so basically to
really question as if we were stupid why
this is so small why is that so small
doesn't have to be like this so I wanted
to build a roof terrace on a school yeah
that's like a roof terraces swimming
pools etc within austerity politics in
Austria also that is not so easy
we're talking about a school that is a
school for one thousand kids and it
wasn't built in the 60s and we did
extensions of this part and this part
and with this extension also built six
different courtyards I could
differentiate them nicely this is a
thousand kids is a possibility you still
have a possibility in splitting up in
some groups of interested kids to
actually do a participation project and
they developed very interesting ideas
and one of them was of course also a
roof terrace which I was anyway would
have liked to do well done so I'm not
going to show you this project which has
many different parts but as you can see
we kind of managed to have lots of
terraces balconies and so on for the
kids open classroom closed classrooms
and so on but this roof terrace was
really the moment of debate or conflict
one of those I wanted we wanted to have
this entire Terrace the entire roof to
become a terrace and the clients took if
the money didn't want the roof terrace
at all and his argument was if we build
a roof terrace on this school every
other school wants one also this is why
we will not do it and this is of course
where the architect says well we have to
do it to make sure that every other
school also demands it and so what we
actually managed at the end was we did
not manage to have the entire roof a
roof terrace but we managed a smaller
version but I could actually include in
the budget and not even in the hidden
way but like outspokenly with the client
I could include metal infrastructure all
around the edge of the roof to later on
when there's an extra budget to extend
the roof terrace to digs their entire
size so what I want to say is sometimes
and this is minimal politics you cannot
achieve everything but even if you
achieve only a compromise you can still
maybe implement the future of the full
achievement you should not give it up so
basically just to say well let's do this
then but we
make sure that later on it's not too
much of a hassle to actually enlarge it
with such an idea of what you can do I
want to show you a project which is very
very beautiful and it's not my invention
no it's a project that is um we called
it internists intersection or city house
and it's topics are right to housing
reuse of vacancy itself bills to it
yourself
ecological supporting the neighborhood
solidarity economy utopian model of
society living lifts solidarity its
critiquing racism ableism discrimination
sharing economy using not owning and
it's a co housing is one kitchen house
sounds like great and it's as I said
that something an architect cannot
invent you have to actually have a large
a strong group of people who have such a
vision and this was like a group of 20
people who found the house in the 16th
district in Vienna which is a very
migrant district very conflictual
district term and this is the house and
they were actually able to rent the
house as a whole and what we did is we
turns this house with minimum budget
into one kitchen house in the one
kitchen house that works in section so
you basically have a large kitchen for
everybody in the ground floor and on the
upper floors
you only have private rooms smaller and
larger there's people who are in the
wheelchair there's it's the the group
itself is kind of working together with
Korea base with supporting charities who
are living and hopefully because of the
sexual orientations there's petrol
constellations etc it's so it basically
it's intersectional completely in its
group of people in those who people who
live there and it's intersectional
architectural II because it works in the
section at the entire house is one one
kitchen house but it's beautiful in this
case is that all the corridors become
very amazing living spaces
and what is the most intersectional part
of that maybe is that in the cellar
there was this only other renter that
wouldn't leave the place and it's
actually a fraternity and fraternities
in Austria quite chauvinist up to racist
group of people and I have to say that
that a collective can be sourced a
collective of people of minority people
here can be so strong to say we live
together with such a kind of post or
antagonistic group is amazing ok so here
I watched them for half an hour they
needed half an hour to actually organize
the Solidarity economy model saying okay
who can pay how much yeah we had already
organized the entire house for everybody
people in the wheelchair need more space
others need a smaller room and so on in
half an hour they organized to pay
together with everybody just paying how
how much he/she can so the
intersectional city house is accessible
in many senses not only physically but
economically and socially and this is
the classical architectural drawing of
all the different spaces that are
actually organized in this house so this
is for instance the kitchen you can see
that it's really low budget
it's not about designing the beautiful
fixtures of the house but what I did as
an architect is help them support them
design the structure to actually make
this living together possible and of
course it's beautiful because it relates
back to a red vienna in terms of a self
built some settlers movement a concept
and also the one kitchen house and in a
similar scheme and a second version of
of alternative housing is the group
so-called group lower Shura means living
better without - - is one of the biggest
banks in Austria so it's a clear kind of
antagonistic moved against other versus
banking and it's the same concept again
but I was it's not the one kitchen house
but it's um it strengths is that it's
also working on taking
out private houses of the free market
economy how do they do that it's a group
of very powerful young people who have
been working on this project for three
years the project is located in the east
of Vienna much different to where we
just were very rather industrial zone
and they found an area that that they
can actually also buy they buy it in
order to actually collect device devices
on viennese Donna canal their
advertising
they just managed with crowdfunding to
get all the money together and this is
the project that we are architectural
working on so we are reusing a lot of
the structure to actually have the
circus center and community center then
the people will live there and work
there and there's utterly is and
co-working and it's in an area that is
absolutely rough which actually makes
its quality so a lot of it is actually
possible there and the organization of
that is that they're literally trying to
do that without banks without alone they
just manage to have half of the 3.8
million already by crowdfunding
organised and this group is setting up
an organization called habitat which is
very similar to meet razuna car in
Germany it's a collaborative association
that is that is buying out of the
markets houses and and land to actually
collectivise it and take it out of
speculation for good so while they are
doing this yeah we architectural er
doing that so to say to organise build
models define these spaces and I'm just
showing you how that generally works
what the meet has a syndicate for those
of you who are interested in Germany is
quite strong because there's already up
to 140 houses together all over Germany
and it's supporting habitat in Austria
well this my project is the our project
is the force
and the nice thing is it also is based
on solidarity economy but in a larger
scale that it says okay these houses are
built with depth or a crowdfunding and
then it says secured rent collected rent
control self rent controlled rents and
then once the depth is paid off the rent
stays the same and there's a margin
which we would call a solidarity margin
and this budget goes into new project
supports new projects to ever kind of
again to housing that work without the
speculation that's very similar to
generally council housing cooperative
housing or and here was just listing
their initiatives that are currently
trying the same to actually see that
we're keeping out or taking out houses
that are there for people people's need
to house injure of the free market and
my last project if you if you stick with
me is one that it's an urban planning
project and it's much more a top-down
project then those that I just showed
you in terms of initiate self
initiatives it was a competition that we
won the competition by the city of
Vienna
Suzanne carp and me work together on
this project and after winning the
competition worked for four years three
to four years with lots of meetings and
so on with the city of Vienna to
organize the scheme so it's all about
the donor canal I will show you in a
moment is the river central in Vienna
right to the city as a right to the
center
it's about inventing of urban planning
tools it's the question in the role of
the public defending public space and
most of all it's what I believe
strongest in a combination of
institution and popular agency politics
and popular agency how is that so this
is to be a Miss Donna canal that any of
channel running right into into the
center of yenna here you see how dense
and tight it is it's a large it's quite
a large area this is our the area of our
planning we compare it to other
in Vienna also to make sure the quality
of it its histories Otto Wagner Otto
Wagner regulating germ that then Europe
100 years ago more than hundred years
ago and imagining a flowering zone and
today it's great so inform this is a
party for instance more informal hanging
out by the waterfront more like in
informal green spaces playgrounds but
here you already see is everywhere in
city centers urban beaches urban beach
is growing and it is quite quite
commodified a lot of the urban space
here you see - I just mentioned it the
bank and this actually is like it builds
diagram one of these urban beaches
alongside each other that where you can
see how they get closer and closer to
the water
they're expanding their space yep having
Moyne was when taking more and more
space of the public space for them for
the kind of for the gastronomy for
making profit with the place while the
space for the pedestrians and the people
moving gets smaller that of course is a
real arm creating a real conflict and
there's another conflict which is based
on austerity politics basically saying
this is the way private can the
gastronomy Zara waiting its public and
this is and clearly it's not everywhere
the same but it's a very specific very
extreme example of a public bench
situated inside of three waste
collection ways this is the waste
collection of the of the restaurant on
the Left this is the waste collection of
the restaurant on the right and this is
the little waste bin that is logically
the one next to the bench so this is of
course nearly a polemic confrontation of
images but it has been very powerful to
say ok well we need public spending in
public space to actually make sure that
people who cannot or do not want to
afford to have a drink in a restaurant
or in a urban Beach actually also find a
good quality sitting
yeah I'm not saying that all of you Ana
looks like this surely not but in order
as a planner to actually
show what has to be done that was one
powerful combination of images so our
project don't worry I will not get you
through that just to show that it was
complex in rich and multi-layered I'm
going to show you three elements of a
term that were literally inventing tools
within urban planning that weren't there
for us
one was an on building plan we realized
what we need to do first is secure
public space to be not coding
commodified anymore to be not built on
anymore did private or public to make
sure for a growing density to find
enough place by the water for the two
million people actually that would enjoy
the waterfront so what we did is we did
not study because I think it's
architecture you know of course building
plans but we said okay we need the same
powerful two s building plans for a non
building plan and now metric normally
I'm actually working a lot in mediation
and I'm doing lectures and workshops and
so on to help people understand the
language of drawing and I actually would
rather critique the building plan for
its unreliability of non architects but
in this case we purposefully took the
same quality of red lines abbreviations
and so on and threw ourselves an on
building plan throughout the entire area
to say okay we preserve and we have it
raw and it will now be able to be folded
up in the city of Vienna to say all of
that is meant to stay public which is
all the waterfront yeah none of it ever
to be given to private investors all the
historic stairs the beautiful thing is
if you do that you even recreate what
has been there yeah which of course if
you just build anyway it wouldn't happen
and then make sure there's enough space
for the mobility of people along the
water side so we did this for this
entire area also in terms of Zoning
sure that there's green areas only the
orange would be one one piece left for
more
castrato me for another urban beach and
it looks like this and it's really very
detailed very careful one to five
hundred throwing and the second
instrument which was the one when the
one was kind of making sure that nothing
would like the to keep them public space
from modifying being commodified the
second was to say okay we need an
instrument that helps these multifold
responsibilities on this area to
actually increase the quality of public
infrastructure so we said this is this
river actually is like a call like an
Patty tour which of course in Vienna is
nice because you have the donor right
sir and you have to tend your music so
it's like it reads well and it's also
what we need to do and we stretched it
and we developed four three four long
drawings like this which actually helped
because they are not so specific
site-specific to actually look at the
rhythm of public infrastructure to say
okay what's the distance between in what
distance do we have another public
toilet where could we find it we don't
it once kind of have to place it but
actually rather make it a goal that then
we can actually really localized so that
has been a very useful tool and insert
you tool was a manual more usual I won't
get you into that because we're already
quite late but how to actually use space
how to deal with this beautiful
cinematographic affected Otto Wagner
built into the city this is this is the
now subway then City line where you see
the city the water like like a movie and
to say okay well graffiti is not your
problem but the problem is that you're
building that you're closing these
windows that's really the heritage to be
solved and not equality not the wall and
just him when we were talking writing up
the non building plan plus the manual we
of course also said okay all the
waterfront and all the stairs are to be
kept
and never to be built on and that was
the moment when they said yes but with
these stairs and this is the only this
is hundred meter long historic steps in
the center but unfortunately there were
already too late that what we heard
because that's an investor and he
already has the the rent for that and he
will build a restaurant on top of these
steps because he wants to be by the
water and by and on steps you cannot
have a restaurant so when we heard that
we were like what it's like the only
steps that you have publicly and you
would give that to a private investor to
actually then build over it so we said
well we cannot accept the display nurse
we went up to the vice mayor saying
listen guys what's happening here and
the nice thing was we already had our
non building plan in our hands which
logically with these steps was only red
saying nothing can be built there
there's so important to the public and
also the accessibility and so on so we
were powerful enough to actually secure
that and the deal was unmade and so on
and every time I passed by the steps I
feel like I built in myself it's like
because you you save them it's very
beautiful spot in Vienna so we handed in
handbooks three books four plans all
documents and so on to the city of
Vienna but we weren't able to really get
them collectively really to to support
it so it disappeared in the shelf in a
way up to this moment when the last
piece in the Sun fled that was not
that's not a restaurant yet actually was
claimed by an investor to build an 800
peoples restaurant on this spot and this
was the moment when actually popular
agents even people when a citizen ship a
citizen protest group actually asked us
but didn't you make a plan that was
clearly saying this is not to be built
on we said yes but it's not published
so they actually supported us with other
people to ask us to / to showed us show
them the plan we send it into the city
of
but that forced them to publish part of
it and actually this group that
literally also set themselves on the
grass saying we will not have this
happen they managed to have our plan be
published actually get out of the Shelf
become a political tool and they related
their initiative to here is the link to
our Donna canal party tool and they used
as an argument our plan to actually
secure this Donna canal visa as it's
called this spot from being commodified
so this protest actually activated if we
had something like a put in a political
potential in the plan yeah which kind of
if we speak with Jared I would hope for
actually the the political potential was
hoping for popular empowerment of a
popular agency so it's it actually it
would have been nothing literally
without the initiative without kind of
the radical Democratic movement that
would say ok but also them would have
been not so strong wouldn't be there
this plan so I guess that's really where
I I wanted to show you that I do believe
that it's a combination of finding
ourselves a position in institutions and
reframing the public but most of all
kind of supporting and empowering
popular agency thank you very much and
thanks for your patience
thank you so much I think that was like
a really inspiring lecture but I but one
of my favorite parts is when you
actually encouraged everybody to take a
position and how you can't really
separate yourself from the politics and
I think that's really important
I guess call to action to do and I guess
to start maybe a few questions from the
audience before we go up drinks I wanted
to ask you specifically about this idea
of the Commons because I think
throughout your talk you kept touching
on these kind of utopian ideals but that
you actually showed could become a
reality through collective action and
popular agency and to research I've been
doing in Britain actually I kept
noticing the similarities between London
and Vienna throughout your talk but in
Britain there they recently published
that only four percent of all land can
still be classified as Commons and I was
just curious as to like in Vienna how
would you define Commons in terms of who
owns them it's very interesting because
we just had a two-day workshop at
Sheffield about Commons and why I wanted
to show you the history of Vienna is
because I do think that Commons are very
locally very different and I would say
that for instance the four hundred
twenty thousand apartments in Vienna are
a Commons and if you say okay who is the
biggest real estate owner in Europe you
could say it's the mayor of Vienna or
you could say it's the Viennese well you
could say it's the people who live in
Vienna actually - exactly make it not a
kind of place nationalistic way of
owning so if you have public housing
public housing is a common sir it's a
comment and that's why I wanted to be
radically democratized in terms of what
these two projects and many more we're
working on now for instance a woman's
house housing project and what they are
doing they're challenging the
standardized social housing production
that is also going on in Vienna to
actually say there is needs of people
yeah and engagement and self initiative
that also needs to find a place there so
what I'm really interested in
with up to say okay how can that's
become a mode in in the production of
even mass housing I even think that we
need another term for mass housing I
like that we need to acknowledge that
this is important and and get rid of
what it has such bad connotations but
coming back to comments so from yen
coming from Vienna where the situation
is not as privatized as in other places
I realized that I would think I'm big in
favor of defending public space while I
can see that in in radically new
liberalized places comments have the
promise of regaining what has been
privatized and so while we still have a
lot of public comments rather actually
have the tendency to say to privatize
public because I mean let's say the the
classical simple things of like let's
take our van gardening it's just very
trivial example but for instance on
donor canal there was some sports
weather some gardening and we had long
discussions if that is actually still
public space no because at the end it's
it's quite privatized it's not everybody
and this so easily and so on so should
be there also as a quality but it should
not be forever given to this group
that's the core the quality of
publicness but and that's why I brought
in the the truth Democratic crisis of
course the problem of public is that
once you have for instance the
right-wing government that doesn't
believe in our public at all they may
privatize it all yeah
if for instance Vienna it is what is
also so interesting with reading Vienna
in the 1930s so today is in the 1930
syrtis it wasn't in clave yeah kind of
then it was a red vienna within a kind
of conservative country turning more and
more efficient within again kind of
conservative right-wing political
country very similar and actually that
is a similar situation to many cities
yeah cities that's why i mentioned
briefly but I was also researching new
municipalities rebel cities sanctuary
cities which are all similar in the way
that they are kind of trying similar to
red Vienna even to see what can I do
with in their legal means and
possibilities to defend more right-wing
or nationalistic politics outside so the
comments are really interesting to me
how do we define I think that I'm coming
from the side where I say I want I want
to defend public space as public but
radically democratize it in terms of it
for being able to be used now for
instance in the donor Canal project some
many people asked us but you know in
this cool you you did such beautiful
participation process we do a lot of
schools and kindergartens and so on but
for a donor canal the new channel
why didn't you you know do like
participation processes involve the
public and we said like well I really
don't know a process that could involve
two million Viennese do you know one I
really and we said okay and this is
where we turned from we actually said
equity planning would be the much
stronger much more valid way of working
there to say okay we do take
responsibility as planners for the space
to be actually secured from
privatization and monopolization to be
there for 2 million Viennese to find
space so do them whatever they want but
if I would take the time to ask two
million Viennese and I'm being a bit
over exaggerating what they would like
to do there it would take so much time
at the end there is not a piece of land
left it's all privatized but then so
there's I think really moments where you
have to choose which tools and which way
of acting do you apply and also from
where do you start and I think that's
maybe really the difference between
different notions of Commons we also
discussed Commons in for instance former
communist city cities or areas
completely different notion you tell me
with comments like this if redness of
commonism coming back so I would be very
careful with using that at the moment
this is fashionable term true to general
but to really look at what they hope
that is implied in it you know actually
asked that as a provocation because I
think it's a term that's used quite a
lot but needs more specificity and I
think actually what I really enjoyed
about the lecture was how you were
inventing these tools that actually
embrace the agency of Architects but we
have to know when to use which one like
the non building plan I thought was
really terrific and I think it's
something that you should really like a
patent and push out there to get
everyone to use I think with a lecture
here it's person did not I wanted to
open it up to see if anybody had any
questions
and thanks Cabo for really I think
carefully crafted lecture and one that's
kind of urgent but I wanted to ask a
really boring architectural question
because your constituencies are largely
non architects the people you're trying
to communicate with a little the
planners perhaps in one corner but
largely a public which is diverse you
operate I think with a certain strategy
of representation in the drawings which
to my I recalled certain abstractions or
clarifications at Auto Noi at would have
been interested in his mapping but I've
been taken further particularly the long
drawing of the canal and the way you
begin to code that how do you educate
non architects to read those how are
those received because they seem to be
doing critical work and if there are
then replicated in the media to make
these political arguments they seem to
have a job to do that's so dynamic that
I wouldn't know quite how to convey the
legibility of them you must you must
work very hard at that or there must be
an audience that you look to that are
used to receiving those things that we
might not be appreciate because of that
backstory of red Vienna because of that
Laboratory of the city being so unique
do I understand you right that you're
saying it's it still is asking a lot of
the audience how do you how do you
organize your audiences to receive that
graphic information so that they can be
empowered and use it well I think this
is one of the biggest challenges of
Architects the many fold audiences and
the many fold actually abstractions of
drawings I cannot have
hence sketch with exclamation marks
activists drawing on the construction
site of a construction company now and
the company so and then again I cannot
have a construction company drawing to
actually activate popular agency to join
me in a fight or battle for something so
in this sense and I have to say I'm even
critical of of representation for the
sake of representation but then again
how do I convince an audience like you
so it's really tricky no and then and in
fact I do think that architects have a
lot of work and and quite let's say
that's definitely not not paid in the
sensor properly to say to have these
multiple languages and because I don't
really know how you could bring it all
together in one drawing and I don't
think that's really possible so in a way
it means a bit of patience or acceptance
of a crowd like you to say okay well
we're taking the drawing of floor like
what they all do is a not so
architectural drawing yeah but then
again I'm maybe sometimes especially in
this very low-budget project the
question is how can you actually spare
yourself and the client and so on to do
all this kind of extremely elaborate
construction drawings yeah and then it's
catch on the construction site may do so
it's again the question of choice of of
tools maybe even inventing tools
sometimes and and also finding out where
whether you need kind of um certain
expertise anyway and but also what's the
level of energy that we put into where
I'm like I'm I'm very happy I'm actually
often in juries also in Austria of car
collection competitions we could also
discuss competitions it's of course a
critical problem of architecture
I think competitions are in so far
amazing as with architectural
competitions we architects constantly
provides so
any alternatives to a question once
competitions are stopped and they're
very easily stopped with communicative
processes suddenly you have none no
alternative you have one consensual
project and this is why the thing that
we do need to critique which is
architectural competitions however still
bring in a quality of saying to every
question there's always more than one
alternative but logically we know that
this architects but with the kind of
communicative planning strategies going
on this is being reduced to a classical
Tina situation so I'm now already
expanding your question but when I come
back to these competitions we've now
started to actually eliminate up to
prohibit perspectives in competition
entries not because we think I think
perspectives are most beautiful
architectural tool yeah
but you know what architectural offices
started to spend thousands of euros on
super fancy a high-class perspectives
and then you're in competition juries
and you have the client and the client
walks to the super fancy perspective and
wants this project so actually we say no
perspective allowed we even put white
paper on top of it and suddenly the
abstraction of the planning section and
the needs of the architects in a jury to
translate that into images in the head
of the client is it has become the tools
we actually talk again about the quality
of the plan you know so actually it's
the opposite of what we would think that
we need drawings that are most clear to
read have become the biggest problem
hi thanks hi presentation by the way
very okay it's very cool thank you I
like the part it's cool it's soo Linda -
what's happening in the world and
especially in Europe in general I just
wonder like for the previous and sort of
like the one before you mentioned the
term the cowman's and I just wondered
when you're using the word the comments
in various presentation either to the
clients or to audience like us are you
specifically referring to something
that's unique to the via Vienna context
or do you have a definition for the
Commons when you're using the term like
how would you define the term and like
how it's different from others like
public for instance mm-hmm well I think
the classical definition of Commons
would be air water I think we have to
include land yeah because land is not
reproductive reproducible so this is
where actually and we had a lot of
debates in Austria at this moment
because land prices have like in every
other city skyrocketed and and I wrote
the paper to actually say we need we
need land price to be limited like rent
control to land control price or
actually I would think that land
shouldn't be privatized at all there's
many many good ways of saying you can
use land but not own it and that means
you can use it privately in many ways I
think it's called
what's the English word for that here
but in German it's called power lay
apart right so it's always of like using
land for 90 years or hundred years or so
but it's not it's not been privatized
and sense or like not not ownership and
and in this sense we've just achieved
quite a success in
because some like this is now politics
again there's a new zoning law that
actually defines or Ken the politicians
can now define areas that have been
Greenland and turned into housing to
actually define it as social housing and
that means also that this price of the
land has to be low which effectively
people call those who own land they call
it quasi expropriation because where the
politicians are actually limiting their
expected speculation money that they're
already looking for so in this sense I
would say that land generally is a
Commons
and when it comes to housing politics if
we think and this is the I think this is
what we what we need to and this is now
not not everybody every architects task
but um it's one that I find my task also
to say if we can convene odd convinced
if we can show people that there's it
that housing is a human rights rather
than an investment strategy at the
moment housing is an investment yeah
it's totally different to saying if
housing is a human right it is public
and once it's public then you can
logically democratically publicly
politically kind of intervene in the
parallel housing market and it's not an
intervention it's not disturbing the
private market because housing is no
market yeah and this is why when you
actually start to define it it's
something else and I wonder if that's
why I said we could see this social
housing huge large amount of apartments
in Vienna as a Commons because it's
something that's collectively yeah but
the only problem is that the way we the
way comments are conceptualized now is
of course that a smaller group of people
can actually define what will be done
with it of with a certain Commons and
that's of course with a large with when
it comes to mass housing it's at a
different level that's why it's
representative democracy
that is taking care of that and radical
democracy is pushing it and and trying
to see that there's better accessibility
and so on so I agree maybe Commons is
not the right word but it was in
reaction to the question to say I would
understand it in any case as a common
good yeah
right in this end as a common task
because it's a public task because
housing is a human rights thanks for
your talk
I'm afraid I have another question about
language and why you chose to frame
things and the way that you did because
I think well it speaks to just that why
what the driver was I'm a landscape
architect and I'm quite inspired and
impressed by the canal master plan that
you've done and I'm just wondering
firstly why you decided to call it a non
building project as opposed to frame it
as a landscape master plan let's say and
whether or not when you frame in that
way whether it sort of takes a different
approach like a non development of you
know it doesn't have to be capitalistic
and still be radical these sorts of
things but but there's an idea of
development and change at the river
thank you for this question it's it's
funny because non billing plan was
especially nice to be banks planning
German post-debate it was highly
conflictual yeah the city of Vienna
didn't want it it's all to be called
like this so officially it's called harm
and plan on orphanage a home which means
frame planning for the public space so
there it was much too negative for them
and we said well in these times we need
a clear language so the non building
plan was really - it was more reaction
and this is why they of course the first
question was good about the tools and
and how they mediate to which audience
generally with my students I would
critique building plans for the unread
ability for their authority charity in
the way kind of they are drafted up
which make it very difficult for people
who actually have access to to read
what's happening in their neighborhood
or so to really to really read it so in
this sense I think we need some
democratization of of throwing of
throwing some of public drawings and in
this case however where we saw okay this
is so much public space it's already so
much in danger there and it's kind of
the it's after 20 years of development
on this Danube General of development
meaning the classical development and
you know what politicians know exactly
how to make use of the starting point of
a construction site you know with the
kind of thing you know how this image
looks like yeah how does an image look
like when you say we build nothing how
we need to actually reinvent this image
how do you sell developments that is not
development in the classic sense how do
we how do we frame and argue for a
future of the Danube channel that is not
built more and more urban beaches that
is difficult and that's why I think at
this moment an on building plan is a
good choice because it really awakens
the people it's speaking to the mall
actually to the people in the city
governmental and in the city
administration so use it really as if
kind of powerful tool as much as the
building plan you know what it stands
for yeah it gives you rights and it in
any it denies you rights as an investor
as a private
not only of course button but this is
where the antagonistic moment is so um
yes of course we could call it a
landscape plan but but a landscape plan
again at this moment is a change and and
making of something and to say okay
actually we called the Danube channel
informally we called it the low line of
Vienna
we literally opposed to the High Line in
New York because it's a quality it's a
low line it's like kind of a channel
yeah and it's has been this you could
call it with faux call this heterotopic
space so it's like a lot of crafty
things can happen there yeah it's a free
space and to keep this free space that
was kind of also our goal to say cities
that grow intensify and formalize and so
on they need such spaces no I appreciate
that and also I mean I should have
mentioned as well I mean you you
intimated it that with the guidelines as
well and talking about the rhythm and
identifying certain sort of services or
what have you that would punctuate yeah
so I appreciate that thank you thank you
thank you for giving this lecture and I
find it really inspiring I was also very
interested by the public proposal public
space proposal next to the canal and you
said it was pop and your proposal was
published with support of the citizens
sitting on the grass against you but
then I wonder what what happened next
and office being published did anyone
take any actions or so in fact part of
it is published part of it is still in
enclosure that's the right of the
government to say okay we we
commissioned studies plans guidelines
and so on what happened was the one
successful thing was exactly this
protester that made it that got it into
the awareness of nearly all the viennese
of may of people who are interested in
such in public space and planning
process
so it has become a reference yeah as the
kind of as the non billing plan it also
has become a reference I would say for
the moment where the politicians
realized okay
and the this gastronomy they invest the
investment plan was pushed and supported
by a politician of this district term so
what I'm saying is I have a critical
relationship to the public which I
support and which I feature and at the
other hand I can see how the public is
just as nearly royal as it's not I'm
critiquing mostly kind of public
planners public administration and the
public police and politicians for what's
happening and never actually private
investors it's logical that if you want
to invest in urban space that you want
to make profit and so on yeah
what I what we need in these times is
like a clear and good position from City
Planning politic city planners
architects and the position goes down up
to the points where believe it or not of
course I was often asked because the
people knew an architect and urban
planner there's like people asking me
are you making this plan you know I give
you a direct Commission if if you manage
to have me aside there and the little
restaurant logic this is what's
happening and to actually make clear and
this is what I mean like to take these
positions and situations up to the
architectural point as an architect as
an interior planner you have to choose
what if what you do and what you don't
who your language and this is what I
said with like you may not say I'm in
this case such I'm so much for climate
saving the climate and on the other hand
I'm building building killing and in the
agreement and and one family houses are
so yeah that's ridiculous in itself and
that's why I brought in Margaret -
Attila watski as a reminder of saying
like you cannot split yourself yeah so
happily to say well you know since yes
on my website I say I we say no to one
family house it's so many
you take service like how can you say
that it's our business is it like come
on I cannot write against what one
family house is to to the climate to the
land and so on and on the other hand do
it because it's our business
it cannot be our business if we believe
in that and this is a maybe I know kind
of followed the long line forgot your
initial question but I think that's
where we're yeah whether non building
plan basically is situated soon and this
is what I was what happened with it I
think it can this is the nice thing when
you do when you do project and they may
not I tried to show that I've many
project I have one that I actually wrote
a long text in in a nice book a Rutledge
book about where I was invited to do a
ad in art in buildings project in a
prison and I was really struggling with
myself if I should do that or not and it
was still managed to actually be placed
there and at the end I did actually do
something I made I built for them kind
of a football field but in such a tiny
space where a football field didn't have
space so I folded it up you and the
football field goes up the ball and so I
could have shown it's very beautiful
images but it's it's as a project again
it it changes a bit it makes the
situation a bit better but absolutely
not really yeah
so what it tries to do is to imply the
criticism aesthetically to say even so
people may not see it it can be
reactivated I can somebody can speak
about it somebody can can take this non
building plan again out of the shelf and
use it you can use it as an example
there was a successful defense yeah on
there was this field this field was
defended and this fight was won and it
can be an example for the next one and I
wonder was there any expense when you
come up project like this and did you
come across any challenges and what do
you think
do you think architecture has a voice a
powerful voice and this kind of city
planning I totally think so I only think
that we have this voice only then if
also and this is where other alliances
come in very simply purely alliances
between architects to say we only have a
voice if we would collectively be strong
in declaring this is what we do and this
is what we not do not do yeah there was
one moment was really great in Vienna
and which the city of Vienna rich City
with this history that I showed you
declared some years ago because of
austerity politics Maastricht criteria
it cannot afford to build the next ten
huge school campuses by itself but we'll
have to do them in PPP public-private
partnership this is actually where I got
really obsessed with PPP because I was
like schools yeah yet again such a clear
public task and a public good our common
good how can you actually get private
companies into this making in Vienna
maybe furious but then and it was really
nice there's this moment first
competition the chamber called me
knowing I'm a critical architect and
said ah we have to cooperate for this
competition can you please be in the
jury and I said like it no I will
not be in your jury and be your helping
hand to support this process a jury is
well paid you know you could again say
and it's better it's me than somebody
else and of course at the end there was
somebody else who did it yeah but if
everybody would have said no but the
moat the thing continues because at the
end what was nice ISM in the competition
half of the competition entries were
actually protests were posters saying we
will not build this PPP project
beautiful some people had their kids
photographed is like I will not go into
an investor school and so very nice very
creative yeah 40 creative architecture
posters making clear that it will not
support this but 30 nice projects by
architects who did it
so okay we didn't really manage a strike
here but I think this would have been
the right thing to do but at least it
was a moment of disturbance and the
politicians know very well whenever they
are public and they speak about the PPP
projects that there's somebody in the
room is like how are you doing this and
so on and then and it's small steps
minimal politics but it's it's at least
holding against the tendency I think
that's a great moment to not end but to
pause to maybe continue the conversation
we're informally upstairs but I think
that's a great point to end on to make
us think how can we advocate for more
greater collectivity even as a
profession so thank you very much guru
and thank you everyone
