hi everyone and thank you so much for
coming this evening for those of you
don't know me I'm Manisha Fergie's I'm
the head of sales public program and I'm
delighted to introduce tonight's lecture
by Thomas Ahmad on Russia on retelling
history this talk is the first in a new
series which you can see on the slide
here called new canonical histories the
aim has been to invite architects and
artists and theorists who are rewriting
the architectural Canon or retelling
history from a new perspective and
that's something that we feel is vital
to furthering a more diverse and
progressive form of architectural
education and tonight's speaker has been
doing exactly that through the teaching
practice and writing salman is a british
architect of Iraqi and Lebanese descent
she graduated from the a a diploma
School in 1977 and went on to do her PhD
at the RCA she worked with Egyptian
architect Hassan Fathy between 1975 to
76 and then 1983 to 1984 and she also
taught in housing and urbanism here at
the AAA until 1997 this book hasn't
fought the earth in Utopia which is on
sale at the back of the room tonight for
a special price of 40 pounds and I
really recommend you all buy it has its
roots in her time in Fatty's office but
it also originated in some form here at
the AAA I thought it was really
wonderful when she shared with us that
she was introduced to his work when she
came across a black-and-white print that
was being developed of a screen he had
designed and was being developed in the
AAA darkroom so the talk is titled
retelling history and the book is a sort
of catalyst to discuss Fatty's career
that moved away from the status quo and
introduced a new dimension and strategy
to inform contemporary and Arab
architecture thought he was a
revolutionary who rejected the
professional norms and practice
consolidated by capitalism's building
structures facades and town scapes and
he was working on an architecture that
was more original and rooted in the
place and culture of the region it was
one that relied on natural resources and
the accompanying crafts and building
techniques that were used to construct
his fabulous architectures there's so
much more I could say but I know you're
probably all anxious to hear from Selma
so um I will hand over to her now but I
also just wanted to mention that after
her lecture there will be a portion to
ask questions so please prepare yourself
because I think it would be great to
have engaging discussion after the
tonight's talk and we'll also have a
drinks reception upstairs in the front
members room so please do join us for
that as well
so please join me in welcoming some
we're back today a thank you thank you
very much for organizing this lecture
for inviting me here and we should thank
also Amira Salah who initiated this with
ever Frank so I would like to thank them
both in their absence and I can't tell
you how odd weird and wonderful it is to
be back in this place it's as if one has
never left it but this was the same
lecture hall that we all attended when
we were students some time back anyway
as you mentioned earlier this lecture
coincides with the publication of a book
that came out in the summer although the
publishing date was October and the
reason I'm showing you this book has
nothing to do with with buying copies
this evening I mean you're welcome to do
so but it's because this is the book
which really celebrates as far as I'm
concerned all the work and and Labor's
and revise of Hassan Poitier and his
whole discourse and theses if you like
whether in philosophy and culture or
whether in his practice and his
profession
it also echoes much of his own language
and spirit which was very very rare to
come by and I part of the world that is
undergoing all the upheavals it is has
to be said and and on behalf of my
publishers as well that that we would
like to thank
the sponsor of this book Salman Salim
bin Laden without whose support this
book would not have been published and
this is quite important because this
book has been in the making for at least
20 to 25 years the story is there it's
in the introduction so I shan't repeat
it but the outline and the book and the
fact that fat he wanted all this
material to be published in the early
80s was what prompted me to actually put
it together now where did it all start
as manager said and I told her I only
discovered this when I only remembered
this when I was working writing the
acknowledgments and I acknowledged
someone who was a tutor at the time at
the a called Omar al Farooq who's
Egyptian and we were doing a project I
was in my first year I was doing a
project photography project and
developing these black and white
photographs and there I saw being
developed this print in black and white
which looked amazing it had the kind of
intricate space as a detail if you can
imagine of the the matrix that you see
in the Maccabiah screen there on the
right and this is one example of it
comes in different examples you can put
all the lights out if you like I'm fine
here you can put them all out maybe it's
better and and I remember looking at it
and saying what is this and I didn't
know the guy I didn't armor and he told
me oh this is a mess Rabia I hadn't
heard of a mess Rabia because where I
come from in Iraq we don't call them
Mobius and then he said this is a mess
Ribeira and you know we are working with
this architect and I don't remember the
rest of the conversation now according
to there were two three other people
involved also with Hamad Farooq working
with Hassan Fateh at the time and they
were John Norton Allen cane and Farooq I
shall originally also students here at
the a they were graduating in the fifth
year when I
was in my first or my second I can't
remember and they told me more about em
fat hey and John claims that it was he
and Alan who were in the darkroom not
omar farooq but the story continues that
on my first in the summer during the
summer of my first year after I did
first year here I was spending the
summer with my parents and be rude
because we had a family house in the
mountains and I was walking in a cafe
and suddenly I bumped into John Norton
Alan and Dahmer and they all get up and
we all hug and we kiss each other and
blah blah such a surprise huge surprise
what are they doing in Beirut suddenly
this small man gets up all the man says
what about me don't I get a kiss as well
I said yes but who are you I was a bit
embarrassed he said I'm Hassan fat head
and of course I couldn't believe it I
had just read his book and I was like a
textured for the poor and from that day
on we became very close I would go and
see him all the time in his hotel then I
joined him on my year out of course
there were few other visits to Cairo but
when it was my year out and the fourth
year and I came and I told at the time
Alvin Boyarsky used to sit with us in
the in the black room in the bar and
when I said to him I'm thinking of doing
my year out and going to work with
Hassan Fateh said that's a brilliant
idea he was so encouraging this is the
street of Hassan fat his house and dad
will abana and the citadel and not only
was he was he so encouraging but also
keith critchlow so I have a lot I owe a
lot to this place and and and to friends
and colleagues and tutors and chairmen
and all the works for recognizing the
importance of Hassan fat hey at a time
when nobody knew who he was in the air
to be honest with you and in the region
this is a close-up of another mesh
Ribeira outside his house and that's a
view from his courtyard inside I just
would like to give you a context of what
it was like to be working with him every
day I would go and I would be met by the
Bob or the concierge Shaban who used to
be stoned all the time
wearing this brilliant blue sailor's
jacket you know and he would be the
keeper of the door and as soon as he
would receive me he would say Sabbagh
health area bash Mohan DISA and in in in
Egypt you know
Mohandas has to be a bash or a short for
Pasha or something so he had to feminize
this because and call me a bash which is
used for men normally this is a view on
the left hand side from the upper floor
of where hisself at his flat was in this
Ottoman Mameluke apartment and a plan of
the apartment below him and a section
through the courtyard which you can see
here that's the quick chat that you saw
and in the previous slide and the door
is the door to his studio and then a
dome in the bathroom lit up so he lived
in this flat which he used and and
resided in for as long as anybody knew
him this is me on my year out 7576 with
him in the studio working at my desk and
these are the interior from his living
room and main entrance the this is on
the outside before you get to the living
room on the terrace and the soffit on on
the right-hand side was like a
mantelpiece that is used this is me when
I went back to work with him in 84 85
that yes after I graduated from after I
graduated and
left the AAA and in 62 Hassan fat had
joined the general administration for
schools 26 sorry forgive me in 1926
after he graduated and then taught at
the Bazar from 1930 to 1946 and so he
commented on this and he said they
wanted to build classical Greek in the
countryside this is to do with the
school's administration yes
so I remained with them till my contract
ended and then left to teach at the
bazaar in Cairo the rector was French
and when we copied from the French and
from the bazaar we are copying awards
from Shuman like Harpo and Chico Marx
did when improvising on classical music
compositions this is because used to
love Harpo and and the Houston of the
brothers Marx and then he used to say is
to love this anecdote about going in and
and Harper asking Chico what are you
doing and he says to him I am inventing
music I'm writing my own piece of music
he told him but this is a betul betul
then he told him yes I'm rewriting
Beethoven so that's I am composing
Beethoven he would say to him so his
philosophy mainly and and cultural or
his research stemmed basically
essentially from the Islamic
architecture surrounding and and dotting
Cairo you know that Cairo has the
highest amount of buildings in terms of
heritage in Islamic architecture and
next to his house I mean this the view
this view is from the terrace of his
house above his apartment and you can
see the sultan hassan mosque on the
left-hand side here
mom look most madrasa and this is the
rifai mosque which was constructed
the 19th century in 1869 and 1912 the
sultan hassan was constructed in 1356 59
and he used to always take us there and
he would look at the floor which
ostensibly was designed much later and
say he would look at the floor and say
pointing to it you say this is Town
Planning and it took a while for us to
understand for me to understand that he
was actually talking about geometry
there's very much coincided with the
fact that I was working with Keith
critchlow here at the AAA and what
attracted me to Keith critchlow and why
I joined his unit was his work on
Islamic geometry the analysis of the
Slavic geometry which he brilliantly
depicted and published and it was the
idea of of geometry and the unit and and
the completion of a unit that repeats
and repeats to infinity and through the
repetition to infinity is the shape that
one can see in the geometry and to Fateh
this coordination organization and a
creative repetition which was never
monotonous was his idea of how
architecture related to Town Planning
and of course he was influenced
tremendously by Arab architecture or
Egyptian architecture the vernacular in
this case and this shows one of the the
courtyards of a house known as a Hana
and called muzaffer kana that
unfortunately burnt down in 1998 view of
the wind capture or the malkov and he
used all these elements in his
architecture I'm not showing you these
to tell you how pretty and beautiful
they are but to tell you how he
instilled these elements and analyzed
them and brought them into his
contemporary
design the this for example Maccabiah
panel takes up an entire wall in Mossad
Farhana
it's a photo I took in 1982 and it's a
view of the white maschera be a wall
skins from the interior looking towards
the courtyard and then it's through work
with craftsmanship and these drawings I
did these drawings when I was there in
the 70s working with him from working
with the craftsman and then you can see
the language that exists and he depended
on on the craftsman a lot he did not
reinvent the stuff and and use it and
claim it for himself he brought the
craftsmen in because he thought that in
the new equation of modern architecture
what was lacking was that the craftsman
and the master builder were removed and
instead we had the contractor and the
architect who had graduated from a
school like the bazaar in in Cairo or
wherever else but knew very little about
Arab architecture so the whole concept
of the Maccabiah became symbolic and as
far as he was concerned this is a
derelict courtyard of a traditional
Korean house in Old Cairo and he wrote a
play a story actually called Alma's
Rabia
in 1942 and fat Lee possessed a vivid
and compelling imagination that he used
remarkably and creatively in sketching
while outlining and investigating his
line of inquiry through the stories that
he had written and there were two of
them these stories accompanied him
fondly for his entire life he often
recalled them quoting passages and
anecdotes from them and they represented
his form of his unrequited love like his
quest and unbuilt projects unfulfilled
incomplete and this is what the story
talks about this love of these two
people who fall in love with staff and
and mokuba was staffed as the one
yearning
and mokuba is the one who is beloved and
he he plays on these and it's it's a
play that moves between modern times and
the 14th century and so it runs in in
two different actors anyway it's one of
the works that that I translated into
English and had published in the book
and his other story that he cared a lot
for was about what's called utopia and
this is where the title of the book
comes from and we're where he got the
idea of when when he was painting and
drawing and this although is undated
this drawing I think it probably comes
from the period of the 1930s and 40s and
I'll tell you why in a little bit but
this for example he called the utopian
landscape and it's private
five houses overlooking Lake Karen in
film this is a story of utopia which we
published in the book and I used the
Arabic script of course with an English
translation and the drawings that were
done by a friend of his an artist
British artist called Bernard rice who
lived in Cairo between 1942 and 1943 and
he did these original wood cuts his
influence where did that his influence
come some influences come from and what
inspired him originally it was no BIA
and this is a gouache that he had done
which shows no bian houses with colored
doors the first time he went to Nubia
was in 1941 to visit with students from
from the bazaar where he was teaching
and later he was to go back in the 60s
and do a design do a complete survey
I'll show you parts of and he also did
the design and you can see here the
elevation and
sketch of the eastern part of something
called the academic museum at the high
institute of social anthropology and
folk art and aswan this was supposed to
be a museum to preserve the various
forms and rebuild and construct the
various forms of vernacular architecture
that were going to be lost due to the
[Music]
rising of the water of the Aswan Dam
after the dam was constructed in the 60s
in the late in the early 60s so he went
on a mission they were all invited he
and some other architects to go on a
mission and he went in 1962 to survey to
study this and look at the snow beam
architecture before the villages were
going to be submerged
so what fad he did was to actually take
two or three people with him and they
sat and they surveyed all these houses
in what eventually become the nubian
survey or what I call the Nubian
portfolio and he was very quick and
understanding the nubian communities and
their way of life and he wrote a very
beautiful piece in Arabic this is not
the translation in English talking about
the socialism that existed within the
the nubian community or the nubian
society which freed it from the need to
acquire or adopt any other forms of
building because it was there that he
discovered the builders and it was there
that he took those builders with him to
construct the architecture that he had
done but this discovery happened in the
40s although the documentation happened
later and these are some slides I took
of the villages that the Nubians had
replaced after the
their towns and villages were flooded
and they rebuilt these towns in new
areas these photographs were taken in
1984 in a place in Aswan outside Aswan
in Mahara Aswan a village called Horeb a
swan and one called Abu riche and this
shows one of the walls decorated with
the classical Brock that people do after
they come back from Mecca so in his book
a tale of two villages where he
documents what happened in Gorna because
that was the biggest project and the
biggest tragedy in his life he writes
that he made the trip across the river
and then on entering the first village
gharb aswan I knew that I had found what
I had come for it was a new world to me
a whole village of spacious lovely clean
harmonious houses each one more
beautiful than the next I realized that
I was looking at the living survivor of
traditional Egyptian architecture at a
way of building that was a natural
growth in the landscape it was a like a
vision of architecture before the fall
before money industry greed and snobbery
had severed architecture from its true
roots in nature and he documents this
when he is recounting the story of Ghana
and talking about the influence
what about Ghana goodness is his most
famous and it's it's his his what a lot
of people considered his failure or what
he considered a tragedy in his life this
is goodnes is across the Nile on the
west bank of the Nile of across from
look sir sorry on the west bank where
all the pharaohs the lands of the kings
and queens the valley of the kings and
queens and the other tombs that existed
there and the whole story some of you
might know was to move the inhabitant
of the bit just below the mountains this
is another gouache by him and this is a
view of of Deir el-bahri which is a
temple of hatchets ooh
but people were living below the
mountains in literally cave houses and
they wanted the government wanted the
ecological and and cultural Department
wanted to move these inhabitants from
these caves and bring and build a new
village for them and he was entrusted
with this task which he describes well
I'll read the quote and these are the
greeneries of the Ramesseum which go
back to third century BC so the vaulting
isn't anything vernacular out of the
blue or an architecture without
architects it actually does go back to
that period and the this is the colossi
of memnon which overlooked the land of
the new gardener with the new gardener
village so in the back you can see the
mountain and some of the caves and then
he says he talks he says it needed a
very self-confident architect to start
building that within sight of the temple
of Deir el-bahri and the Ramesseum under
the military eyes of colossi of memnon
gazing coldly over the countryside
toward our side towards our site and of
course he wrote this in hindsight this
is a plan one of the colored and painted
plans showing the four parts of the
village and what happened is that it was
meant to be designed in various phases
and this is a plan of the center of the
village of corner showing the public
buildings mosque village hall theatre
rural sporting club and the village
crafts exhibition space and Han which is
the which is right here I'll show you
Seattle a bit later as well
the
is right there and to the east the
market and the craft school these are
some other drawings that he had done of
the housing schemes or streets that he
designed that there wasn't a house which
was exactly like the other he
interviewed every single inhabitant that
was supposed to live there and these
houses were all designated to various to
the allocated families that were
interviewed and this is the master
builder Aladdin Mustafa who worked on
all of Hassan fat his projects
everywhere from Saudi Arabia to New
Mexico and fat he also trained a lot of
young boys and builders to build and had
documented the technology of Alton dome
construction using that in his
contemporary building and developing it
at work as well and this is one of the
most important aspects and contributions
of that hayyan that he took this myth
this technology using of course
materials that existed in situ and
mostly it was earth bricks and sometimes
baked bricks were used for the
foundation or stone and he developed
this in his designs to build an
architecture that he thought that rural
Egypt and the communities the less
privileged communities who are entitled
to have because he is to always say that
they live like princes in their own
houses and the government wants to give
them matchboxes out of concrete that all
look the same and are all repetitive and
these are some views of God now prior to
the flooding which took place
immediately after we finished this is a
drawing of the mosque in in gouache and
this is the mosque in 1984 of course the
mosque in this part of the world in
our region's is always preserved no one
there's not let a mosque fall derelict
or anything to come of it so they're
always preserved the mosque and always
well-kept and these this is a partial
plan an elevation of some good knees
houses and if you'd taken in 1946 this
is one of fat haze photos after the
construction of goodness showing the
boys primary school and the in the
foreground the on the left is the
village hall you can hardly see and this
is a view of the theatre in new Ghana
after it was completed in 1983 so the
theatre was restored and I'll tell you a
bit about that to the village market
with a series of arcades and a pigeon
tower these are earlier buildings and
then in 1946 shortly after the village
was completed by fat hay and the opening
celebrated with officials the good knees
decided to flood the village because
they were not wanting to go and move to
live there so the village was completely
inundated by opening the banks and of
course when the when the Nile had had
[Music]
had raised and the entire town was
submerged and the best excuse that the
inhabitants had was that it was cursed
by it was a village that was cursed by
the Pharaohs and in particular the
Memnon's that I showed you the colossi
of memnon some of the people went back
to live there including this this family
who were the Guardians he built himself
a house in the village and as you can
see the interior of this one I mean then
the houses look terribly miserable the
whole village is is extremely there a
derelict now and in 1984 he got some
funding and decided to restore the
theater this is a plan of the theater
actually this plan of the Village Hall
the theater and sporting he had done a
sporting club and village exhibition
space so the theater is here and these
are the other and and the the main
public square is out here this is the
hon this was in 19th photo in 1975 taken
by John Norton and these are two
different girls from two different
period Hasson Fathead took the one on
the left and somewhere between the 40s
and 50s and the one on the right was
taken 1983 the architect James Richards
who was editor of the architectural
review for a very long time I think he
was editor from 37 to 71 visited Ghana
in 1967 and described it as being the
title was gonna a lesson in basic
architecture and he he describes it as
he was very poetic about it but he
describes it as being wholly modern with
no feeling of pastiche it's combination
of repetition and contrast variety and
simplicity embellished by the planting
Hassan phat he writes of appeared as the
epitome of the coordinated plan and yet
the value of the experiment being social
more than visual it stood only as a
monument to the achievement it might
have been and this was 67 of course
because the actual inhabitants that
village was designed for it never really
went back to live there and a lot of
families came and squatted there and
changed the buildings and and and the
shape of of the architecture that he had
originally done on the left is a is the
the mosque and on the right-hand side is
a slide of the theater after it was
restored and this is the theater while
it was being restored he brought the
same builders who built the town to come
and restore it 40 years later and the
the renovation was sponsored by
Institute for appropriate technology
that he had set up with funding that I
believe he received from sponsors that
he had in Kuwait and these are some some
of the photographs showing slides
showing the builders plastering on the
outside and and working on on the inside
and he used to always say to me we need
a revolution especially when he was in
despair a mud brick revolution without
one we won't be able to do anything and
this is another view of the theater
entrance a section that he had designed
in 45 foot six more recent views of what
the town looks like now it's pretty dire
but this is a view from the colossi of
memnon in 1988 what happened after gonna
and the big disappointment for him
because no one could really do much and
the government was totally inadequate
and and impotent in this situation he
was asked to design a school in Paris
and after he designed it and this is the
plan it was very successful
he suffered another problem with the
bureaucrats saying that it cost ten
times as much that it actually did it
cost something like 37 thousand Guineas
at the time and they accused him and
reported him to the minister saying that
it had cost some sixty thousand or
something and he was really furious and
he decided to leave Egypt he joined
doxiadis and went to Athens
and he lived in Athens between 1957 and
1961 where he worked with a lot of
projects including one that related to
logistics of course the theory of
doxiadis and a project called city of
the future
he developed projects for doxiadis in
Pakistan and in Iraq and did some
studies during that period also of the
vernacular architecture in Africa which
he included in the in his study on the
city of the future and this is a study
for the kangy house project plan of a
settlement center with the mosque and
public buildings in Pakistan and this
was in 1959 and this is a perspective of
of the same project in Iraq he worked on
greater Messiah project which was a
ruler house
housing for farmers and that they did in
different types and details and he also
developed the Val Horacio lakes for them
he developed different public areas and
schools but much of this was avoided
after the 1957-58 revolution in baghdad
he stayed in athens till 1961 and then
returned to egypt and was offered a huge
project to work on and to design and
this was to do with desert architecture
and designing the project of Newbery's
[Music]
this was in the races of harga to the
west and and he then managed to design
and work on this and develop this whole
system of several villages again on of
which only one phase was built and this
shows the construction of the vaults as
you can see there of the
and and some drawings showing the
sections and elevations of the craft
center and it was one of the few
buildings the craft center that was
actually constructed and he had already
proposed one in new Gorna as well to
teach local people how to make mud
bricks so his system of building
entailed that the young boys and and and
should always be trained in building so
that they could be self-sufficient and
independent it was way before the sole
thinking of sustainable architecture
came to light or a psychotic chair or
self-help housing he was working on
self-help housing and doing schemes and
planned for it way in advance of when
when it became established in in the
architectural disco and design and this
is a view again of the Craft Center on
the left and another view through a
passage also there is so the village is
a supermarket and the administration
building this village was also deserted
and why it was deserted at the time was
were never occupied was because of the
1967 war that took place in Egypt
between Egypt and between the Egypt and
Israel the rest of the Arab world and
Israel and Bert and these are some of
the plans that he had done for it and
studies showing the roads the vehicles
the animals he had developed a whole
scheme including a health center and and
workshop for women and their involvement
and etc while all his public projects
were kind of defeated by the system
by bureaucracy and by a lot of his
colleagues who were much more interested
in modern architecture and having
adopted all these forms and Western
architecture that everybody was very
happy with at the time in order to
associate with being modern and that
part of the world that he continued
working with his scheme and technology
and builders and by then started to get
office to do private housing and this is
one of the houses he did in 1967 for
somebody called ducted for a triode and
it's in the Sahara Road in in Giza but
his work in the traditional and
vernacular had started much earlier this
is a fine house that he designed for his
family in 1944 the peasants that were on
the land on his family's land in 1940 so
by then he had already started using and
built designed and built and this is one
of the earlier houses that he had
designed for a colleague of his an
artist called Hammett Shaheed and with
him they had created this Society of
Friends of the Arts and associated from
very early on the importance of art to
be associated to the importance of art
to work along and imperil el with
architect and artist and architect got
together and homicide was a serie missed
and he designed this house and built it
for him and and they still live in it to
this day these are some views of it and
this is a drawing of watercolor
watercolor that he had done and pencil
on butter paper dated March 1944 of
showing an elevation of two
semi-detached houses from a group in a
high spa which is on a farm built in
sun-dried mud Matic so already by this
time he was designing this
architecture this was done in 1944 and
this was a rest house for an Egyptian
client Hamid syphilis and you can
already see that that he had combined
the Vanek of the vocabulary that existed
in both the Islamic if you like which is
a very generic word and the vernacular
this doesn't mean that he didn't attempt
or build his version of the modern and
this is in 1950 and he built this house
for a friend of his very dear friend of
his called
Artyom ona steadily in in Cairo and
[Music]
that's a view of this is when he was on
on the cusp of transformation and this
is the stopler house that he built in
Luxor in the 1950s and a more modern
version of an apartment which he did for
a friend
shahira Maris and this was done in 1968
it shows a section through the main
living and dressing room area with this
wooden dog that is called socks aha
and the dining room here and this is
part of the entrance it's a very small
apartment on top of normal concrete
modern building the house he built for
himself is insid Eclair and it still
exists and he used to use this as a
holiday home or as a summer house and he
wanted this to be a prototype for
buildings in in the region he built it
out of stone because it was built on the
Mediterranean and this is one of the
plans that he did for it which which
developed and it was assess the bathroom
with the dome and this is the kitchen
area here and this is
the terrace which he covered after he
built it and it was originally open to
begin with
somewhere there that's the bathroom here
and that's the kitchen area that's the
terrace which was open onto the sea
living room and the sleeping alcove and
although he strived to work for the poor
he was often accused of being the
architect of the rich and this is of
course because clients like she ha ha
Sabah and her husband asked him to
design their house and where some of his
sponsors they they actually sponsored
the I think it was they who sponsored
the theater and this house which he
designed in 1978 was built in the it's
in Kuwait was built in the 1980s by omar
farooq who I mentioned to you was a
tutor here so he took over the project
and he was very close to Sheikh Nasser
and he was the project manager and they
made special type of bricks that baked
bricks that they experimented with and
used them to construct to construct this
Palace home whatever you want to call it
in the 80s he also did design a few
houses that were immediately constructed
one was meet Han in Giza and this is
1980 and there were two others and then
there was the andreoli residence Gerry
andreolli was Italian and his wife was
Greek and they built this
house in film in 1984 and it was very
simple but that's what they wanted his
final project was took place between 82
and 84 and this is when he was
approached by a group of American
Muslims who wanted to have their own
community and village in Santa Fe in
Mexico and they had some funding to do
that and he designed a few buildings for
them all in all he didn't have more than
five drawings I think but here you can
see him explaining the project to the
participants and future inhabitants and
that's in 1982 in Santa Fe the
remarkably fat had presented five
drawing sheets only for the entire
scheme Foundation plan elevation
sections and roof schematics when asked
about this by the client fat he replied
I leave this to you and those who work
with you to continue and develop the
project with the contribution of the
community and according to their needs
endorsing the decision making and
transfer of knowledge involved in the
process of self built community projects
so what he did was he took two master
builders two Nubian master builders with
him to Santa Fe
in New Mexico and here you can see Allah
the same Allah I showed you earlier and
a colleague of his and he went to Santa
Fe to train the people or the builders
the the whoever was going to become the
builder they stayed there for two weeks
and they trained them how to build the
vaults and the domes because that was
the most difficult part the most
difficult part of any building is
constructing the domes and thoughts
because these often collapse if they are
not built properly and of course they
are built without centering in this case
or without using any format so this is
Ana in in Santa Fe
and in fact the the book ends with a
with an interview with this guy on up
and talking about Santa Fe so has a vet
Hayden said to me we've been fighting
for 40 years and haven't achieved
anything in the USA they had the
revolution in two weeks and he continued
that it caused the revolution the locals
even the women he commented were joining
in the building and the little children
were really happy because they were
engaged in and living the process this
method which solved their problem he
added we'd been fighting for and
preoccupied with for 40 years the method
is dying here but it will live on in
America he said to me because it is the
only solution to the housing problem and
this was him talking in the 80s and
these photographs are from 1982 and it
was finally this is an aerial view of
the madrasa on the construction in 1982
and one of the plans showing the main
road road system that he had created
this is the facade of the mosque of
Darla's slam project in new mexico and i
think this the the versatility and all
of this and the diversity that exists in
his work shows ultimately that if the
project was in new mexico or if it was a
new good now that you don't feel any
discrepancy or any kind of disharmony
it's terribly an consonant with the
actual environment of the place and the
landscape and this is what he was
working on landscape environment IKEA
chair Town Planning and for him it all
went together and he very much believed
in not just the beauty but the harmony
and the
[Music]
poetics that existed in architecture
since working with fat hey i I've been
working a lot in Yemen and and there's
something very interesting that in the
architecture and cities that I have been
working and I've found the line that is
commonly forged between the past and the
future to be entirely and totally
fictional when it comes to architecture
and vernacular architecture in
particular Hassan fat his work and
influence was twofold in developing the
use of vernacular architecture as I hope
I showed you this evening materials and
technology for housing less privileged
and poor communities in Egypt and Beyond
and in reconstructing the meaning and
composition of the Islamic Arab regional
vocabulary and in the architecture and
the design making and building of
contemporary towns and cities and both
were deeply concerned with the future I
hope that this was a good tribute to the
man who gave us all of this and thank
you very much for your patience
someone first a terrific talk it really
I love the way you ended it where you
talked about the fictional line between
past and future I had a question to
start maybe the question portion of the
evening actually about I mean how you
measured the success of some of the
public projects is one thing but he did
receive considerably large scaled public
commissions and also quite a lot of
private house commissions and at a time
where maybe the value system was focused
around first Bo's arts architecture and
then kind of more globalized modernist
architecture how is he able to shift
attitudes or get projects like that to
convince people about a truly Egyptian
architecture they couldn't convince them
and I remember his famous words and and
we used to think he was paranoid because
we found him very funny too he had a
great sense of humor so you should
always say to me they are fighting us
they are fighting us every day they are
fighting us you know so it was about a
battle and it was Wars and he got these
commissions he was very lucky with new
good now fortunate it was still during
the regime of the King at the time and
it so happened that he was married
briefly and his brother-in-law was head
of the court of King Farouk so he was
well associated to begin with and
possibly and he had a friend who at the
time was Minister of Culture and and it
was through him that he got this
commission to do the village in good now
the tragedy is that no one appreciated
his work at the time and the few people
he did were either elite or were
educated and then they didn't fit in the
bureaucracy and in the mainstream so he
couldn't convince them he couldn't but
again I mean I showed you one side of
him I haven't told you that he received
he was the first one to receive the
chairman Spratt
for the other con for example and and
Kerry Monaghan created a special
Chairman's Award for hisself at hey and
when he started to set up the Agha Khan
Awards he came and he discussed this was
better and he's received a lot of
recognition outside and I think there's
a foundation of hisself at Hays outside
so it's a tragedy that all of this has
been developed outside and not on the
inside but this is very much the story
that he writes in alma's Rabia he talks
about this in my story not about the the
defeats in fact about the bureaucracy
whatever it is so I would know in the
world not in Islamic world where
architect like him had succeeded in
promoting traditional architecture
founded on sedition against the modern
the modern architecture is there any any
other Indian or Chinese whatever
architect was able to do that what he
wasn't able to do though she did some in
India and the Iraqis in the 60s were
very very clever with the modern
architecture but they had another
perspective they didn't come and create
vernacular architecture they instilled a
lot of the language of vernacular Iraqi
architecture and put it in modern
building like the work of the office of
Iraq consult and our friend here which
done was a member there so they were
very successful ref a identity and and
company and they were very successful in
creating a modern dialogue if you like
using some of the elements but they use
other they you
bricks because bricks baked bricks is
the traditional way of building in Iraq
they also did use a lot of concrete and
it was a very modern take which was also
very successful but not in the same way
that fat he developed it in in terms of
going out to build for the rural to
build mass housing where each house was
designated and designed for its user he
never considered that he was he didn't
believe in designing one house and
repeating at a hundred and fifty times
to create mass housing he didn't believe
in that see and but the system I think
it's it's a there was a lot of also as
you are quite aware a lot of corruption
in housing and building and in I can't
in North Africa that definitely wasn't
anybody and so I I mean I I can't think
I had somebody in mind and yeah no no
someone thank you very much for the
great lecture and yeah it's for the
great work as well it's really good to
basically somebody to compile all his
legacy and yeah it's a great record I
want to share several things with you
first one is more of an observation and
I I can recall reading his book
architecture for the poor and his early
struggle with the building methodology
at the time in Egypt use of steel that
was brought from Belgium I think and
timber and and concrete and obviously
there were expensive materials and it
was kind of mainly what kind of drove
his I guess instinct to look for
solutions in a place with such kind of
rich history and an interesting thought
but it looks like his kind of legacy is
is I guess I mean he's becoming more and
more popular especially nowadays with
all the kind of all these sustainability
kind of legacy and movements and I'm
trying to look for ways to build with
less embedded energy and in a way the
greenest way of building is the
materials from the site and it's not
very difficult for one to look at the
map of the world and where these
materials can be found in office and you
can see oh look there it is it's the
solution which he came across all these
years ago and he kind of he found a way
to actually build using that way but
it's interesting also to observe that
there is very little appetite in today's
climate for basically yeah pushing the
limits of that you can see a lot of
examples of similar sizes and similar
kind of scale buildings being built but
yeah it's it's a shame to see that yeah
it seems that the need is there but then
there is no appetite for actually
yeah somebody to really take on that
challenge I don't think it's a question
of appetite I think it's a question of
policy and politics and in that that
plays the main role because the problem
is that as I think I mentioned it
somewhere is that okay he talks about a
revolution and and the problem is you
cannot have a revolution without a
political agenda if you know what I mean
and even even if it was a Cultural
Revolution and I'm not talking politics
trying to be DP and all I'm trying to
say is that these projects that he very
much cared for which were the projects
for housing and yes you're right there
are various aspects related to economy
to cost to materials to climate to you
know I mean I didn't even touch on any
of this because it's obvious I think
what what the advantages of building
with with with these materials are in
terms of cooling in terms of ventilation
and natural cooling etc in terms of
heating and using the ovens that he
placed in different rooms the cocoon
often which he got from Germany the idea
that he got from Germany
all of this was very important and the
fact that he was also aware that the
poor people were not able to afford
either wood or steel and another
contemplated sin or any other form of
material to build with and that when
they they built these villages he talks
about these villages that were built in
Colombo which is a desert area in the
south and where they had this mass
housing built out of units and concrete
that people had to bury their children
on daily basis because the heat it was
very hot of course they couldn't afford
air-conditioning either so he was he was
deeply concerned essentially for these
people but I don't think it's so much
the appetite whether the appetite
a general scale or on an individual
scale it's it's a question of a policy
which government is going to come and
adopt such a policy to build in this way
this type of rural or urban housing
which government is wanting to embark on
this and it's I see frankly I always
thought that mud brick and earth
building and architecture will come back
to our region from Europe because this
is what's happening you know as people
like Martin Roush and and Anna having
her and Martin Roush has industrialized
ground there is building you know and
he's using it technically and building
in Switzerland and in Europe using this
material so yes they are individual
projects but I think if we're talking in
terms of mass housing or village
building or town building and we're not
just talking of gated type of
communities that are built by
contractors but where architects are
involved we really need to see some
political solutions or some sponsorship
at least to do this kind of work I was
considering the situation in Egypt how
it has developed ever since in the last
four or five decades after and do you
think that you as an architect and also
a modern Arab who knows the situation in
Egypt do you think that there would be
any chance that any that his vision even
if politics and government were helpful
and supportive do you think that this
vision had any chance in this in the
reality of of contemporary Egypt is it
feasible is it sustainable
I think it's feasible not only for Egypt
it's feasible for the entire region
feasible for the entire region if you
had ruined
and housing and and housing on the
periphery of towns that where you have
squatters and people living in different
areas including in the city of the dead
and there's Abilene and all this area if
they had one or two schemes to house
people which were similar to this I
think it would be very successful
considering the demo the demographic
development to you you think it would
have been and it's it's this is an
architecture that is viable for
development you know when they came to
restore the theater in 1984 it looked as
if it was brand new I mean this about
this there is no both the design and the
technique and the way of building are
extremely developed and terribly
contemporary still to this day could be
very hard to reinvent it anyway
thank you helpful for this beautiful
lecture I just want to touch upon the
plan work it seems that most of his plan
work is very irregular and there is a
way that it acts away from regularity
and bringing parallel parallelism in his
plan work so I wonder if you could talk
a little more about the way he draws or
the way he implements or the parameters
the hector's that he uses in his plan
work it was all freehand and he did a
lot of these drawings just sitting there
and like any idea tech used to do or
like we did and maybe some of you still
do but there was she recalled no
computer anything he didn't even use a
t-square was people like myself and the
other IT Tech's around who would draw
these put them together and he had an
amazing vision for scale he was he was
very what's the word he was very
prolific in in the production of designs
and drawings and used felt pens most of
the time do you know how long it took
and to construct a project let's say
constructor to construct a plan of a
project the parents plan I mean if it
was a house I mean it might take him a
few weeks but then he would go and come
back in discussions with the client and
change things all the time but yeah I
don't think he was very fast time was
not a factor it's just the terms of what
the prerequisites of of the projects
were and when it came to villages he
worked on on different levels at the
same time he was he would be doing the
design of a theater and design of a
craft place and its side of it and he
had the formula ever since he came back
from Greece he had developed a formula I
mean
I write about this and and my course
does and I'll analyze it very
beautifully in in the chapter on berries
where she talks about how the geometry
and configuration that he took from the
systems that he developed with doxiadis
worked in in his design and in his
parameters okay all right think that's
just we have time for one final question
okay responsibility the interesting at
she that I think in following from the
other gentleman may think he's
interesting to think in the and your
question as well of the situation and
Egypt at the moment I mean do you in a
sense is there anybody actually trying
to work with it because it's interesting
that the agra karna wars are pretty
amazing socially ie that the user of the
building has the feedback to the award
and so most architectural competitions
just simply is who's got the wackiest
idea let's build it so the Agra cars got
an idea of social projects of actually
looking at the building that's been
built and then actually seeing what the
users say after it but the other side of
Egypt is the existing new Kara the
polycentric new kara are in the worst of
all is the new new Cairo which just
seems to me that even the geometric
pattern of the floor could not possibly
cope with that you you sort of said so
is there anything in Egypt at the moment
where people are working at a scale
because I think it may be there's a
tremendous fight between the scale that
fatty wanted and the scale of
development that has actually present at
the moment is there anybody working at
that in a sense more more I know that
there were some architects look I mean
I'm not living in Egypt and I've been
going and coming over the last two three
years in two different places I've been
going to see why I haven't left to Cairo
than I am so I am not aware of any high
tech so I
working on a larger scale let's say or a
scale of a sort I mean when you talk
about new new pyro I mean that's that's
a nightmare that's a complete honestly
night and worse than any nightmare one
could have imagined
twenty years ago not alone I mean we
thought what was happening was bad in
Cairo at the time now it looks fantastic
next to all of us you know but this is
the problem of this Dubai and Abu Dhabi
and and and syndrome of wherever you are
in our world they think that the highest
point of modernization is by replicating
what's happening in Dubai and in Abu
Dhabi you know which again is a huge
disaster but let's not go there at the
moment I think what is important is to I
am not aware of a movement as such an
architectural movement but that doesn't
mean that I know I'm I am not aware of
any particular architects or
architectural movement that is happening
or taking place but there could be one
and I'm totally unaware of it all I can
tell you is that I don't think that the
architectural education as such our
university is a teacher architecture in
Cairo have had much to say over the last
decade or two anyway so they haven't
produced any amazing but you know that
there are one or two quite well-known
egyptian architects now who are getting
projects or you know who arse skies by
their own like what's her name
shahira something who on this museum
competition but then she didn't win it
you know as usual you know you win a
competition and it's removed from you so
I haven't seen a movement happening like
this but I doesn't mean that I might be
ignorant of
in Egypt so forgive me
just torie yes I just have a quick
question about one of the things I've
found really important in the work is
how he was interviewing every single
person of every single family that was
gonna dig in something that was from for
a group of a whole community and I was
just wondering if there was a written
transcript of his interviews or if he or
if he said some of the specific demands
of different families or if you have any
examples of specific demands of each
families that would be fair now he talks
about this in the book and Gordon ah yes
he writes about how each family was and
he did have a lot of sheets and logs but
there wasn't I mean he didn't sit in and
and document he documented figures and
he documented requirements but there
were no stories written because of the
magnitude of the number of families he
was working with as you can imagine
sorry they would probably they would ask
requirements for sizes and for
orientation rather than I don't think
they were aware of orientation he was
aware of the orientation but they would
ask for example for pens for the animals
he needed to know how many I what type
of the animals that they had they have
cows that they have donkeys that they
have chicken or goats all of that made a
huge difference you know
and so because a lot of them wanted to
keep for example they relinquished the
cows and accepted to put them all
outside in a joint depending on but they
all wanted to keep the chicken and the
smaller type of animals next to them
because they were quite precious so
these are the things he took into
account number of people living there
number
children and then projecting as to how
many more there would be and what
they're required where they worked so
that for the proximity of the housing
next to the schools because they had the
boys code and he had the girls school so
all of that was taken into account thank
you thank you
[Applause]
