hi everyone and this is the second
lecture of summary table and we're very
happy to have created Austria with us or
fostering partners and his work lies at
the intersection of architecture and
computer science and within his team at
the ARD at Foster's they look into
methods of implementing robotics
optimization and RvR amass techniques
for real-world projects so please join
me in welcoming credit for that lecture
so today I'll go I'll go between like a
lot of topics sometimes not in much
detail so if you have any questions
after just please tell me so just a
quick background Khalid I graduated from
a very classical architecture school in
Alexandria in 2009 afterwards
I joined a studio called encode in Egypt
one of the founders and often code is
actually an a graduate and during the
time I kind of my career shifted a lot
because I was I got introduced to a lot
of topics related to computation and
afterwards I decided that I wanted to
study a little bit more so I moved to
London during the bartlet and did some
work with robotics which topics that
they still do some research on and I was
very lucky to join the ARD group in
fostering partners which will be the
focus of my presentation today so for
some partners of course like a very
large architecture office we have what
1,200 people only in the London office
projects all around the globe and
compared to the size of office we are
quite a small group so we're only 10
people but we cover a lot of expertise
from like machine learning complex
geometry
robotics and then what we do is we the
way that work as the office works is
like he can all the time he can any of
the projects can come to that for us was
a question and then we can see like
solution for it
so how did this all start so I'll go
back a little bit so the bridge museum
like this was like in the mid 90s so
this project was quite complex because
it wanted to go from like rectangle to a
circle in the middle and the circle is
also shifted so it's not it's not
exactly in the center of the rectangle
in order to achieve this this form like
the office contacted dr. Chris Williams
who was like a very famous mathematician
and structure engineer in the University
of Bath who wrote the algorithm for the
dynamic relaxation that could get this
form that can look very very smooth and
effortless and get like the transition
very nicely between the boundaries and
afterwards like the office wanted to
have this kind of expertise in-house so
one of the first projects at the office
worked on was the gherkin of course
everyone knows about the project what I
didn't know when I joined the office
it's actually the project isn't designed
in Excel so this was this bit dates any
of the them or like generative
software's that we have now so what
happens in is like all the parameters
for the exterior shell of the of the
gherkin was inputted in this excel sheet
and using VBA Excel would drive
MicroStation generate all the exterior
structure and node locations and also
generate like this huge excel sheets
that can be then like shared between
as architects the engineers and the
construction team in the end and the
project kind of end up pretty good I
would think so
moving forward with the Smithsonian so
the Smithsonian is a very famous museum
in the US and they approached the office
to do another roof on the courtyard but
at the time the he couldn't touch any of
the surrounding architecture it also had
like a much more complex geometry but
was also all produced in code so again
another project that was done like way
before any of the chromatic tools was
done moving to now we can actually
design something like Mexico City
Airport just to put in scale this is a
roof pitch museum and Mexico City
Airport is 90 times larger so it only
the roof of the bridge museum is only
one of the funnels and it's much more
topologically more and advanced as well
because of the edge boundaries that are
very complex so in order to achieve this
kind of complex form what we have done
is we started like with a with a
mathematically defined mesh this mesh
like was basically defined by the edge
boundaries the locations of the funnels
and also the intermediate arches and
these are like the functions that we
used 2 4 3 4 genetic this initial mesh
and we use dynamic relaxation similar to
what we used on the best Museum and what
dynamic relaxation does it tries to find
that like the optimum kind of shape for
for the shell and I would say as well
like this is a final
let's see this is a final design so the
roof is 1.7 kilometres by 800 meter one
single roof that covers the whole
airport
so as you can see by time we're almost
like getting like more complex projects
all those are kind of the base concept
is the same moving to another project
has worked on recently as well this is
you eBay villian in Milan Expo and at
the time they we approached this office
for the pavilion because it was quite an
important one because they would do the
expo 2020s are going to like show their
concept and so on from from with an
adjust here so it needs to be like quite
special and the idea was like bringing
the desert to Milan and we started to
like some ideas about scanning the
desert and trying to figure out how we
can do this pattern on the walls but
what we end up with is using something
called reaction diffusion and the action
diffusion is a way to like generate this
kind of patterns that resemble how the
sentence work but at the same time we
are able to control the edge boundary
condition of each of the panels which
mean we can tile them I think you can
see it now so you can control where all
of the patterns are ending which may
become produce a lot of them that can
tile next to each others and then we can
like interchange and move them and they
would still like fit for the outside
panels we had the problem by the NAM
both the number of molds because each
mode need to be used up to 7 times and
we can just produce like a special mold
for all of the facade and each mold is a
combination of an arc and the pattern
because like all of this is curved so
what we used is called the multi
objective optimization and what it does
we optimize again it's like multiple
objectives in here it was like we want
to reduce the number of moles and we
wanted to have and we didn't want to
have any of the patterns repeating next
to each other so as you can see here
from the top you start from
a random allocation of patterns and then
you can see the red is where like the
patterns are that are similar or next to
each other and after of what I love
reminds optimization you start like the
patterns are like distributed better and
then you have a world that looks very
random and when you see it you don't see
any of the repetition we generated like
the planets are all directly generated
from our model they're all were produced
in China and then put in a container and
then put together again in in Milan we
were very proud as well by the quality
of the the finish that we had because on
the Left this is a sentence and on the
right is our our panels and currently
just the whole pavilion have been like
taking apart and then being put together
again in Dubai could be like a visitor
center for a master city
one of the recent project we worked on
as well is the chapel and one of the
vatican chapels and venice biennale and
what was training about just challenging
about this project was a timeframe so it
was a very short timeframe only three
months before the projects need to be
put together and what we have done is we
became in the middle of the all of the
stakeholders so between the designers
structure engineers and the construction
team and we produce the models that they
can everyone can input the criterion and
then review it very quickly instead of
like just going between each one
individually and then losing time only
in the reviews and the things that the
project had been praised a lot after a
being put together one other project
that I've been working on for the last
two years this is a mobility Avalon in
the next Expo 2020 it's currently on
site we did a lot of work on that
process
because what we've done is like we from
the start of the design after the
concept phase we wanted to make sure
that we'll be able to fabricate all all
the facade was like a certain quality so
produced the model that we're still used
in now since the beginning of the of the
design that produced light and produced
maybe fifty or sixty iterations of the
facade in the meantime and hopefully
soon I can show the whole process
because we're now they're like putting
together the facade on site so I'll move
on to some of the more interesting
interesting stuff we do so like the
process of design is always evolving and
we're always interested in in the tools
we use as well as designers so I I
really like this picture of the office I
think this was like in the early 90s so
what you can see is like you can see
rarely see a computer and you can all
you see like all the drawing everyone
all the drawing boards everyone's
drawing unlike very large drawing boards
this was in the early 2000s and you can
see like we have lot lot more computers
but also a lot more paper so paper was
still there tons and tons of it moving
to now we see less paper more screens so
the medium is kind of changed how we
share information also changed so what's
next
[Music]
the the phone model is still quite an
important part of our design process
especially in the early concept stage
and the problem with would like the
phone model is the iterations are very
slow because you need to put a model
together you need to digitize it you
need to send it to us for analysis and
then get results back and that means
I'll get the result of four to three
days
and by the time the actually the
projects have moved forward so how can
we get this process much faster for
example what we have been working on for
a long time
is a way for the designers to get like
feedback very quickly so this is
actually one of the first iterations for
if it starts
here this was almost 10 years ago and
the idea here was we can actually put at
the hand of the designer a lot of our
analysis that we can that can text one
or two days to run he can they can run
it in seconds by a press of a button and
we had like at that time there was like
a solar analysis there was pedestrian
analysis it was like a simple CFD
analysis as well and this means that the
designer can take decisions very quickly
because he like he can roughly know if
his design is going to work or not again
we this tool evolved and wanted to go
back to the physicality of over model so
we linked it to a physical model and you
can actually move all the buildings and
in here and then they get detected you
get a digital representation of it and
then you can run multiple options and
like compare between them and I'm going
to move to the last iteration which was
actually designed by my colleague Stan
wasn't sitting right there so this one
took like a direct aim at like the alien
phone model and the way you design is
very similar to Minecraft if you if you
have seen it so you you build those
voxels you have different uses you start
building your model figuring out like
how much you need from each one of the
users but the difference is if you can
also run a lot of analysis in real time
so you can easily check if your
designers working or not in this tool we
have a lot of we can you can design by
using the blocks but also we have we can
draw splines we can draw surfaces we can
have trees and we
was a huge set of like analysis that we
plug in from like Sauron asses to
financial statistics and the beauty of
this tool is we can run it on like a lot
of interfaces so can run on a iPad so a
partner can have an iPad while he's
traveling and then he does iterations of
the of the project it can also run an VR
and this is if you see on the right here
is one of our senior designers working
directly in VR like producing the
options instead of like just drawing a
sketch you can also have a touch
interface you can have a our interface
where you can actually collaborate with
other people as well in designing as in
real time we do some works with robotics
as well so this is one of the tools we
use to control the robot that we have in
the office the idea here is like this is
a real time Tool it's trans and unity
can all have all sorts of clash
detection and so on so you can run the
robot in a kind of real-time fashion you
not just like building the program going
to the robot running yet you know you
can just run it directly from the
program and again you can you can deploy
it to multiple interfaces so in here you
can deploy it like for hololens and then
you can directly interact with the robot
was like your hands you can also connect
it to the other tools we have so connect
it to the sandbox tool and we're able
for example to build like as a physical
model again from our digital model the
real time while someone is designing it
what I'm going to talk about okay so
optimization so we have seen this before
this was like in the Milan Expo so this
optimization was quite simple in terms
of like each iteration of it took like
only seconds which meant it can run on a
single machine and you can have a result
very quickly
but what would happen if we want to run
this kind of optimization on a city
right so let's say you have a huge city
like each if you want to run the
analysis like Solar analysis and view
analysis on on the scale that means each
iteration can take maybe five six five
six minutes and if you want to run like
thousands of iterations that means that
you like if you want to run ten one PC
will take days so what we worked on was
actually designed by my colleague
Martian of zero as well is a way that we
can tap into the computation that's not
used in the office and then send like
this analysis to multiple machines run
them all and at the same time and get
the results that you would wait like
like two or three days for in a matter
of minutes so this means that we can run
this kind of like huge analysis on like
larger scales that we can run not only
in one single building one other topic
we work on the offices kind of reality
capture so we have as you see on the
Left we have like a huge collection of
materials I think more than three
thousand samples and our material
Research Center and the idea is that the
architects go and then you can look at
the material and they can see how it
reacts and how it might look in the
project but how like we will be better
if actually can have a digital kind of
version of this material theory that we
act in a true fashion to light and can
actually represent itself like the way
it's supposed to work in reality
so what worked on is a way to capture
this material and then reproduce it scan
it reproduce it industry see
okay I don't get this won't run but what
you can see here is like one material
here that like reacts differently if
from the light when you look at it from
different directions and then the
distant version of it and what happens
is whenever you move this material it
react in the digital form exactly the
way it reacts on physically and this way
you can use it in renderings and you
don't be sure there's going to be
exactly what's supposed to be so if you
find the material that doesn't work you
know you need to change the material
rather than just trying to fix it like
on something like Photoshop this is one
last topic I'm going to talk about which
is a machine learning which kind of like
a very hot topic right now so this is a
collaboration we've done with Autodesk
recently and what if looking at here is
actually the material this is like
laminated materials that react to to
heat and the problem is in order to
simulate these materials the simulation
take a lot of time and usually the
designer like cares about like the first
state of the material and the last state
of it so when it's how it's reacts to
heat and then like the last state after
it's like stopped reacting to it so what
we worked on is actually using the same
system that we use for our optimization
which paralyzed this kind of analysis we
used to run like a lot of iterations of
of this analysis getting the results of
it and then fitting Katainen to a
machine learning algorithm train it and
order train it for on this kind of
materials and then generate a tool that
works other way around
so you can tell it okay I need this
material to react in this location and
then it will give you how would you
produce the
using laminates as you can see here is
where where you're supposed to deposit
your euro materials in order to have
this deformation we will do a lot of
recession in the topics and hopefully
hopefully we'll see more out of us as
well and some other parts of machine
learning and that's so if you have any
questions please ask thank you very much
[Music]
there we go so this scanner here what it
does it actually takes it takes a
picture from the material from each from
all the angles being give and then it
like blends all of them into one file
that then if when you react it to the
light it knows exactly how it's supposed
to really to react so that's why it does
you can see here it have multiple lights
and the camera and all that to like keep
capturing all the directions of it okay
next come on I'm sure you have some
questions
[Music]
for machine learning for this one it was
supervised for the one who's Autodesk I
mean we usually it depends on the task
right I mean like there was a lot of
interesting work who supervised learning
that we're trying to tap into but again
it depends on the task the task would
require like ISO files then we will use
what whatever the task needs well ten
years is a long long time maybe in five
years maybe can detect it a little bit
more but definitely like a RvR is going
to change a lot like collaborative
design like VRS do it as having like
lots of jumps so if you get like the
haptic feedback to work nicely like the
way we design is going to change but the
spaces we design is going to change as
well because you won't need like a huge
meeting room anymore if you can everyone
can just strong from from from their
house and then everything would change
then as well but definitely like a our
VR and like this kind of new interface
is going to change how design work a lot
I think and we would keep like unlive
all the stuff coming up in the space
yep sorry
yeah so the the office like inside the
office we work as a consultant and like
this is us this is environmental
engineering structure engineering
because our office actually have a lot
of expertise in-house so we can act you
can have a project from A to Z all in
the office so what happens is like as a
partner in charge or the team will come
to us and we will work with them like as
a consultants as a specific part that
they asked us for and then they would go
on and continue their work some other
projects we work on long term like
Mexico Airport like the mobility of
alien which will start early on because
the team knows that they're going to
have like a problem that they will need
like some innovative solution for and
then we work on it like from A to Z and
sometimes one of the teams would go and
sit with a design team for a while and
then come back and join therapy again
currently no we we only work internally
to be honest were overworked as well so
any time what we do externally is
collaboration so we do a lot of
collaborations in terms of academia with
other universities with other bodies
then we can exchange expertise and then
if we have like a similar goal in the
end
so in the terms of the machine learning
one what you do is we always have so
I'll go back to house I'm jyler Network
right so you have the supervised one you
have like input/output and then you and
this is something that I'm copying from
someone who's just did the presentation
about machine learning it's office so I
can take like great so you have
input/output and you want to know how
the ink from the input you put the
output and then you generate you try to
figure out house I have Grossman the
middle works right so you have no idea
how you went from this state to this
state and you try to find the program as
a generated and here it's the same way
so in here you have what we do is like
we're on the analysis a lot of times we
just the very slow analysis we have then
thousands of tests that we have done we
know how the state state of the material
in the beginning is and state so
material in the end days we feed it to
the machine learning algorithm if
children are goes figure out what's the
connection so what it does it like goes
one way is try to generate this final
output it to check the final output
against the right output this is wrong
goes back tries to like reconfigure the
connections it have goes back again
tested and and so and so on and so forth
until it like is trained well enough so
that actually can predict to a certain
degree the result right and that's what
time is here but like when the machine
learning I was in strained that means if
the things that can take hours to
reproduce it can just generate it in a
second like like this tool you just like
you can see it like just reading on the
other side so you're always going
getting feedback loop that's kind of
like
getting your algorithm better if that
makes sense this is like on the machine
machine learning site on the largest
items officers whether we always do what
we call like performance based design so
like analysis is very important we test
like a lot of options and try to figure
out what the best one is so again the
analysis always feedback into the design
and this is why we aim at making it as
fast as possible because design moves
quickly and if you don't have the
results in the right time the process
have moved forward and not only stuff is
not put into Google conservation
for force application didn't have any
machine learning in it it will just give
you a give you a results so like will
tell you like this building performs in
this way and you can see where it's not
performing so you can see because you
have like for example for the right
analysis you have like a gradient and
you can see we're not getting much light
you start like playing who's a model and
then runs analysis again see if this fix
it and so on but I can see like a place
for machine learning it's a feature as
well that can be like an assistant kind
of thing so it will like tell you okay
maybe you can choose this bit maybe you
can see this bit there is something that
be interesting to look at as well I
think in the future
I mean we we do that still we do that
now as well I mean the mobility for
example Pavillion we're still working on
it and when it's on site so because we
have lots of problems with the
fabrication but whenever you have
something that's like complex you mean
like on site we I don't think I have a
slide for it so we've used YouTube are
lots of a are on site as well so you can
go and check with an iPad you can go
around and shake like how's that the how
the design will work we're looking at a
lot of technologies with a are like the
hololens to use on site the technology
is not there yet just because of you
know the light effects it quite badly
but we're definitely looking into like
the kind of like the construction bit I
think it's a bit that haven't moved a
lot and and the kind of maybe lost 15-20
years so there's a lot of interests from
people that are working on a are
solutions on even machine learning on
drones to get into the industry because
they know they can add a lot and we kind
of keep an eye I understand like how we
can integrate it so whenever find
something interesting we we can suggest
as well
who's all oh one last one
I'm not exactly sure if they're scalable
or not I think I think there were a
specific size I can double-check because
there you can also talk about it but
with this kind of materials I don't
think is scalable I think you test for a
certain size and then it behaves in a
certain way the material when you get
bigger you need to train it on larger
set thank you very much
