okay good evening thank you for having
me here thank you manager for the
introduction and ever thank you for
having me here speak tonight but also to
launch this book but also I think it's
such a thick book and it deserves to be
I mean thanked in all kind of directions
and the thickness doesn't come about in
one day and one part was also that I
could teach here is seminar which I have
some students still here so I think one
of the driving forces also is the kind
of the change over the material of
authors contributions and I think I'm
very grateful to to have had this
opportunity to to be here and to engage
with actually at the time a really nice
group and also with Manatee this longer
ago on a different topic but I I do
remember
history and theory seminars here with
great fun
and it's also obviously the time to
thank my contributors because that's one
of my yeah it's the first presentation I
actually environment I presented the
book in the bajas Museum in October
just to take in in this hectic Bauhaus
year obviously this book had to appear
before the end of 2019 and it was then
presented in German and here actually I
would like to thank some of the
contributors who are here I know that I
meet cassavas here I haven't seen Robert
Jordan Frye who I would expect would be
here but maybe she comes later so as
they are here I would like to thank them
for their beautiful contributions also
Alice here I have to thank him in all
ways obviously
thank you so Dustin data is actually
it's a project that I would like to tell
for a moment through that actually quite
comfortably looking here in the
director's office of of Gropius he led
its design obviously as part of one of
the workshops at the Bauhaus actually
workshops that were already in place
physically so we have some continuities
with the very beginning of the Bauhaus
we have actually the School of Arts and
Crafts here in the buildings of Henry
Fonda Felder who was also directing that
school and we have another building but
Henry Fonda Felder for the School of
Applied Arts and the possibility for
Gropius stood to unite both schools and
to start actually the powerhouse in
Weimar and the kind of the date that is
frequently used as the first of April
1919 and therefore this year is a big
powerhouse here to celebrate the
foundation of the bars in Lima the I can
take you may be quickly through that
building which is also the place where I
teach at the moment and where I
graduated also and I have to say I
always try to take this staircase on the
way and go all the way up and you see
actually it is very beautiful underfed
staircase and when you go down actually
you would go down through the along the
murals of habit pyre that were put at
the words of the staircase for the
occasion of the Bauhaus exhibition in
1923 where Gropius was actually also
forced to show the products for years
almost four years
of his new art school so funders were
actually pressuring him to show what was
going on and what what are the new
products so just as a hint pressure was
put on directors at that time to produce
quickly and to really show design works
experimental new stuff and I think that
makes also the powerhouse quite unusual
that it has actually this enormous
output so rather than using an art and
architecture school as a space of
reflection and maybe a kind of
theoretical experiment these things were
quite immediately on the market over
trying at least to survive even if the
first experiments didn't quite work for
example in the lights affair they were
trying to exhibit early and stay
actually they come of the cups and pots
that they were presenting they were not
yet fully dry actually from the process
of making so it was actually quite an
experiment to practice them so we go
along that staircase and we pass by the
office of group views that was actually
designed at the time to present that
school and became actually an exemplary
for the collaboration of the Arts with
the on all fields we go further down the
staircase and become actually now to the
blue circle in the Baja staircase which
is actually as you would probably
noticed this is the kind of things that
the three geometrical shapes that Native
Bauhaus of famous and
we had actually at the time the Bauhaus
masters were actually doing
questionnaires about the experience
students have with these forms how they
actually feel about them trying to make
actually scientific inquiries about
their work
pretending also that this is a very
scientific work that could be handed
over passed on to to students rather
than kind of an esoteric method it could
be presented through data and clear-cut
theory what was handy was the existence
of already existing workshops but also
we need to notice and that's also I try
to make a point in in the book there are
continuities that lead into the Bauhaus
rather than state zero or a complete
beginning as a short already the
building existed but with the buildings
and the arts and crafts school and the
workshops for the Arts there were
already artists the kind of the
facilities were there so one could just
rien habit and revive them and kind of
start a school conceived like like the
Bauhaus like Gropius but on the other
hand and that's something C nepeta like
Alexander shows in her essay they are
actually kind of continuities from the
reform movement that is not particularly
German as well it's also an
international movement we find it also
in England and if we actually look at
[Music]
the continuities Paves not tries to draw
from let's say even the English
arts and crafts movement to the modern
movement so we are actually in that
environment and still it needed the kind
of the big starting points Gropius was
making here through this manifesto that
starts again not quite with a clean cuts
beginning but rather takes a little
graphy of finding which comes very much
out of the crystal chain that says
correspondence or the expressionist
movement here more the kind of the idea
of the gothic cathedral as the the kind
of theme the image of all the arts
meeting which then I think most of the
architecture schools which today founded
would start with this diagram because it
seems to be kind of unmissable - to
unite all the arts and crafts and to
actually - to work through that several
layers from the study of materials of
metals of textiles of color glass into
actually theory of nature the theory of
of materials and to actually start to
slowly build an architectural capacity
or experience this is actually the
circle takes about six years it's the
kind of six years Lima didn't have it
did not manage to to to have diplomas in
architecture it was actually something
that was only possible after students at
the Bauhaus had closed in Lima and moved
to dezong but going back to those
workshops they are important because
they kind of dig
that image of the modernist kazama-kun
swag but also help us now help me to to
also think about methods of our research
in such an comprehensive way so what we
need with this the dusty part is also a
kind of theory to think them to
investigate them not only as design
objects of as a singular thing but in in
their context and in the way they have
been conceived at the time here it's
actually a color reproduction in
presented already in 1925 of the
director's office and received
difference to today's reconstructed
office actually that was I mean of
course we have a color problem with the
images with the photograph but I think
the the gentle nature of an image like
that in color reproduction for which
actually propria Smeaton and efforts to
have that in the books is quite obvious
i was actually once in walking down my
staircase
it's basically my office in miami
pasties mural we have actually some if
we start usually the students here for
the bachelors with all sorts of
exercises in the school which kind of
give you a sense of tactility let's say
that kind of works like frottage works
and so they are usually in the first two
weeks of the semester on the floors
kneeling in some corners and doing
sketches of of the corridors and one day
one of my saw a student actually doing a
frottage on on that mural and I have
literally heard it when I pass by I
could see it cracked off like a piece of
of color at that moment and that
actually we were shocked seeing that
that kind of break-in in the wall and
actually had to be reconstructed for the
hundred years anniversary and we had to
actually dive deeper it was kind of an
invitation to dive deeper into the very
much reality of of that wall which
actually revealed that this war was not
as perfect as it now I was presented to
us for since the renovations of nineteen
of the of the first in the 80s and 90s
but this was actually something that was
revealed in the early 80s after it was
completely covered by paint even plaster
of the following schools of the Bauhaus
so our blue circle the red square and
the yellow triangle were only hardly to
be recognized so in that sense in that
kind of spectrum between the dust and
our investigation that is needed to get
basically from our today's perspective
to back to the to the object that is
basically the story of this book to read
the the object not only as an object of
history but to see it within history how
it moves how it has an afterlife how it
kind of has its decline its rejection
its revival but also its complete loss
and so to see that actually as a project
of architecture to to build it as in as
a space that was the idea of this book
to to to contribute basically to the
hundred years anniversary which seems at
some point like it was a very exciting
year actually surprising because in 2000
when it started we saw so many
exhibitions so many remote places came
together through actually to to see what
they have in their archives right so it
was a kind of a revisit of what can be
contributed with the system it kind of
to re-orient some of the discussion so
it was I think as you know probably it
was heavily funded also by the German
state to to celebrate the sparse years
here not only in Germany but also
internationally but at the same time
there was help with the I skip through
my page of the introduction but also
helped culturally through institutions
like the de Goethe Institute that was
kind of also the institution that helped
promote this project internationally in
Germany it might have appeared to you
slightly confusing of how many
institutions are actually around and how
many bounced museums we have and maybe
just to put them together so we have
Lima obviously as the school building
that has luckily survived almost without
any damage we have next to it like still
in an execution or how to call it like
the competition
[Music]
image or rendering for a new Bauhaus
museum we have a Desilu bajas museum
planned to the Bauhaus building and we
have the Bauhaus archive in in Berlin
formerly West Berlin which is actually
the one building that is in West rather
than the two others that were located in
East Germany you might have heard about
the museum itself that was actually
opened in Weimar rather than the pastel
colors of the rendering I think it
surprised a little bit when the scaffold
event eventually fell and the idea of
working with eve of his context was
maybe taking a little bit too little and
so it's actually a place in a dearth was
actually meant to be placed right in the
middle of a very difficult part of
Weimar history which is one of the
famous completed Nazi complexes in Lima
that obviously immediately brings up the
the existence of books but which you can
see also from the windows of this museum
so the museum is actually placed right
in the vicinity to these buildings which
is a difficult task and in that sense
explains maybe the context or maybe
opens to other questions and how this
building actually should be read so it's
actually followed a lot of controversies
in Germany I'm just still amazed about
this moment when the scaffold fell
because it kind of nobody was prepared
to that until it was seen and the other
building is obviously more
none I guess to you the ban was building
in Dessau actually a few years ago when
they yeah actually this book started
from a conference in Vemma and I had two
people who mistook the place in which it
was taking place so they rather than
traveling to Weimar they had come to
Dessau which very much shows and kind of
the kind of more anglo-american
understanding of where the Bauhaus is
it's more identified with with their
self remember maybe they did lo go or if
you probably know it already this is the
kind of the lettering on the facade so
also des how is kind of overwhelmed by
the amount of objects collected by by
the museum the kind of cultural
foundation that's actually the
difference also between bimah and daesil
so while Lima and like the university is
a cultural institution and the museum
would be basically not only based on
young objects they they would on and
environment there are not so many so
they are the museum could be full of
kind of has more space while Desa
actually has a real problem they have
several Depot's in which the kind of
store objects related to the Bauhaus
paintings chairs all sorts of important
artworks and so rather than exhibiting
them in the bars building the Bauhaus
building was kept more as and as a work
and cultural obscene exhibition venue
and the museum is both an exhibition and
basically a changing place for for
showing more works from the temple the
Bauhaus archive is actually a story that
would lead us right into a conversation
about the division of power house
history in
and west or between east and west
something that is discussed in in the
book and it's probably conic going to
fourth in a second so we have also a new
design planned for the powers archive to
extend to to have obviously more space
so at the moment it's even closed which
was one of the frightening things in the
last year's that whole archive closed
exactly three years before the Bauhaus
here was to start so the the the project
here the funding of Germany was actually
quite ambitious and I think it has in
2019 it was planted already in 2016 to
fund in such large amounts about house
here it has also a kind of a political
meaning right it's kind of an a delayed
reunification of both of Germany but
also the kind of the cultural history of
Germany that has been so divided so the
Bauhaus actually in both parts of
Germany after the war wasn't quite
revived as we could maybe imagine for
example the Soviet sector or East
Germany could have well taken up the
Bauhaus for its kind of social values or
for its yeah utopian thoughts but it
didn't so for also for the West it was
very difficult to approach the
powerhouse or to kind of to to receive
the Bauhaus into its
political and cultural reading so it's
kind of a fascinating story to follow
now how the Bauhaus in both parts of
let's say divided is twice divided was
rediscovered and celebrated to the point
to 2019
so this is how I see that also there's
kind of this long history of rejecting
of even persecution during the Nazi
regime the kind of T the careful
handling not touching it at all and the
slow appearance of of that project so
when we go back so this necessitates for
me also to go back 200 years of the
Bauhaus which then immediately as we
have seen also in this year in for the
cultural celebrations at the same time
we celebrate the meeting of the
parliamentarians that actually make the
Weimar Republic in the National Theatre
in Weimar
so this happens at the very same time
the powers is being founded only a few
hundred meters away we have actually
parliamentarians that it's not only one
meeting they come there's a kind of a
drink a special train connections
there's even an aerial connection
through planes so Gropius even flies in
from Berlin to Weimar and it's actually
fascinating to think whether Bauhaus
students did kind of the young
experimental people were actually
meeting parliamentarians at the time we
have a few images of it's a little bit
later but we obviously see here we see
power horses in front of the theatre in
front of the two sculptures of Goethe
and Schiller
so there's kind of this this idea now to
celebrate kind of an yeah kind of the
arts new kind of liberties but at the
same time to think like to recover to
also to use the bar house that
institution as a place in which to to
rework the experience of the of the wall
we have actually one of the essays very
beautifully by Nova Corps accusing a
kind of scholar of the Bauhaus in
environment at the University he for
years collected postcards and tried to
find traces of the very strange
beginnings of the Bauhaus
which did not start even with an empty
school building for Gropius on the
country we see here our staircase the
hoedowns that use put a little bit to
this to the side at the ever of them by
the way they we see actually hear a lot
surrett and kind of hospital war
hospital in which the veterans of the
First World War are still housed in in
the upper floors of of that building and
actually the first few weeks and months
gropius's fighting and writing several
letters to to the authorities to to
please empty these rooms because he
wants them for his for his students and
to use them as workshops now interesting
you see still in the background the the
paintings from the art school the bimah
art school that was there before so they
are
you see them here in kind of usually
there are postcards and on the back they
are writing home from primer so yeah
sign up at Alexander I spoke already a
little bit about her takes us into this
1919 through kind of an continuation of
pedagogy or pedagogical reform movements
but on the other hand we have somebody
like Joyce I was looking at people who
are traumatized from the war like lászló
moholy-nagy himself
there were many powers the students were
but also even Gropius who had served in
the Army who have achieve Gropius had
also has been wounded several times and
always asked to come back into the field
and no it was was traumatized by the
experience and now it's interesting to
see what they bring drum the warm and in
her reading Joyce actually read some of
the kind of the military equipment and
the knowledge about yeah new machinery
that that brings about also new
attitudes which creates this kind of
laboratory also at the Bauhaus to try
out and to to perform and to create kind
of all sorts of bizarre machines that
yeah on the one hand they look like
lines but they also have something of of
military equipment like here Calliope is
Lucas work for the house um home in a
lamp he had designed in 1923 also as
part of that very exhibition environment
that
was presented on kind of next to the
director's office it was the house um
horn which was a experimental building
which there was a student competition
and at the end all students were invited
to to design objects for for its
interior an experimental building that
still survived until today and in which
several are kind of modernist concepts
were actually experimented with and one
of the authors in the book anthem
partner actually writing about it as
part of the concern about hygiene
actually this would be it's like it's an
essay called the power house and the
Hoover the actually reading both of the
copy and Gropius and their emphasis on
on hygiene and having an interior that
has basically no no frames that wouldn't
catch dust which also brings us to a
kind of a new materiality like the
county the famous metal part of silver
pot even of Marian brand which is
probably one of the most valued bajas
objects so far so yeah he takes us
through kind of a hole that would be
what we think of like the destice is
kind of environments that it's
borderless that it's kind of around us
and that was kind of considered very
frightening in the 20s as part of this
hygiene movement so while the first part
is actually looking at some contact
concepts of dust and data and tries to
develop some theories
another part is more on the history
related to that foundation moment in
environment so it's very much a very
much have in mind as chair which I
showed at the beginning to stay put
somehow environment and to see what kind
of influences were around and on a book
off and she looks at the the mass school
the kind of the Soviet version that
almost took place at the same time like
the Bauhaus and its surprised by IFRIC
bars famous drawing in which all kind of
diagram in which he draws in the Bauhaus
as part of the modern movement but in
1936 is not able to put in a kind of a
communist school from from Moscow and so
she's kind of going into new archives
and finds new materials to find the
relation also on the influence and let's
say people like Kandinsky who who move
between Germany and Moscow and diplomats
that actually allow a network of
exchange between Lima and Moscow and she
ends the the essay with drawing your own
book the mass school right into the
middle to complete is destroying Peppa
Velez kind of looks at the exactly this
kind of interface between the
materiality and the new media that are
being experimented with at the Bauhaus
and interestingly by kind of looking
specifically at dust he he finds new
interactions and he reads through the
term
a Russian term factor - yeah to read
medias history and theory in relation to
experiments at the Bauhaus with much
reality we have Persephone Allen and she
contributed with a very beautiful essay
on comparing the work of Garrick Mooka
who was also the architect of the house
on horn and yeah exploring actually
through photographs together with his
students the both metals as reflective
surfaces they're kind of the metal that
are kind of polished surfaces that don't
hold dusts and kind of interesting and
but also to to read then reflections or
kind of experiments by Marianna blonde
who sees herself in in in the sphere and
so it's not only about the
representation of dead space but to see
herself in conovan in a new kind of
almost even power power over the camera
being kind of kind of ahead of of those
spheres rather than just being reflected
through them so her work has also been
kind of fascinating because she ended up
in East Germany and most of her works
were actually undiscovered until her
death where she had been she apparently
had left quite a few pieces outside of
the public view and so these are all
rediscoveries that we are actually
celebrating since only
last few ticket and is a bit auto rights
actually very important as a title quia
coded powerhouse which she revisits some
of the you know I mean actually it's
part of her book haunted Bauhaus and she
actually contributes a case study on a
student who was there already in 1919
when right at the beginning of the
Bauhaus he was a lawyer and appeared
incredibly talented max type of a fool
and Gropius invites him to to have even
his own workshop and after a while
working full us even to to be allowed to
study at the weaving workshop which is
very unusual because we hear a lot about
the woman Weaver's know the fact that
the Gropius was kind of rejecting a
woman and any other workshop so he
didn't want them in painting and not in
the metal workshop and not in sculpture
so he reserved weaving as the place in
which they would feel comfortable so
here we have actually some somebody who
particularly chose to be part of it and
we see this very beautiful world
tapestry other works he has done then
later after the Bauhaus are present this
much more clearly and
this is really the point where liberato
will begin to speak about all sorts of
hidden voices things that we have to
still read in photographs there's a lot
of experiment with double exposures kind
of hints in the photographs that have to
be decoded and she begins this really
amazing work and I'm very grateful that
we have kind of a piece by her in this
book so here I just put up the book
because I think it's really important
it also looks at bar hustlers who
actually fall into the nationalist
movement rather than having this kind of
clear-cut idea of who is the bauhaus
subject and it's the kind of nity
avant-gardist and leftist she draws you
another portrait of the powers in a
haunted house beautiful an essay by
Christopher Greene who actually takes on
the work of Josef Albers and later so
any others to to do actually also
theoretical reading based on the glass
fields of the glass images of Albus who
actually when he arrives in in America
after leaving Germany finds all his
glass paintings in that were packed
badly apparently falling apart so they
were just splinters of glass and it's
kind of a dramatic moment but in the
essay becomes a reading of the digital
of kind of pixelated thinking but also
very
tries to find relations to to
architecture him so obviously the the
work of an ER basis and we always try to
find that the relation between the two
which will be discussed here well what
we wouldn't fight I don't know if she's
here already but she looks she takes the
moment of the departure of Gropius from
one of the Meister houses in Dessau to
now to hand over to his successor he
invites in 1927 Hannes Meyer first to
take on the architecture department and
later he becomes actually Hannes Meyer
who become the director of the the
second director of the Bauhaus the you
probably know the kind of the three
directors Hannes Meyer actually they
kind of they the Communists kind of
left-wing sympathizer in the Bauhaus and
they almost read the coup they get him
out because he moves the Bauhaus in
apparently in a true communist direction
which endangers the bowers and as an
institution within an again conservative
nationalist environment of German
politics around 1930 so he then leaves
to Moscow while Mies van der Rohe will
take over the Bauhaus in Dessau in 1930
and then they close also in 1932 and
then try another attempt in Berlin which
is again really interesting so here what
we didn't fight looks actually at
[Music]
particular attitude of Mies van der Rohe
who's less known for his rationalism or
kind of efficiency in terms of materials
but rather on the contrary he has always
seen uses these lavish materials to
design interiors for his clients and she
still discovered something in that the
kind of the very much reality or the
work his during reflects something about
the character of Miss from the role at
the time so he falls a little bit out of
the of what we would think as the
modernism of kind of the social project
or utopia she also published you
probably have seen the book a really
fascinating study on luxury and
modernism where she looks at the kind of
the kind of the paradoxical relation
that actually most modernists themselves
couldn't quite commit yet to to give up
kind of ornament or certain luxury like
we have here in the Meister house and
the directors house by Gropius who was
asking actually that the marble will be
[Music]
airbrushed out for the publication
because it couldn't be that the director
would have marble sinks on on the
contrary it had to look kind of much
more affordable so that's her book and
this is one of the first stories in the
book and it will be also leading us
right into a conversation about the
master houses by Anna Maria my sister
who reconnects them
to the house I'm home which again it's
this project of 1923 the house I'm home
environment which I already discussed
but it was meant to be also a prototype
for a settlement that would develop
develop on and in Dessau might have been
the chance to do so but again she's kind
of discussing some of the conflicts
between actually only four master houses
that are always double houses which
don't quite repeat at all in themselves
already and again not what later Hannes
Meyer would kind of demand to to really
think about social housing industrial
reproduction and we have actually here's
something very individualistic still in
this buildings and it also takes us into
this whole debate of stretching that's
not like the four hundred years but to
stay within the story of the various
after lives of some of the buildings and
in Dessau some of them have been
destroyed in the the war is very close
to the youngest factories and others
have been rebuilt in a completely
different style so the another kind of
story in the book is actually a bit more
it's kind of more from media theory it's
an observation about a page in in in a
publication of 1978 and young Thomas
actually discovers something between
these two pages in in one of these
publications where when you kind of look
at the paper it's quite literally
immense today the materiality of the
paper you look at when you look at them
a little bit from the side you see that
the kind of the print has actually
pierced through the paper
and he kind of begins he opens on that
very kind of interface of the paper and
the photograph and the pixelation of
this photograph opens up this bars
history that leads him to to search that
very same publication in various other
libraries discovers them in different
states different forms of decay but also
in different forms of registration and
library signatures actually a quite
fascinating a little bit unusual reading
of Bauhaus history and let's say also
the entrance to about historiography in
a different way
nickel atom oh sure I'm sure you know
him and here in London he was very kind
of yeah wonderful to use the work is
done for four years on the spacesuit to
actually to find a relation to two
Bauhaus costumes and particularly to
this lemon Valley it seemed kind of an
an interesting kind of connection to
think them through and he develops them
really wonderfully which goes in the
same way both into the kind of the the
the textile itself the development of
the textile for the for the spacesuits
which took some of the knowledge of the
time from from even Bauhaus experiments
and at the same time
ends with of reading of Slammers kind of
nationalist tendencies in in the early
30s where he kind of sees these
spacesuits walking by themselves but
also into a problem I don't have this
last image a problem of conservation so
both suits pose the kind of the costumes
of the famous bar husband a special Emma
have the same kind of conservation
[Music]
guidelines like the spacesuits in the
museum so it's kind of interesting to
read the kind of the expertise of two
conservationists for those costumes so
so while the first part is about objects
patterns textures and codes I gave a bit
way of this already the other one is a
bit more really related to the divine
man as a place as we've kind of in both
places basically by my aunt daesil had
their own afterlife something that is
more complex and would make another
story that is maybe less established as
a powerhouse history which relates to
the moment when the bajas leaves here we
just to illustrate this beautiful
setting here between Gertrude aunt and
ot burger or T bracket sits here and
kind of stages an image of the departure
of the Bauhaus from from Dessau but it's
also the departure of the same family
and from their house in in Dessau and
it's actually interesting how kind of
how simple it looks like
at the same time the arrival of the
National Socialists into this building
don't have such images yet of Lima I
didn't find them yet but that is
actually the story that needs to be told
in relation to the history of those
buildings and objects that how they
actually go through these regimes and
how they are destroyed we see as already
during the war it becomes actually it's
a kind of an school also first for like
a kind of a crafts training school and
later more militaries Jews we have other
buildings that are being bombarded like
here the house of the Pahlavi Nagy and
East Germany brings up its on a version
of Bauhaus or like a kind of an family
house the building itself in Dessau is
in an ok State and 1961 from far but by
the time we are in the 70s early 70s it
kind of it feels now really heavy traces
of decay the building is cannot can yeah
it's leaking it's it's patting us
falling off and it's actually that's the
interesting thing I learned in Vemma and
we kind of we have it in the book it's
how it was an initiative actually of
Lima at the time now in East Germany and
to to monitor this building already
throughout the 60s like to have an
interest although it wasn't an
established research question to
research the Bauhaus on the contrary it
was quite critically seen - to open up
and let's say in all-embracing bars
history research it became
ruin that was then documented by
conservationists by architecture
students who actually found themselves
probably in the same moment like we are
now in 76 in Dessau when the building
would be like in 75 it this is the state
in Dessau and it's the same moment we
have when bernard tschumi is actually
looking at the buildings of modernism
enjoying the decay and even the kind of
sensuality that seems to emanate from
from these buildings as in the way they
look but it also it what actually starts
is an enormous revival project of the
70s to to to bring the Bauhaus back into
East German academia so there's a
chapter about the kind of tea we had the
way it was slowly kind of revealed for
conservationists later they were kind of
very critical of the fast process of
renovating this building it was actually
done within less than a year that this
building was transformed to be ready for
its 50th anniversary
so the baddest building was in Desa was
opened in 1926 and by Gropius and in 76
it had to be celebrated so it was the
idea to celebrate its 50th anniversary
and so it had to be ready for the press
for for international guests and
obviously for for Bauhaus students power
hustlers who could come and were invited
to come from all over the world and in
that sense it was the very first time
that East Germany also opened its kind
of
borders or the kind of even allowed the
invitation across the kind of the border
to allow Western journalists architects
and obviously the protagonists of the
powerhouse to be in this place it was
kind of the same so it's also in the
book strangely the very moment of the
opening on the fourth of December 1976
looked like this which already when you
look at it it looks quite stiff and
little Dow not quite like the bar has
looked before
actually the in 1926 when it was all
about jazz and cool experimental music
its Germany had really a problem to
celebrate I wasn't quite sure what to
celebrate and how to do it and so it
looks really more like kind of some
party bureaucrat and Mozart and the
music program so all that I mean this
image shows very well that it was new it
was kind of something that wasn't
[Music]
considered something comfortable to
introduce into let's say official is
German propaganda or kind of an Russian
Allen so yeah so these same bar houses
they had to kind of probably told each
other the old stories how it used to be
and what happened as it was such a
special event in 1976 they were
instituted both inviting to the Bauhaus
building in Dessau but at the same time
created this boscola film on in
environment which is now the moment how
I come in because this book actually
began in 2016 when I
invited to to this conference at the
so-called Bauhaus colloquium which was
founded the very first time or kind of
took place the first time in 1976 so
with the kind of foundation or kind of
reopening of the Bauhaus building in
Dessau and it was now 40 years since
that very opening so we have now a few
kind of temporal frameworks so on the
one hand it's the 40 years to the kind
of the history of a conference that was
repeated every two to three years and
the history of the Bauhaus itself and
that is being that out through the
course of these of these events so we
could so I'm just showing you a few
images of the conference just because it
was somehow like a a background also in
different formats to think through and
kind of to meet and to actually to
create also this kind of collective
working on that yeah it was very much
also the kind of day the image I had or
kind of the that kind of encouraged me
to continue with this book because it
was such an amazing experience that we
also repeated in 2019 so with kind of
all sorts of not just one conference but
within conference and an exhibition they
put an exhibition together to actually
look back at these 40 years of these
conferences in which we would say that
actually since 1976 every with every
next collection with every next
conference you could say a little bit
more or you were teasing out what could
be said against a regime through the
cover of the Bauhaus right so that was
actually also attracting a lot of lefty
architectural historians and theorists
who come to East Germany which actually
there wasn't such kind of forum may be
related to the Bauhaus or to modernism
that allowed certain form of exchange
so left minded theorists came because
they they found the discussions
fascinating and on the other hand kind
of research from Eastern Europe and
international works on the Bauhaus were
presented there it was also kind of an
unusual forum so my mom in this kind of
conferences that were important was an
important institution to to put on the
kind of the revival of the Bauhaus so
that we always when the government as in
2019 to celebrate that years it actually
kind of relates to a longer struggle
rather than just kind of a new question
of research also in terms of the history
telling that was important for me and
also started in 2013/14 research
collective called the Center for
documentary architecture in which we
actually translated that research into
an online archive in which basically all
the this kind of exhibition found a
different form of existence online so
you can check that we also had
interviews we see here Charles Jencks to
whom I actually wanted to give this book
still in September we exchanged over it
and I think it also belongs to this 2019
year this that not all of my
contributors could be here so
I would have liked to give it to himself
so we have so this is the story of the
lady the kind of interviews we did with
[Music]
guests to the Bowers Coliseum over these
40 years of which Charles Jencks was won
in 1992 and another one is karl-heinz
hooter who's actually who dared in 1968
to write a letter to grope us with a
manuscript he'd written about the
history of the Bauhaus in Weimar and
because he's not allowed to write any
letters no even to send manuscripts
without any censorship to to the US he
was actually accused quite heavily of
not quite a traitor but he was basically
not allowed to follow his academic
career as he had planned and we have
actually this few letter correspondences
so quite a wonderful and Gropius very
happy with the spoke and even helps him
with some of the details but it shows
actually how precarious the situation
was in East Germany to actually to to
pursue Bauhaus research and another
chapter the third one last one we look
at it's titled refugees migrants
returnees and travelers that's the kind
of the idea of the Bauhaus in exile or
kind of the to to look also for
protagonists and their various difficult
to research sometimes trajectories in
two different places of the world
first of all Hannes Meyer himself the
second Bauhaus director who actually
really struggles to to move
as a communist into the communist scene
in Moscow than to leave it to return to
Switzerland and to come back to them to
move to Mexico and then again to return
to to Switzerland and he finds himself
actually more and more in a kind of an
animal situation in which he's kind of
attached to every regime too much
so it's Germany cannot speak about him
as you know famously Gropius it raises
him completely from all bajas
exhibitions or books as if he never
existed almost so it's kind of an very
moving but also beautifully researched
essay by Thomas Phil who managed to go
into new archives in that opened in
Russia mostly in Moscow which he's
translating and reading here in Turin
for us it's sort of similar tima by tima
Viner is an student of of Hannes Meyer
and he moves also with him to Moscow
he's originally from Hungary and then
goes to Chile and actually brings this
is the interesting thing he takes the
pedagogical theories and ideas of Hannes
Meyer to Chile and begins to introduce
them into an architecture school and
develops amazing data sheets and very
much in the fashion of Hannes Meyer but
interestingly he holds back at some
point this is also what I found
interesting in some of the protagonists
that they also fall back as soon as they
are back home he goes back to Hungary
and he has kind of slightly Stalinist
attitudes to his architecture so this
kind of modernist episode is one thing
and then it's a different character
somehow which doesn't please usually
historian so it's difficult to tell
these stories and Ana coherent way but
it's obviously and it's we have a few
such stories that kind of fade out also
into history or kind of become less
strict to the framework of what we would
think Bauhaus history is about in a song
that has a beautiful story about an
architect who was a communist at the
bars from you could Slavia salmon salmon
agate who is probably also the I don't
know about another Muslim in the Bauhaus
is not being told about but he actually
goes to Palestine after traveling a bit
to Egypt and ends up in in Palestine and
works in the office of Richard Kaufman
until Richard Kaufman discovers that he
is actually not one of the other Jewish
émigrés who have arrived and he's kind
of the story obviously varies but
apparently he's thrown out of this
office and interestingly salmon salmon
agate continues to work he's also
working with the mufti of Jerusalem he
builds a synagogue not a synagogue a
mosque and we see him actually here yeah
this is probably still work in the in
the office of fish at Kaufman but yeah
so it's actually also it seems to be
still the missing link we don't know
much about his actually work with after
the work in the Hoffman office and he
comes back actually before
the war started and there's a huge gap
in his biography which really or in
asunder' tries to to speculate a little
bit but salmon salmon agate will become
an very important professor at the
architecture school and bison say in
East Germany and will be very successful
but he will never really speak about
that episode in his life so it's left to
the family archive for memories that we
can yeah mostly only speculate on I just
go through this quickly because the
bauhaus here in in Britain is a chapter
on its own it's just kind of attached
upon in an essay by Veronica Raymer who
looks at an Australian couple and the
influence of meeting Bauhaus
protagonists who had come from Germany
after 1933 to London as you know am a
supporter and know just what for the
Simpsons department store and this is
where they actually met this Australian
couple and they take some of this back
to to Sydney to a design exhibition and
they keep actually this is also
interesting this powerhouse also write
each other constantly birthday cards so
we still see some late works of lászló
moholy-nagy who always tries to be to
stay in contact so we see post transpire
as law and but also we see in the
invitation card some of the traces that
lead back to powers education and how
Mead I think he should give his own
lecture on that but it's very beautiful
story that presents also rather the more
the context or the kind of the the other
side of that powers history let's say
starting with the
Bauhaus members on the roof in in in
Dessau juxtapose true day to the meeting
of the CM meeting here and he begins to
speak about Gabrielle goofily cow who
comes is volunteer-run
and yeah and it's a birthday and for me
interesting worked with other flows and
Jenna and it takes actually kind of more
the Lowe's and French side of Education
rather than with the Bauhaus and
famously this you probably know D he
designs the garden in the villa and why
and we actually see that lászló
moholy-nagy was there in the same garden
it was very impressed by by that villa
and he designs actually in kind of an
bajas terms it's this kind of moment
also where we need to up open up to to
read not only Bauhaus as a Bauhaus
relating to the Bauhaus school but also
to Bauhaus modernism and the kind of
environment created with it and but he
very nicely traces it back also to find
relations to lászló moholy-nagy who
stand still in Chicago they meet or they
kind of day right between each other so
there's kind of there's still some some
repercussions even if we are not in the
same place he will actually go back to
Tehran to design office buildings but I
think he never comes to realize them and
will become actually more influential a
teacher in the United States and
I think that's also the you have one of
the wonderful protagonists relating to
the network of modernism my own essay I
think it's fair to mention that begins
with like an locust plague plague in in
the Lebanese mountains of 1916 which is
kind of an the idea also that something
quite horrific and something that cannot
be divided by Buddha something that
affects a whole strip of land it causes
an enormous for me in in northern in the
mountains of the Galilee and stretching
to the Lebanese mountains it will also
become it's kind of it collides with
another historical movement which is the
kind of an Academy the Spanish flu which
was actually raiding around the same
time throughout the world it was a
global horrific epitome that kind of
could not be traced it's not visible we
have hardly documents of how many people
died of it they and yet there were like
several I mean like about fifty million
people died within two years of this
Spanish flu so these two things these
kind of these events and we also I found
in the diaries of Park Lane where he was
kind of speaking about having a flu
in 1917 when he served in his army
headquarters for the Bavarian air force
he thinks about it so we it's somehow
around him and yet it cannot it's not
been traced so that's the beginning as a
kind of just in an historical fact that
comes down for me in with one of the
protagonists who died of the Spanish flu
so marks mark Sykes who was actually the
originator of the together with his
colleague his French diplomat colleague
picot who divided as a kind of planning
at the end of the First World War who
started to divide the Middle East along
that famous sykes-picot border that
would divide between French and a
British side right through the middle
east that would kind of create Lebanon
and Syria and cut it off from Jordan and
obviously British Mandate Palestine I
want to zoom into in one of these
moments of the border which I just
framed here in Red Square
it actually takes us to the Jordan River
crossing here depicted by kind of an a
sketch by an Australian Army soldier who
was sitting down probably observing the
repair works done on the bridge that was
crossing the Jordan River something that
another person captured through a
photograph
it was one of the last gestures of the
Germans crossing together with the army
of the Ottoman Empire to actually to
retreat from its kind of attempt to
occupy that part of Palestine and so
they retreat with a last bump that
destroyed the bridge and the British are
at the moment rebuilding this bridge was
a very clever construction then you
already how to think
bridges very quickly and so I think it's
one of the last gestures of the Germans
in the Middle East and as part of the
war of the First World War this was in
1918 and I always speculated like if we
have on the one hand we have this kind
of veterans of the First World War in
Weimar and actually where they came from
or where they have been during the First
World War so we need to actually kind of
draw still or kind of imagine that
relation between their kind of time and
impact elsewhere and to actually bring
this back and somehow strangely it has
it kind of comes back there is some
Bauhaus found apparently in in that part
of the world
so we are crossing actually today this
is kind of an image of the as an aerial
image as don't don't manage to get my
mouse we are actually in the Golan
Heights now the Jordan River is the
established international border we you
see a road crossing westwards as well
eastward to up the hill and we see a
French Customs House
sorry the British person found customs
customs house and further up on the
mountains is a French custom house
so as this border had been drawn
literally somewhere in the 1922 but that
said the buildings were built later kind
of kind of date function was given later
we are between probably 1922 and 1930s
that these buildings were built we are
at the moment the Golan Heights is
[Music]
annexed by Israel it has been
acknowledged or comforta has been
supported through Trump that that is
kind of illegal occupation we have to
otherwise see that actually just
crossing into this territory means that
we are in a heavily contested area which
still shows traces of the war it's full
of landmines it's full of Tanks it's
full of also monuments to Israeli
soldiers who have lost their lives there
and it's kind of a part of the culture
within the IDF to visit these places and
so we we drive up the roads that is
quite intense we actually because it's
not possible to step on this land one
has to use a drone and we are flying
here some drones and we actually
discover the the British customs how
something that sits in the middle of a
very beautiful but slightly eerie
landscape if we think that actually
under the screen the
some land mines hidden but we fly over
this building and it's actually it shows
that it it's probably not new built it
looks more like an old
caravans and real quick-like and kind of
current yeah like in medieval structure
that has actually not been changed much
by let's say the British forces at the
at the time it's very hard to understand
how this building works at some point I
did approach it a bit more as I saw that
there were actually traces of cows I've
heard a little bit safer and discovered
that actually this whole building is
full of cows who inhabit at the moment
this structure while so it's still very
hard to find out more about this
building but it relates to this building
on the top of the mountain that we have
to approach slowly and we actually as we
go there we see constantly army vehicles
either driving tanks down wow it's quite
weird but this building was actually in
this state in 2015 when I saw it the
first time and when actually the owner
of this building
invited me kind of maybe hoping that
somebody from the Bauhaus in Germany
could kind of assess this building and
maybe to think about it whether it could
be about house building and I was rather
surprised and he but he insisted always
no no it's from 1919 and so we have been
wrong with the dates we don't know the
architect and unfortunately before we
could actually do any investigation on
this building it was already
kind of in the state of renovation so it
transformed too fast before it can
actually be investigated deeper but
there are some signs of modernism and
this I would probably more put into the
late 20s rather than the early 20s it
doesn't have to be necessarily Bauhaus
its kind of I think you've quite generic
modernism actually a modernism that we
would find not only in its it's
something kind of more electrons across
the Levant and it speaks rather if we
are not talking about it as a French
customs house it's more a kind of an a
colonial project right - I mean this
might be something a Paris centered that
has been transported here or transferred
to the Middle East
and yet this owner was very keen to
actually to have this building as part
of a hotel chain here you see it in an
advertisement related to the Bauhaus in
tel-aviv as you might know the Bauhaus
kind of modernism this white modernism
is very much in fashion and so the hope
was to create actually a boutique hotel
devoted to the powerhouse which so he
kind of I thought at that stage it's a
bit exaggerated and at some point he
actually we have some conversations over
over this building because he's
beginning we have this what's up
conversation and he's beginning to ask
me what I would think if he if he has
this logo of the Bauhaus in the Golan
Heights
and I try to actually take it a little
bit away and politely and also try to
reread that Bauhaus history not as
something that relates to Lima as a
powerhouse but to think of that border
that sykes-picot border is an also
artificial border and something that
should allow us actually to to to cross
our own kind of imagination of where the
Bauhaus should be right it's a kind of a
European project but actually if we look
at the use of modernism as a as a to
start with let's say it's a colonial
project it's we need to follow much more
interesting and much more wider open
bordered investigations so the in 2000
this year in September we flew another
drone it's now in created perfect state
probably in his terms it's white it had
a yellowish color in the middle but it
achieved indeed the Bauhaus sign that
was put up there and it's quite an
awkward experience I haven't seen it yet
but I can imagine on that kind of corner
passing by seeing a powerhouse building
on top of a mountain on top of an
occupied territory it's kind of a very
strange appearance and I actually got
other few images he sent me about a kind
of a meeting he had already a day after
the opening where he brings the military
to invite actually to this Bauhaus
building so there's a kind of an quite
yeah an institution being built here
that uses the Bauhaus as a massive
strange cover story that yeah gets
somehow critical dimension so I kind of
for years I have followed this building
how it was transforming I was kind of
interviewing and yeah looking at the way
this the owner is arguing this case and
I think I I will continue to do that if
I manage to to get there maybe lastly a
story that's also in the book is about
exactly that kind of powerhouse
modernism here in Tel Aviv it's actually
by a building right in the center of tel
aviv built by an architect called
tough commie who designed it in 1936 he
was not a mouse
student he studied in Ghent at the
architecture school there and actually
what I was trying to figure out with our
research team was whether there could be
any traces to fund Henry Fonda Felder
who also taught in Ghent at the time
when he studied there whether there
could be any influence in terms of
funding eldest teaching two in this
building so the the building has been
recently converted to become rather than
an apartment house a house that would
present the city of Tel Aviv and its
project for the White City preservation
so as you know Tel Aviv got the UNESCO
World Heritage status in 2003 and it
didn't have an institution in which it
could present that work and now this
building is being transformed to become
like in exchange it's a center for yeah
kind of a museum and it had been funded
also by Germany as a form of cultural
collaboration that's why I probably also
became part of this story but also
because I found it interesting when the
first hand to to look we had actually in
2015 an exhibition in the building and
to follow actually as we were already
there we and knowing that this house
will be come converted into into a
museum to follow its transformation so
actually the same thing we did on the
mountain to do it here but here to use
or to ask more questions or to have
actually chance to to go be behind the
patina of this building so we invited
together when with the creators of the
house in Tel Aviv preservation is who
actually both gave an expertise on what
they could find whatever kind of on the
colors the histories of the colors and
would maybe lead to the stories of the
inhabitants or the story of the use of
the building but also on gave
recommendations on how to renovate this
place so we were documenting this kind
of most of the conversations of which we
collected so many that later we needed
again a kind of audiences what we
constructed actually digital platform in
which we kind of try to find rather than
having a whole series of interviews but
to kind of to inter connect them and to
basically also put them into one kind of
research questions because usually
conservationists tell each one a
different story and you never get one
single narrative so it was more about
collecting them and to learn from
of them so we were actually taking this
building really Ford's as a document of
its own time both of the yeah of the
story of that city that was may be built
on I mean it was obviously with the idea
of modernism but had relatively little
to do with the Bauhaus so this kind of
whole Bauhaus narrative this was for us
quite questionable but also not that
interesting it gets interesting when
decisions are being made to actually
make a decision on the color of the
paint of the building and so the more we
actually investigated the pains and the
kind of the various structures of the
paint we discovered that the original
colors were were not all white
they were always more in the kind of an
orangey occur yellowish tone something
which we kind of we have a with the same
effect I showed with the director's
office where the yellow is too strong
right in a photograph and so we actually
translated that into carpets that was
one work to do as part of an exhibition
but also to to think about color
conservation but also the kind of the
whole idea of yeah transferring color
documentation into another medium
everything we've done so far on that has
been digitized or is being made
accessible through our platform and here
I'm just moving slowly into the
exhibition we have done recently and of
which some of it is still on view in Tel
Aviv together with it was also an
installation or kind of an video screen
of eight screens that actually
eventually devoted to the AIDS
architects who have come from the
powerhouse and to actually dip design in
Palestine and later Israel and so it's
quite a large presentation in by MIDI
it's a little smaller in Tel Aviv for
environment we kind of we took it we
really enjoyed the comfort of space feed
we had there with the model that
presents actually this house to mark
sleeping house as the key or the medium
through which we can read the or the
other or like research we had done on
the city of Tel Aviv but also cities in
or kind of buildings internationally
which we had actually analyzed as kind
of an architectural biographies so it's
kind of an like the research we're doing
relates opposed to to make that publicly
accessible but also to interconnect them
with stories so here is some like blue
dots that's actually relates us to
another story of research we have have
done so this is just some views what
became fascinating in this in this
project was the more we studied this
building we actually learned that this
building had to been equipped with
products that were clearly could be
clearly traced to German companies which
was very strange because the building
was built in 1936 and so you wonder why
there would be so many German products
could be found in in this building and
later I mean this was also in
collaboration with the sleeping house
and decorators there this fascinating
story appeared that actually something
which is known - let's say historians
and
yeah political histories was that there
was a trade agreement the so called
hahaha agreement that was between the
German Ministry of Economy and the
Jewish Agency and Palestine which
allowed actually it's kind of a trust
agreement also there were two banks
involved in that of a sermon and Wambach
who were actually allowing that Jewish
funds could leave the country to allow
both to travel to to leave at all and to
tow her to prove or to actually to
receive the permissions for visas which
the British asked to when they were kind
of giving visas away but at the same and
also it allowed to have funds when they
had arrived in Palestine and that fund
actually that actually it was an
agreement between that was in work
between 1933 until the beginning of the
war in 1939 that fund allowed like it
was actually made possible through the
transfer of German building products so
we have all sorts of things we have like
tiles kind of here we see tiles with
soap dish we have door handles that in
this building clearly showed a German
company we had also something like kind
of a plastering net and yeah kind of
objects that really now when we see
these images of goods that are being
transported through the city of Tel Aviv
we are kind of revisiting these
photographs and try to see actually if
we see any
German labeling of these objects so it's
quite a controversial history also
because it it's obviously as you know
German products were boycotted since the
with the arrival of the Hitler regime
internationally and the one country that
takes them is actually British Mandate
Palestine so it's actually something
that we need to understand now in this
triangle between Germany Britain and
Palestine and on the other hand it's
yeah it shows the collaboration of sorts
between the Jewish Agency and Nazi
Germany in order to get people out which
is probably the best reason and totally
understandable and important so what we
are trying to do now is on the one hand
to be very suspect of building materials
but also to go into to kind of to trace
something that's kind of also bit
outside of let's say the architectural
historians space to look actually at the
bank accounts of the two banks and to
kind of to try to to bring them together
this Bank at the receipts we find in
archives both and the Bank Archives but
also in archives of companies which it's
always a very strange start to call a
company let's say a big cement German
cement from a company to ask whether in
their archives they have any such
documents but so it's very difficult on
on that site and on the other hand it's
kind of we have revisiting of building
materials that we take into laboratories
something like the terrazzo floor for
example became for us like in
an example in which we could try to
figure out and almost on a nano scale
the kind of the components out of which
this terrazzo floor was made and it took
us all the way to actually to this this
microscopic state to to see or to prove
that there was white cement and white
cement is something that can be really
framed in the time between 1933 and 36
so it's very very close that it really
came it was developed in Germany only
and as only then so it was actually very
likely that this material was
transported to into this house and
obviously the mock sleeping house is
then only one of other houses I've been
in some other houses and obviously now I
keep turning around the tiles and we did
find other available talents for example
yeah my voice is leaving and I think I'm
I will close here at the end we kind of
we found actually a similarity between
the kind of the idea of researching the
transport of materials with the kind of
the customs houses on in the Golan
Heights that are exactly trying to
border or - we have to create a border
between these kind of lines and
trajectories and so we have actually
presented that in an exhibition in
Weimar which was called the matter of
data and it also had the book as part of
it because somehow book and the story of
this exhibition and the research we have
done as a group went hand in hand and
yeah so I'm just letting this fade out
thank you very much
[Applause]
I think a great collection of objects
histories and contributors to this
incredible project that's I think
started as a conference and then you
know you've turned it into this book and
exhibition I'm sure everyone in the
audience is probably anxious to have a
closer look at this book but I wanted to
see if anyone had kind of Hansel
questions before we closed
thank you he knows fern engrossing like
shown congratulations on the book I
guess I was first introduced to your
world your office in 1996 by Garrett
Zimmerman taking us to the director's
office car yarmulke leading some kind of
colloquium but remembering back to that
already in the discussion was because I
was an American what trails of dusts
connect the project to things like the
new Bauhaus in Chicago or the Black
Mountain College where the Albers
eventually found a sanctuary are there
places in the book where the American
traces of the dust eventually settle yes
I mean this was maybe more with Josef
Albers and Amy Albers right they take
the directly to Black Mountain College
so yeah and then there's also Anna who's
you might know she looks at rock use in
kind of together with Wagner to design
actually social housing and doesn't
quite succeed so it's actually something
that predates a bit the TAC
collaboration of Gropius and so that
does I find interesting that actually
there something that happened in Berlin
could not happen in this day so that
kind of this new environment this was
maybe the first lesson also for for
Gropius at the time and then we have
Michael raucous in back there so it's
maybe it's not quite what you meant but
at least a kind of state american
scholar stream yeah and in terms of the
london connection the house the famous
modernist the Cohen house and Levi's
house next to each other on is it
Chelsea Church Street is that connected
in some way to this triangle you talk
about in terms of Bauhaus this is
interesting but I don't know I think it
would be too early to say that but I do
find it interesting to to see them
together especially because actually the
the latest book of Allen powers now
where he really he tries to really show
that there was a modernist movement here
right so just a counter narrative to
what we always thought of like we cannot
that actually the Bauhaus didn't succeed
here no actually there were moments in
the early 30s that it was interesting
and so I when one needs to also see it
at the same time like how British
modernism was exported to places like
Palestine and it's also it's a material
research right it's about the
development of cement and new building
materials so that's kind of it's a
competition now on a different level
which should be that's why I think I
shouldn't get announced that or kind of
thing most of you about ISM thank you
maybe everyone wants to ask you
questions over drinks
but there are drinks in the next room
and also you should all check out the
book thank you so much and as this is a
really terrific talk
thank you very happy thank you
[Applause]
