so I just want to say welcome everybody
and thanks for coming and I want to
specifically thank Daniel and to be as
for coming from out of town to be with
us today over the past five years to be
a spectacle and performed at venues such
as the Swiss Institute in New York
Cristal is Uruk in Switzerland
it's a Hammer Museum in Los Angeles and
currently has shows up at Deborah's
Ramona gallery in Munich and young cops
in Cologne I want to start off by citing
some recent work of [ __ ] takes the first
of these being an installation at York
Cargill gallery in Vienna last November
we're in a continuation of hizmet rotten
series Big Dig filled the gallery to the
brim with stained used mattresses
donated to him by friends that in and
totally eclipsed the viewer from
entering the space in Malta this past
January big dig filled the gallery with
use refrigerators leaving just enough
space between the fridges and the
paintings which hung on the walls around
them for the viewer to navigate the
space in a booth at least a Basel where
I first saw his work human-shaped
figures made of used clothing donated
from friends were drenched in resin and
posed in various ways throughout the
gallery the sculptures became stand-ins
for us hanging out in a gallery space
and wearing all the symbols of our
newfound Eleazer economy and as it is
with the majority of Spriggs work you'll
find yourself within one of these two
rhythms the space will either be filled
with everyday objects like desks fridges
mattresses or the space will be sparsely
populated with sculptures posing as if
in a photo shoot with paintings hanging
around them through this focus on
objects depicted puts an emphasis on our
newfound economic situation in which we
identified our surroundings through
objects which have a lifespan that is
constantly being eroded by planned
obsolescence and cultural dissimulation
the tables fridges mattresses and used
clothing all of them used although
currently not in use in this light the
objects transcend themselves and are no
longer fridges or mattresses but rather
material
it's almost as if SPECT is using the
concept of material the same way
comedians refer to their jokes as
material a series of paintings becomes a
row of one-liners albeit one-liners that
diverge into abstraction and complexity
and ultimately a fridge is still afraid
of a mattress and mattress but in this
context where the objects are turned
into a material they are able to play
with the meaninglessness loss humor and
redefinition of space which are all side
effects of our late capitalist reality
ultimately it's a body of work that for
me is still difficult to pin down I'm
still not sure how these paintings and
sculptures relate to our world or fit
within a contemporary asset based art
market as Dan Shearer said in a recent
paper about [ __ ] dig quotes the work
that stands an equal measure in a state
of partial autonomy with respect to
other works of its time into conditions
of aesthetic production and critical
receptions it simultaneously occludes
and mobilizes and quote and with all
that please help me and Paul cling to be
expecting to they thank you for this
generous introduction it's a great honor
to have been invited to this talk start
right away this is one of my recent
paintings most recent paintings titled
Earth this is Earth and the moon in my
studio
[Music]
I chose his slide to the prologue sort
of and this short lecture I will focus
on recent solar shows for different
shows which all happen in galleries like
they're like sequels or chapters the
first one is titled Chima cotton in
English the mattresses first shown first
in 2016 of young cops and cologne then
like deadlines in heaven a show at
gallery burnhardt in suruc and indy and
then we'll talk about fridge in mind
this January at small to contemporary in
Valletta Malta and the last row which is
still up titled long stories I'll start
with the mattresses was the installation
[Music]
in Democrats and I installed used
mattresses as a preferred in the two
main rooms of the small gallery covered
with sturdy sheets collected from
friends while the office was occupied by
a few ghost sculptures ghosts and German
guys - therefore the title but first the
mattresses the literary and literal
aspect of the mattress as a basic layer
that underlies always terribly
attractive the word throne existence
parallel absence of all when asleep the
acts of law of birth and death and
whatnot first of existed as an idiotic
as first it existed as notes and idiotic
titles not to be mistaken as stupidity
the idea to something else
big fan of the figure of the idiot I had
several sketches when the show came up I
thought it would be perfectly basically
I was into pulling a whole drama of
melancholy into one room an apartment
full of my sorors would have been
another possible title I stuck with
DeMuth rotten which has a bit of a messy
connotation as a sloth can be called a
dolphin at Autzen Sherman someone that
knows everybody so a village of
mattresses thrown into one room then
arranged according to fitting into the
room it's a pattern that made sense in
terms of looking good but only in its
form looking at it from distance but in
its complexity then again arranging them
was all about proportions relating
defining an infinite field the room the
building the city in the village the
village in the city and then the people
who would see this all parts of the same
village and what these people would
think and tell each other the mattresses
were inspired of course by period of
more or less constant travel different
cities scenes in politics gossip as well
that the fact as well as the fact that
my grandmother died in an armchair
the stories were there and the material
and the material itself so I guess it's
really a bit of a Catholic understanding
of material the yes and the know why I
prefer not to I'd rather not know why it
might be a platitude but if there's a
concept or an idea doesn't have a reason
this isn't the office to go sculptures
and solve them
yeah they kind of like visitors II don't
want to have fun an opening and they
remained in the office also the
galleries at the time didn't have any
assistance so I thought it was a good
idea for them to something for somebody
to scream at yeah at the ghosts so in
the end it wasn't so much about anything
in particular but more of a scenario of
the concentration of signifiers and
directions it could take which made like
the mattresses almost abstract and so
kind of similar things sort of similar
about that of the ghosts
yeah they're basically the ghosts are
basically a series of gestures and moves
that appeared as elegance and
appropriate in certain situations and
kept on being so and other ones a lot
like good clothes in fashion I might go
out of style but never lose it that's in
the studio like when I first handsome
grounds the bookshelf crashed when I
came after came home and this kind of
yeah
probably was them it started with like
clothes laying around the department and
I wanted company but not the guest that
takes all the attention kind of useful
was around clothes from friends that
forgotten so material was a souvenir
with devotional quality but I wanted
understand the first thing that came to
mind was to use epoxy used for
high-performance airplanes it turned out
the structure of the sculpture was
exactly that a monocoque structure
monocoque structure is when the skin
takes the force like we have an
airliners and stuff so in terms of
sculpture it's a tradition as in clay
knots abstraction as a marble and it's
also not a mannequin as a figurative
sculpture but sort of yeah I kind of
felt like the abstraction of fashion to
kompis clothes making the body itself
somehow autonomous clothes and it was
good theater clothes fail to perform
when worn
I think fashion is important I get in
theater and ask the you know
[Music]
[Applause]
yeah the question of painting that's a
painting portrait of my girlfriend
syriza and I don't know if I would call
myself a painter know it yet the whole
thing like this show at y'all kind of
also I was yeah I kind of felt like a
painting and really like an installation
or something and I we liked about
imagine imagine a the medieval times
when sort of the same word was used for
sculpture or or unpainted so I did a
call myself a painter and talked about
concepts of painting or a conceptual
thinker and then I think like a painter
there's no way there's no way around
painting I think it's the most luxurious
median anything that's not really about
something but miss if it's good it's
something and of course it was sort of
impossible to show paintings with
mattresses cristae kind of ate each
other so in the next show I wanted to
show painting but I also felt like
continuing just some
yeah like the mattresses and so kind of
going from the bedroom to the to the
kitchen yeah there's a table in this
attire it's got the same field and and
it sort of switched from from the
horizontal to the from horizontal to
vertical so basically I raised the level
from floor to table height which sort of
established a vertical more visceral
state of being let's go to the show
quickly yeah that was to show deadlines
like deadlines in heaven at college
barren heart and sewage yeah I felt kind
of embarrassed about the simplicity of
of now he's gonna do a table thing but
yeah when it somehow works so and with
every des about it as with all things
that are embarrassing at first when you
hit something inescapable it's quite
simple and probably some kind of
laziness that one thinks something is a
good idea or in this case a bad one if
it's easy if it's easy to realize it can
be even more embarrassing and then you
do it and you realize how much work it
is to arrange tables and the way they
should be I think that's much like
painting in a way well how I think of
painting the opening was like boarding
an airplane where we either sit beside
the person you'd like to but involuntary
rub your parts against somebody else's
I'm yeah these are some of the paintings
that were in the show
they're basically final prints on the
row cabinets and then paid to direct
them to propound vez with yeah paintings
basically I guess one always paints a
right from images but simply from photos
and it always ends up there so one might
as well just print something in canvas
since we did so it fits whatever
intended needs for great whatever
whatever one needs it isn't not about
the perhaps expression but more about
how in things to impress the ugly to
only have it on the screen it's just
like staring at a light bulb in order to
see the light at the end of the tunnel
and yeah it was kind of yeah like I yeah
why not just use it
um so this was the show was there's
another painting titled of course while
the bad fat Panda isn't we have been
reading horse
and this was a fridge and mine a fridge
and mind in Malta I'm just gonna read
the sort of the invitation text I wrote
[Music]
the fridge is an institution even more
so than buildings and people the
fireplace of most lives primarily spent
inside with Sablan Leibler plunder fried
as a basis of negotiating on states of
being real it functions like real
estates holding a steady cold climate to
have some Robin basic needs by using
energy and producing heat in exchange
opening opening it to see what is
missing is like saying hi to the
personnel at the counter of a museum or
a gallery where the lights are not yet
on it stands for the body as I as its it
stands for the body's architecture
stands for people painting is the minds
the economy behind some desired
congruence of being the material
pretending to mean something totally
other than it is preceding language like
the third eye appearing his flank when
one meditates too hard
so this walk through the galleries about
quarter quite the frigid sort of took up
the central space and it was like a half
yeah half a meter between the paintings
and the fridges or my good walk through
that's a little painting it's basically
will wall paints with diamond dust
[Applause]
kind of like you're staring at the blank
canvas and then it starts to Sparkle
[Music]
this is a portrait titled the third eye
some other litter is it flowers it's a
friend of my daughter usually get some
hiking in the mountains and takes flower
pictures and have all his he always
sends me the flowers and then
yeah this is my this much researcher
titled long stories at young cops and
cologne again and it was like yeah I
thought of in the previous shows the
paintings were obstructed for different
reasons like for whatever and then in
this one I had some old sofas installed
sort of central facing the paintings
[Music]
yeah
at Ziggy pop and and to the right
there's the title is Libra flings a tiny
silver lon
dear hope please don't be so lost cause
titled Finan and these were sort of the
artists from old sofas from from ebay
from the city
[Music]
that's sort of the last image I'm gonna
show
it's that's a sculpture first shown with
the Swiss Institute in Belgrade that a
group exhibition fade-in and title is
Heiner Midler it's yeah the dragon
sculpture out of scrap metal that spits
fire and hisses water yeah just
photographs again for record cover no
yeah
you should start with sure huh yeah I
think I asked you this morning what in
God's name is this about and you said
this is about painting writing is what
you said yeah now could you talk about
that because that's an interesting
tension to me to paint writing it
reminds me of that Benjamin said that
every work of art in the end ultimately
as far as the condition of shift of
hieroglyphs of writing and I think
there's something there do you do do you
think so do you agree with that idea
yeah yeah I think I mean
[Music]
maybe there's like a say what super why
did not know what it's not about I think
it's not so much about like the gesture
of the hand or like this whole but but
actually how do you know sort of right
and then yeah I can have been in a big
way or have been the broader sense
mm-hmm
even like writing as expression no not
necessarily but but like how to how to
get something right when you when you
like to talk like this and you have you
how do you say something or how do you
pin it down with so it's like the right
overtones and all and and I think that
yeah yeah I think it's easier to kind of
for me to talk about it the musical
times I think it's more kind of how like
riding or a writing style which I think
it's analog to if you firming it in a
content way but yeah to kind of find the
right time when I guess mm-hmm
so and you mentioned there were two
things that you mentioned in your talk
there reminded me of music in particular
the obvious one is the iconography of
which is then very stylized like a
poster as well of Iggy Pop and so you
have this almost pop icon of Iggy Pop
and then he has this almost weird kind
of rainbow hair or support yeah and this
kind of tension between the abstraction
the figuration or what I would call the
stylization reminded me of a Peter Max
poster of David
of Bob Dylan which had this kind of hair
and so you're playing with these
different levels of vernacular posters
of photographs and of and of painting
though there's these different levels
going on and then you say the way it's
like music so I mean you got everything
going on in one spare or one rich image
and I think that's very enigmatic
because everything's packed together and
it didn't you need to unpack it for
instance the glitter when you start
talking about the glitter which you
didn't do so much today and I said oh my
god the glitter paintings remind me of
this silver and the glitter paintings of
Andy Warhol you said yeah absolutely but
that's not what it's about and yet it's
also about that so I don't want to
accuse you of being an art historical
artist but in a funny way you come
around the corner you get to the back of
something and then you rediscover that
kind of technique and it's new again and
I think that's really really interesting
so for instance I can't say that you're
an installation artist because every
time I try to do that you say no I'm a
painter and then you said the emoji a
because the emoji a in medieval times if
you looked at the medieval documents for
the bow hook for the Cathedral
workshops the sculptors were called
images emoji but the painters were also
called emoji a so what you made was an
image whether it was flat or whether it
had relief or three dimensions it was
just an image and that's what I think in
a funny way you're doing you're not a
painter only and you're not an
installation artist but you're dealing
with all dimensions of the image it does
that fair yeah baby I don't know yeah oh
is this a crazy critic trying to throw
you I don't know I think it yeah that's
it it's simple I mean yeah it's kind of
the material it's like yeah this Andy
Warhol thing I mean of course if you
want to sparkles I got this restoration
guy in Zurich that that rescue restores
like the Warhol's shoe series and stuff
and he sort of had the same glitter of
course that works the best but but yeah
that's the point but also no I don't
know
maybe it's just a way of how to talk
about something and you know I don't
know I don't know why but maybe also not
to fall into into those categories yeah
no I mean I like categories but but nah
not in order to kind of know know what
to do or sort of what to do next but I I
also noticed that whether it's because
of the conditions of display and least
aesthetic conditions of of a gallery
curating you have a certain amount of
space but it reminded me of the the the
lower threshold is architectural is
spatial when you see those damn
mattresses or those tables yeah or or
the fridges there's a measurement of
space going on and there's an obstacle a
physical obstacle so there's an abstract
measurement of space they fit in and a
certain amount of space and they only
enable a certain amount of navigation
for the spectator just so it's like very
difficult but that's the lower threshold
whether it's vertical or horizontal who
is the upper threshold which is the more
Geist is the word is that writing is the
thought and that's one way I could
navigate this terrain I think and what I
found so strange and so interesting is
that the word takes many different forms
and you got a little irritated and
correctly irritated and I thought of
Raymond Pettit on not because of drawing
versus the word because of the
the titles in your work yeah the title
is at war or in tension with the image
and yet it gives away that somehow the
truth content of the image for instance
the night that has lost his sword yeah -
I said and now I've suddenly lost my
sword short and there's no sword
and he's standing there with just like
the Lacanian you know castration yeah
but there's a medieval the Eamon yeah
you know suddenly lost his sword and
then I thought of Raymond Pettibon
because he almost always has a
philosophical topic on TNT or
Nietzschean or Schopenhauer so crazy and
then there's some skateboarder kid or
then there's some you know 1940s
criminal underworld figure or there's a
sex club or something and then they have
this philosophical title and so this
tension between the title and the image
is what made in random Raymond Pettibon
made me think yeah all these which is
you called the one-liner yeah but that
tension of friction between the word and
the image is part of the game that our
display with their titles even when they
say untitled yeah I don't know that's or
do you think I'm over no I think Rosen
is really from generation and I love his
work
who found but for them yeah I guess it
goes into that direction enough yeah
like what's the question the question it
was a series of associations where I was
getting at the prom I was trying to
circle around like an Open Sesame
there's an ending mark and the enigma is
the is the paradox that I said at the
beginning between the materiality and
the Geist
yeah well that's matter and Geist yeah
and and I said the lower threshold is
architectural Johanna CAA we're here at
the architecture and the upper threshold
could be any intellectual content but
you play between those two that's the
way I see it work right so do you think
that's a crazy way of looking at it no
of course not but it's like yeah it's a
bit like to be that's all kind of not
remedy well but more or less like these
that's that's what I mean by material
and one of my favorite essays is by a
Heiner Muller or in this writing you
always refers to
he always really refers to it - they
often thought to Montreal and I think
it's so good because it just goes to his
village and hangs out and basically the
whole thing becomes material like the
language the people and so on and if -
about meaning something which comes to a
stop
yeah no more like a stay yeah that's
really just a salt well after that
matrix when you when you when you were
being in the material basically like you
stay it's like for a certain time period
like for example my hospitality and long
yeah stay hot away yeah you stay there
so yeah I guess that's sort of yeah yeah
so it's like a voyage through a certain
no really Tyrael just out there and
using it I think and I think that's also
like to image wise that's I mean that's
obvious I mean Paul had to go around and
like take pictures and develop them and
then or fight them in books and whatever
and I mean his he then sort of imitated
like the dots in a way and I kind of
yeah
the terms of painting like this
indexicality of material and where does
it where it comes from the faces of that
Evan a friend super fan really sitting
and but also as like this whole historic
quality that's that's always within
every work like takes like savings from
from the past or realities that every
works the more you already use them so
it's kind of unconscious of civilization
yeah yeah and also like the terms of
photography I think it's like the
history of photography to me is more or
less just an industrial history of
fixation because like the lens the lens
was used I don't know about the Romans
yes it's like it's such a simple thing
that to sort of continue so it's also
something yeah like if we talk for a
patron or making images like yeah
whatever whatever it's the stare I use
it and I'm just not so much into how do
you say like fetishizing that I you know
like well the special because I use like
I used this tool or use this technology
I get it but yeah in the end its
it's there and you use it sometimes I
feel when I scratched the surface of
what you're doing and stop painting
versus architecture or sculpture versus
painting but in the end you get to
theater because you you come back again
- for instance when you talked about the
the guy stood there you know the body is
the clothing yeah and then you put them
in the you like this idea of the if you
go back to the beginning can we get to
the image we're showing the you know the
like the reference to the nude
descending the staircase is a spiral
stair played the Duchamp if you remember
in the other we'd been hard yeah
now the reason part but let's solving
this out is the Eric allottee yeah no I
think theater is super fine and really
interesting at the moment in terms of
performance and theater sort of to
distinguish that I'll see you mean a
distinguish between the two
yeah because too many people nowadays
say that our performances oh it's always
it's just also maybe kind of really meta
level in the ethical way I don't know
like friends at McKinsey they their
performance get mash it gets measured
and I think like it's really political
is good theater so I don't know I think
there's some power there the side it's
weird but there's something like that
what brands don't know hina moolah
no no no I don't mean that I just mean
false in terms of painting I think the
theater with the painting or in the
painting I find much more much more
interesting and then then like the
performance of painting or yeah like
this yeah this whole discussion if maybe
it's also like yeah like the modernism
whatever it's always this performance
thing yes but but actually a fight the
theatricality as opposed to the perform
yeah somehow somehow heads be more now
what do you mean by the theatricality
versus the performance because I think
that's a very fertile pivot in your work
actually I think no I think not the
Chester of the painter will actually to
Chester that sort of gives it sense or
meaning I don't know you know like give
any classical paintings like which is
which is why when I when I showed you
the the paintings by in Orvieto it's you
know senior daily you you got very
excited because in fact those angels
that look like they were on skateboards
with there are clouds they're on clouds
and they look like the geister yeah and
it's Michelangelo's favorite painter but
yeah an economist was a tough-ass art I
was really tough he hated everybody he
hated Leonardo
no but the booth was even more not
really loved senior Ella and I showed
you the senior le yeah anyway again we
gotta go see the senior out I
gotta go see this thing does it look
like these angels on skateboards and
they look lower what I said even more
interesting about him
I think that as figures look they really
like to look like Tom of Finland or like
the outlines well also the very key
coming
also the dead when he did the the reason
the resurrection of the flesh the the
the skeletons which are pushing
themselves out of the it looks like the
eruption of Hawaii right now of Kilauea
these holes in the earth and these
skeletons are coming in flesh is
starting to come on to their their their
body and it's unbelievable and then I
was thinking of the geister because they
are their own their flesh is their
clothing because of the monocoque a
thing that you were talking about it's
at the day do you remember your talk
about the opposite yeah that's more
that's what I like about fashion its
kind of this this want to be something
and yes and no and I think also for it
with senior Ally like the skeletons like
everything is fake about them yes
art is right and I think that's that's
maybe that's what I mean by theater
there's still skeletons and they still
appear like that but they yeah they kind
of say they function on it on in a
different way now even if I wanted to be
categorical in an old fart and mean and
stupid and horrible I would say you're a
radical traditionalist because every
time I talk to you in the end is
painting its the Albertine historia it's
the movement of the story through the
painting
and it's the primacy of painting as a
kind of figuration of human gesture I
mean it's like reading a beef on board I
mean it's like the pathos formula this
is Renier the Varberg Institute it's
really a radical rereading of something
that in the 17th and 18th century was
the academic high point of art theory
which was painting was the highest art
form and sculpture was beneath it and
there was a hierarchy of paintings and
you have all of them you have landscape
you have the fig portrait you have the
only thing you're missing is the battle
scene although you could have that too
and then you have the abstraction which
is like the heroic modernist system so I
really think you're coming around back
at tradition yeah anyway I could go on
and on like this I don't want to snow
snow you with this stuff I'm just saying
I found that very interesting that in
the end you really are a painter thank
you
