thank you so much thank you Manisha
that's really generous introduction and
for the invitation to be here tonight
it's really great to be here at the AAA
and thank you to all of you for coming
friends colleagues and yeah others for
attending so this lecture raises a very
important topic of new canonical
histories following on from the topic I
decided to use this opportunity to talk
about pedagogy and teaching in
particular rather than my own academic
research with the recognition and
understanding of teaching as both a form
of practice and research yet the life of
its own so I'd like to start with a
question that I think underpins the work
that I do in more general terms in
teaching and in research which is to
question what it means to engage with
the Canon of the architect architecture
architectural and related to this to
question what it means to think with and
through entanglement and I planned today
to discuss this these questions which
we're which um predates this this
invitation really by discussing three
courses that I've been developing and
working on over the course of the last
year and a half between London and South
Africa the first that I will talk to you
is a third year dissertation seminar
series that I taught at the Bartlett
School of Architecture entangled spaces
the second an open-access curriculum
titled race space in architecture which
are developed with Suzanne hall it's
great to see her here today at the LSE
and the third and most recent and
emerging history and theory courses
course at the GSA titles methods fields
and Archives and while I will talk about
these as distinct and throughout some of
the particularity and in many ways they
are distinct as you will see they are
also related in very particular ways so
this presentation will reflect on some
of the underpinnings to them that begin
with the premise that decolonization is
not a metaphor with reference to Eve
tuck and Kaye Wayne Yang's 2012 paper of
the same name instead it is
and should be profoundly unsettling
these curricula are to disrupt and
actively unsettle categorizations of the
architectural canon through multiple
forms and modes of engagement they
question where we find architectural
knowledge and what we understand as
architectural truths along with the
structures systems and institutional
underpinnings which produce and
reproduce these knowledge systems in
reflecting on these curriculum and the
entangled worlds they speak to these
courses talk to the centrality of
displacement and associated spaces of
Refuge they point to a recognition and
productive engagement with entanglements
and multiplicities an understanding of
race making and space making as
foundational to modernity more generally
and intimately present within
architecture whether spoken or not and
third a conscious and ongoing
questioning of the boundaries between
methods fields and archives asking what
it means to talk of these from the
margins in particular when I refer to
the concept of displacement and refuge I
talk both to the actual material that in
these courses we look at discuss and
read together and the ones I've taught
and to the wider context of displacing
the process of curriculum development
from an individual and internal process
to a form of workshop public engagement
exhibition conference and conversation
from academia to activism from the
seminar room to the street quite
literally in some cases and to the
Associated construction of a space of
Refuge of a space to have safe
conversations sometimes difficult a
space of shelter for questioning the
Canon with a full understanding and
recognition that neither shelter no
refuge are metaphors so the first course
entangled architectures from 2017 to
2019 in the UK academic calendar I was
teaching a seminar series at the butler
titled entangle spaces this is an
elective six-week course seminar course
followed by an independent research
project developed by final
undergraduate architecture students and
it runs from September to March roughly
the general somatic for the course
emerged out of my own PhD research which
I completed at 2018 at the Bartlett and
which looked at a series of migrant
markets pan-african markets in Cape Town
as spaces of Refuge these are markets
established and run by run and
maintained by migrants asylum seekers
and refugees in post apartheid South
Africa in the context of an ongoing
racialization of space and racialized
politics of urban citizenship the
emphasis in my thesis was placed on the
everyday marginal and subaltern as
central and through the course of my
research it became increasingly evident
that despite these being localized and
imbricated in located spatial politics
these markets were also intimately
connected to places elsewhere in the
case of one set of markets known as
Somali malls notably Nairobi and
Minneapolis and while my PhD focused on
South Africa and Cape Town in particular
these markets spoke to wider and longer
matrilineal networks of crossing borders
and negotiating citizenships and
multiple engagements with nationalism
post PhD research took me to some of
these related sites and I've showed two
photographs here the similarity and
closeness of these despite the vastly
different geographies were striking
these entangled and transnational spaces
began to open up the possibility for a
critique a shifting of views and
conceptual frameworks for looking
producing an alternative kind of
discourse certainly in the context of I
would say a place like South Africa but
I think more generally we develop mental
frameworks for looking at the global
South dominate and where informality is
largely understood as often only
small-scale localized and survivalist
within a needs-based discourse my
research questions these dichotomies
between the global South and North the
epistemic framings of area studies
and how these frameworks operate as
dominant ways of seeing among others my
PhD adopted a multiscale approach to
looking at these markets from that of
transnational and global displacements
to the intimate scale of the small
spaces within particular shops and I
argued that these shopping arcades as a
whole and the small shops were then are
central to constituting an alternative
sense of home in the context of forced
displacement they offer a kind of home
place that exists at the ambivalent
border between processes of home making
and unmaking and following bell hooks
suggest points to the margins and
marginal as a site of radical potential
as Gloria Vecchio suggests the concept
of the cultural archive is intimately
related to Imperial history and deeply
implicated with a racial construction of
the world therefore in looking to
architecture with a capital aim as
objects whether in as only objects we
should say whether in pedagogy colonial
or post-colonial archive European Europe
remains at the center and how could it
not my PhD research deliberately looks
beyond the architectural archive to
question the categorizations and assume
definitions of spatial topologies often
taken for granted working across scales
and across sites talking to an
entanglement of these markets of stories
that circulate of goods that travel
similar paths and of people who
facilitate and enable these movements so
to be very clear my research has not
suggest that these markets form a
particular spatial type as related to
ethnic or cultural identities rather I
suggested points to broader
socio-political factors that influence
these spaces along with the recognition
that many are not formed out of choice
that they're rendered that they are
often rendered informal taking on an
onion raw as critique of informality and
I suggest that the spatial organization
is therefore as much about particular
spatial practices which influence them
as it is about this
status as of the populations who inhabit
these as migrant or refugee groups
having been displaced and their
associated subordinate Oh marginal
position within the urban contexts my
research simultaneously both claims and
rejects the category of architecture so
when I did not teach my PhD my research
and theoretical approach fit into the
seminar series at the Bartlett and in
the first year of running this course it
focused on migration refuge and
displacement with the forced migrant as
the central subject in the second year
and what I'm going to talk about
entanglement was the starting point
we understood entanglement as a
condition of being entwined or twisted
together speaking of a spatial intimacy
across vast geographies in thinking with
Edward lease and entanglement talks to a
seminal taneous recognition that while
some ability is a choice at other times
the ensnaring and overlapping of worlds
might be resisted resistant ignored
uninvited and unchosen where these
boundaries are changing ambiguous and
often unclear for the first seminar on
arriving and departing we read glistened
and Hannah Arendt Glassons open boat set
the tone for recognition of
multiplicities as a site of extreme
violence and degradation but also
open-ended possibility and the potential
for radical remaking the idea Hartman's
reading of the Caribbean suggests with a
gendered reading along with a ret
gendered reading of the belly of the
world keeping these multiple framings in
hand at the same time with a marginal
figure framed our initial conversation
and entry into the seminar series it
would say it reminded us in literal in
relation to literature that to read Jane
Austen without also reading France for
none and America Bravo is to dissociate
modern culture from its engagements and
attachments
each of the following seminar series
takes as a starting point a distinct
scale and seemingly special stable
spatial typology along with different
visual forms and media in the form of
drawings graphic novels literature
photography and film and for me this is
really key to thinking about this course
as an architectural course in looking at
the cultural production rather than
assuming they don't exist each session
was deliberately multidisciplinary and
brought together different geographies
where the conversations aimed at using
these contrasts as a productive
difference to actively disrupt unsettle
and challenge ourselves to question how
our own special thinking is informed by
multiplicities of displacements of
people places ideas and temporalities so
we read together
Arendt passant Sara Ahmed a Mary Douglas
bell hooks Karen Berman among others we
looked at apartheid South Africa the
developed the development of Buenos
Aires as a white City 1920s Japan 1950s
Japanese internment camps in California
and that's what we see here
Lagos Jordan London Cairo and Hong Kong
and importantly while we were covering
these different geographies we were not
looking at these as abstractions but in
details for their specificity in the
process of these for our seminars we had
critical conversations on area studies
transnational architectural networks
everyday architectures ethics and design
power relations embedded within space
and the archive and informality as well
as a tactic and a tool there were no
distinct weeks on race and gender
instead they were brought into the wider
discussions yet race was centered with
the basis of understanding that
coloniality and modernity occur produced
and reproduced through hierarchies of
gendered racial capitalism we had some
difficult sometimes uncomfortable and
often confrontational discussions the
students challenged each other
and in choosing and yet perhaps in
choosing their own dissertation topics
all of the students took on this
conceptual framework and it's perhaps
worth noting that they don't have to
using the concept of entangled spaces in
temporal spatial and geographic terms
and I very briefly want to introduce
four examples of student work as
examples from 29 from yet last year
these were excellent works and there
were many others so two of the students
in the group looked at home making
practices through the figure of the
Filipino domestic migrant worker both
coming to the topic from personal
experiences the one having grown up in a
Filipino migrant home in the UK and the
second having me having been cared for
and essentially brought up by a Filipino
domestic worker in Hong Kong and both
coming to this topic viable hooks sarah
made and Mary Douglas Patricia Costello
and whose work shown here started with
the concept of the by Ani understood as
a person of extraordinary courage talent
who did something noble her dissertation
explored how the modern by Ani is the
often the female migrant laborer tied
into global networks of racialized
migrant labor her work throughout her
making practices for Filipinos in the UK
and the manner in which these two spaces
Philippines and the UK are inhabited
concurrently as here and there through a
particular Geographic imagination
material practices of home shrines
remittance houses community gatherings
phones and food practices
Emily Mack the second student also
started with an autobiographical
interest she looked into the home making
practices of the large filipino domestic
migrant labor population in hong kong
having grown up in a home where she was
largely cared for by a series of
filipino nannies she came to the topic
through the seminar series and
reflecting on her experience of growing
up in this
context and as she said having never
really thought about this person her
research was structured around a series
of temporal frames each beginning with
an autobiographical part fictional
narrative as a way of confronting her
own positionality the sat alongside
interviews conversations drawings and a
study of the legal frameworks in Hong
Kong that construct a particular kind of
gendered racialized and ssize
domesticity both within apartments and
in the way public space is inhabited in
the city
Jade rebus goody wrote a dissertation as
both an account of research and trance
infrastructures of Kay in Belem for
migrants and as a handbook exploring
this particular method for studying
trance practices of home-and-away
drawing and Sara Ahmed's writings queer
phenomenology and the idea of the body
as home and home as body as leaky
intersectional spaces this camp came
across in both the writing and in the
multiple registers and through a
practice of overwriting in the
dissertation that spoke to the concept
of entanglement through actively
questioning the practice of research and
what it means to design research methods
for difference
unfortunately these images don't do
justice to the care and craft put into
the making of this product and Jed went
on to develop an activist practice and
series of public dialogues on questions
of curricular change at UCL last year
and I think now elsewhere and the last
project I'll very briefly talk about is
Joshua Richardson's who looked into the
racialized representation of informality
in full focusing on Blade Runner this
dissertation moved from the film screen
as a site which reproduces reinforces
and constructs an association of
informality with particular materiality
of corrugated iron and plastic and a
racialized and gendered body to the city
of Los Angeles itself and the historic
construction of the Asian as other
through Little Tokyo in particular
in developing the research project the
conclusion was part written and part
filmic a filmic exploration of a
primarily Caribbean Street Market in
London as a way of talking to how film
as a medium could be used in alternative
and possibly complementary ways there
were many others these were all
experimental and creative and all of
these challenge the typical format of a
history and theory dissertation through
drawing filmmaking and inclusion of
fictional narrative among other
techniques these are indeed examples of
practice they engaged with and
questioned the architectural archive
spatial typology and assumed dichotomies
they were located and reflective pieces
that spoke to the positionality of the
author and the specificity of the
context they were researching working
against what this idea Hartman refers to
as a violence of abstraction so central
to this course was that architecture as
a discipline is not only the site of
particular buildings defined by famous
architects but rather constituted of a
wider landscape landscape including
drawing writing filmic and urban
cultures both produced by architects as
well as other cultural pollution
producers another initiative that kind
of happened at the same time beyond the
actual seminar so I was concurrently an
organizer for involved in organizing an
exhibition and conference with Eric cuts
and Giovanna Asafa and Ella Kok titled
infrastructures of care which opened at
the Bartlett on the first of February so
about a year ago and this event in many
ways mirrored some of the conversations
we were having in the classroom in a
different format it was an event which
brought together academics activists NGO
workers special practitioners and
students on questions related to
infrastructures of care related to
forced migration among other issues the
exhibition in particular questioned the
ethics of aesthetics how to talk about
forced displacement without violating
and dehumanizing the bodies of those
displaced
without a set-aside something that is
not ascetic the exhibition was curated
and what participants brought to the
table clothes careful readings deep
engagements collaborative works and an
understanding of infrastructure as
physical social human and intellectual
and I mentioned these projects together
because in many ways the conversations
were where they were happening at the
same time and the second project that I
will talk to is moving towards an open
access curriculum on race space and
architecture from October 2018 to April
2019 I was working with Suzanne Hall the
co-director of the cities program at the
London School of Economics on developing
a curriculum focused on race space and
architecture this curriculum emerged out
of a series of longer conversations and
readings a work initially focused on
racialized migration a topic central to
both of our individual research
interests and we began the year by a
revisiting of the black radical
tradition post-colonial anti-colonial
Theory rereading MS as their Frantz
Fanon edward lee sant
sedia hartmann katherine McKittrick and
others along with newer writings notably
Guardi Bhattacharya is rethinking racial
capitalism and brain abundance colonial
lives of property among others beyond
the readings are conversations engaged
the wider political economy of higher
education and epistemic violence and
injustice is embedded in reading lists
courses access access to tenure and
permanent jobs with questions of how
institutions will produce particular
values who get cited who and what is
considered legitimate or not then this
led to our decision to ask what a
curriculum on race space and
architecture would look like with
architecture and the design world as a
key reference point to question how
these how a curriculum such as this
might begin to unsettle
coloniality of race violence in place
beyond our initial informal
conversations or conversations among
this curriculum was informed by formal
and other informal conversations we
followed a course on critical race
Theory led by Sarah sell em at the LSE
we met with smaller groups of Urbanists
architects critical race theory and
geographers from around London and we
organized two public platforms the first
a workshop will be presented an initial
draft of the curriculum alongside Andy
Lowe Hansen from breakline who brought
in specific questions related to race
her own design research and the Bartlett
as an institutional space and the second
focused primarily on London with various
groups of artists and academics these
were central to our thinking process and
a reminder that the implications of race
making and space making racial ordering
and displacement are widely felt lived
in and resisted both within and beyond
the Academy and it was not a suggestion
that all scholarship should be public
but rather an assertion and recognition
that certain publics are often excluded
from scholarly spaces institutions and
debates the curriculum engages with
three quick key questions what are the
spatial contours of capitalism that
produce racial hierarchies and injustice
what are the inventive repertoires of
refusal resistance and remaking that are
neither reduced to nor exhausted by
racial capitalism and how are they
specialized and how is race configured
differently across space
how can a more expansive understanding
of entangled world space broaden our
imagination for teaching and learning
the curriculum is conceptually framed
around six spatial processes of racial
ordering that are both spatial and
material with the understanding that
race is constructed in and through
architecture through spatial processes
of production and reproduction that
extend beyond the object so okay so
these are the six processes centralizing
circulating domesticating extracting
immobilizing and incarcerated within
each this is one example centralizing so
as an example within each frame we
collect a range of references in the
form of images drawings and text some of
these sources and inspirations come from
the discipline of architecture many do
not this is an important part of
unsettling the Disciplinary conventions
of what architecture is how it can be
taught and how architectures on the
ground impacts and future possibilities
can be understood each section also
includes links to related projects
activist groups and different ways of
imagining human connection and
disconnection a collage of reference
points drawn from different geographies
the inclusion of visual graphic filmic
material was central to how these
processes are understood and represented
for us this is an explicit drawing out
of the materials that we use to talk
about and think through and think with
in design disciplines this curriculum
recognizes a lineage of racialized
hierarchies endemic to capitalist
systems and cultural life that extend
from Colona colonialism to coloniality
slavery to incarceration liberalism to
subordination and sovereignty to
populism it's important to note that we
recognize that while race operates at
the level of the subjects it is also
decisively operating at the level of
structures which define the raised body
as constitutively outside following
christina sharp and we recognize
following brain abandon that the
colonial encounter produced a racial
regime of ownership that persists into
the present creating a conceptual
apparatus in which private property
ownership globally remains bound to a
concept of the human that is thoroughly
racial in its makeup and that these laws
of property associated language ways of
seeing and modes of subjectivity render
indigenized and colonized populations as
outside of history as but acharya
suggests bringing in the analysis of
race to the conversation of capitalism
points to practices of expropriation
beyond and addition and in addition to
exploitation where expropriation
involves accumulation and the relegation
of groups has edged populations of
particular groups race groups so we
question both the subject of race and
the subject of architecture how
individuals are rendered as laborer
domestic worker or immigrant in legal
and cultural terms and how the
architectures of the camp compound
detention center solidify the gendered
symbolic and lived forms of these
positions yet importantly we also
recognize that within around and beyond
the structures of racial capital is the
substance of transgression
we look to places of solidarity for
social justice our galvanized through
the space in the convening powers of the
margins and in the arrangement of
material and practices that together
stake a location from which to speak the
places from which different circuits of
connection processes of validation an
alternative ways of inhabiting the world
are established and I'm thinking in
particular of two texts that are
included in this curriculum of Nadia
Alice's writing on dancehall and bounce
in to post plantation societies in New
Orleans and Kingston in the section
circulating along with habibur bedrooms
archival excavations on slave kitchens
and cooks known for black magic or ghoul
in 17th century Cape Town these are two
examples which talk about particular
spatial topologies and places along with
how they operate i inhabited and
embodied drawing on archival indexing
and research from fields including music
studies literature slave records the
community cookbooks and sometimes
architecture historical material often
understood beyond the limits of
architecture and its Constitution's of
history catherine McKittrick tools are
the paradoxes of race in relation to
modernity as raced as a race subject
being simultaneously central unspoken
fully present and disavowed instead she
posits a recognition of the difficult
entanglement and violent intimacy's and
the rhythm and a reminder that the
brutalities of racial violence are not
descriptively rehearsed but always
already demand practical activities of
resistance and encounter and anti
colonial thinking so in thinking about
the political economy of higher
education it was very important to us
that this curriculum is open access
recognizing that access to books
articles and journals is often limited
by pay walls and in June 2019 we
completed the first phase which is
downloadable so you can download this
document
and I'm very excited to be working
further with both tangelo hansen and
susie hall on the next phase expanding
and building this across institutions
okay so the final course that i will
talk about is the most recent in april
2019
I cook on a position at the Graduate
School of Architecture University of
Johannesburg as the convener of history
and theory the GSA is committed to the
project of transformative pedagogy's
established by Professor Leslie Lacombe
the previous speaker on this very same
lecture series the school was started
the year of the Rhodes must fall fees
must fall protests and in the past few
years student design work has responded
to a call for alternative spatial
imaginaries which reverberate across
scales from the intimate present to the
urban national continental and planetary
yet while the gsa has certainly made its
mark in terms of design teaching and
design research in South Africa and from
South Africa history and theory has been
a difficult terrain Tunica to negotiate
for many for many of the reasons
previously mentioned much of the
existing research on modern and
post-independence architecture on the
African continent focuses on the role of
the expat of settler colonial architect
yet very rarely do hear what in
particular Africa had to offer beyond at
times ornament supplied and some vague
traditional references which may or may
not have been African in the first place
or in the centralizing and reductive
approach that often epistemologically
Marez colonial frameworks in taking on
the role of setting up this history and
theory program important to me and to
the school was to extend the ways of
thinking through architectural knowledge
production that enable a critical
reading of discourses a depth of
engagement and a speculative approach to
crafting and writing both sipar
than the future so here I also have a
set of three questions the first of two
courses that I've been developing is
titled methods fields and archives it's
both an introduction to histories and
theories of architectural methodologies
and questions and develops a critique on
how we can read architecture key themes
include race gender migration and the D
of post-colonial imaginary and it starts
with these kind of three key questions
what does it mean to engage or the
transformative pedagogy in relation to
the history theory and criticism of
architecture how do we talk about
worldly global and cross-cultural
architectural knowledge without
essentializing exotic sizing and
orientalizing the other or ourselves and
particularly important for me in the
South African context and in a design
school it's the question how we talk
about the politics of architecture and
knowledge production without reducing
architecture to politics the course
consists of five thematic seminars each
focused on a particular medium or method
of architectural knowledge which I
loosely referred to as texts these
extend for more conventional
architectural history and theory
articles two manifestos fiction film
exhibitions and oral histories across
time and across geographies each of the
five seminars draws on a range of
material designed crafted and spatial
yet not necessarily canonical and not
necessarily from the architectural
discipline yet I would suggest
distinctly architectural students
interact with these materials through
close readings and associated tasks
along with a research essay all of which
ask them to engage with the medium
directly to experiment and to understand
the essay as a process of working
through working out and thinking through
so these are some of the examples of
this of their weekly tasks that the
student do students do which forms a
kind of history and theory portfolio and
which sits alongside their research
essay the students took on the challenge
each of these is themed depending on
what we look at so this one refers to
the week looking at ethnography the
students took on the challenge
responding with evocative and thoughtful
provocations they took on the invitation
to think collaboratively responding
visual both visually and through writing
with the results in portfolio that
created a space that enable the
expression of different strengths and
voices and I've included just a few
samples of student work which was
attended to the violence's of history
along with moments of transgression
protest and possibility in and through
fields such as ethnography
anthropological material craft phone
political manifestos so this is one of
the manifestos written by student Gloria
per Vita and fiction
we started this course with the premise
that there are histories of architecture
beyond the canonical and that they do
speak our task is to question how where
when and what this might mean for an
architectural culture of knowledge
production that speaks from our location
but not only to our location this is a
collaborative mapping that the students
did in November 2019 of their own work
as a as a group which they turned into a
zine this current history in theory
course has its own set of entanglements
and ways forward that GSA reading group
which takes on feminist queer and
decolonial theory open to all with the
reading sessions led by two two tutors
and students and we use this initiative
to build a collective for biography and
create a space for open-ended
conversations working and thinking
through together and creating a space or
claiming a space really to sit in the
room with history following sharp and a
series of conversation rooms started in
2019 and through what was the previously
the history and theory colloquium so to
draw this to a conclusion these three
strands of courses which have been
working on over the last year and a half
form part of an ongoing project to
question architectural knowledge
production and the Canon of the
architect architecture architectural
through the framework of entanglement a
recognition of racial capitalism and a
rethinking of methods fields and
archives and their attendant epistemic
underpinnings at the very core of all of
these is that the Constitution's of race
gender coloniality as they are produced
and reproduced and knowledge are not
arbitrary or incidental but are in fact
produced and reproduced in institutions
so indeed it was the theme of the
institutional imaginary which we took on
for the colloquium and which is
currently framing how we are
taking forward this question at the GSA
and I say we as while I'm running the
history and theme program this is an
intensive intensely collaborative
endeavor which would not be possible
without the community of students design
teaching staff interested interested
practitioners and colleagues and friends
both locally and globally many of whom
are here today Sarah I am it reminds us
that while institutions have become
associated with an established order and
assume stability what is often
overlooked is the instituting aspect of
that which is instituted she asks us to
think of institutions as both verbs and
nouns to recognize the processes labor
and work which goes into
institutionality to attend to how
institutional realities become given
without assuming what is given by this
given they are collective endeavors
involving all of those who do the work
to establish maintain and actively
produce the physical and intellectual
space on a daily basis so in the place
of the annual what would have been a
history and theory colloquium this past
year together with colleagues from
counter space at hamsa Meir Valley who's
here today and zeroD de Villiers and in
conversations with breakline David
Roberts Tandy Lorenson and Miranda
Critchley we use the platform as a way
of focusing on the theme of
institutional imaginaries questioning
the central role institutions play in
the formation of architecture the
university being just one of these so as
I started I will end with a series of
questions that we some what we've been
talking about questioning the methods
means and media we can use to become
undisciplined architects how positioning
ourselves at the edge or margin might
offer alternative insights into
architecture streets cities and planets
and asking what kind of institutional
imaginary enables designing speculative
well walls drawing on the past for a
different future
one in the global North institutions are
often critiqued as being resistant to
change in the South they tend to be
discussed in relation to their betrayals
and failures so we took on this
vulnerability to suggest that it may
offer us the possibility to think
differently in the wake of this
fragility to raise the question of
architectural knowledge production
through multiple forms of engagement
across institutional framings and across
institutional politics and through a
choreography of the event space
following I've made again places are
shaped by the proximity of somebody's
and not others
this colloquium event conversation space
attempted to actively question and
disrupt relationality x' and while
recognizing the danger of domesticating
decolonization colonization I'd like to
end by returning to McKittrick to
recognize that thinking otherwise
demands attending to a whole new system
of knowledge we're in the brutalities of
racial violence are not descriptively
rehearsed but always already demand
practical activities of resistance
encounter and anti colonial thinking
thank you
I said that I think the brief of what we
set out to do in the series but it goes
a real long way into making what we want
that happen a reality I think to seeing
examples of student work responding to
the different courses that you've run
but also to the curriculum as a whole is
really exciting and I guess I'm curious
to hear more about phase two of the
curriculum you guys are developing
together with Suzanne and Sandi I don't
know how much we're meeting on Monday so
I think one of one of the key questions
we're really keen to I think take
forward yes speak for us is I'm so
firstly to actually make this open
access so we're building a website and
trying to collect as many
pre-publication versions of papers and
we've had amazing responses so far
people have been incredibly generous and
and yeah really great responses to the
curriculum in the project so that's I
think that's really important for us I'm
part of this is also thinking forward in
to building on this as a platform and I
think thinking about questions of what
it means to think specifically about
kind of speculative and alternative
futures and how that relates to design
projects or design thinking
[Music]
I just wanted to open it up to questions
if there's a question to some you know
bring the microphone to you
like okay this is a lot for me but one
thing I was always wondering it's like
how do you this this is incredibly
amazing to see as a person that has felt
marginalized institutionally but I've
always wondered how do you get people
who aggressively don't want to think
about race to engage with stuff because
honestly right speaking to me it's like
fine like I agree with you and we're all
very happy to do this but that's not
really I don't know yeah you know that's
a really great question and that's
actually something I was talking to many
Shay about just before this talk and I
think I mean I think it's a difficulty
but one of the ways that I've been the
one of the ways that I tried to do it is
to talk through the kinds of
specificities of the contexts or places
or things that I'm talking about and
part of that is also showing things like
student work so I've had I well so what
I was telling when I was talking to
Manisha about just before this talk is I
was just in Manchester and one of the
comments that I got featured Lee was
well we understand why I'm kind of
paraphrasing it we understand why you
might talk about race in your context
but what does this have to do with us
and I think that so I think that that's
a reality that you know we yeah we're
facing and I think one of the one of the
reasons that I started by talking about
the of course that I taught at the
Bartlett isn't a way to kind of frame
how these conversations are talked about
or can be talked about or are engaged
with and by various students across
geographies so it's not just a question
for South Africa or the American South
forum but it's something that can be
that can be discussed in the centre of
London and I think yeah that's that's
kind of one with responses it may be a
follow-up question is like I was I found
it really interesting that you've had
certain initiatives in the UK and in
initiatives in Suffern
so like I am assuming that people are a
bit more on the same page in South
Africa this the that's what's your
experience dealing with institutions
like from here in South Africa that's a
huge question I think so the challenges
are different and the questions are
different in the questions of how race
is and then this is also something that
I think we're thinking about in further
developing it is being really attuned to
the specific the specificities of the
context and the kinds of questions that
arise but I think that the question of
race and architecture in particular or
even the way that institutions function
to marginalize racialized bodies is
while they take on different forms in
these different contexts there are
surprising similarities across these
contexts and that's been one of the
amazing things about working with with
these colleagues in London and working
across the context is I think a kind of
awareness and thinking about what I what
I think of as a kind of global economy
of higher education or even though we're
position in very different ways
with very different daily realities
sometimes the kinds of issues are not
that dissimilar and
[Music]
thanks so much for sharing this really
thought-provoking body of experiences
and the work you've developed over the
past three years I guess my question
follows from the first question that was
asked could be potentially relate that
to the question of the cannon which I
guess is also in the title of the series
which is clinical histories right I'm
wondering how you I mean that kind of
began who came across in the in the
third body of work you kind of
introduced how does one approach the
cannon through this kind of work and not
so much to identify or define it but how
does one cope with it or does one
actually do that and I'm really asking
this because in the wonderful kind of
body of sources that you talked about we
didn't hear much architectural history
in theory and I know that that's there
and this is not a criticism I'm just
wondering because that's a problem that
I'm facing as well in my own work
actually and the question of course is
as you and I kind of I guess sort of
encountered when we worked together in
the running the first history in theory
right you know it's maybe one would kind
of come up and say oh it's something
else to do this on graduate level but
you know all students first-year
students want to you know read you know
the core busy etc right so how do you
actually kind of approach this this
problem really off of the Canon through
this work okay
so I think okay so I guess it's they're
sort of multiple ways of kind of I think
talking about responding to it my
position is that the Canon and the idea
of for example the first-year survey
course or the survey course to
architecture is deeply problematic for
multiple reasons and it's problematic
because it assumes and I think most of
us probably know this so we know these
these problems that I think you know one
of the things that I would say and this
is something that also came up in the
debate I was part of yesterday is that
for me one of the main reasons I find it
so problematic because it's actually is
the kind of a hysteresis city of it so
it's a historical so it presents a
particular version of history of an
architectural tradition as though it is
truth without really reflecting or
engaging with other kinds of issues and
debates and I think when we look at
other kinds of humanities disciplines
that first-year students are are
encouraged you are required to engage
with critical theory so why so for me
you know the question is you know why
should architecture students not when
other students can and what's the
fundamental difference and I think so I
think for me this is more a question of
how do we think about history what is
the kind of knowledge within history
that we're trying to that we want
students to get out of this rather than
a kind of select very selective very
specific of instances of history that
are put together into this kind of
packaged history as history of
architecture and I would and then I
would say the other part of it is that I
think this course that we've that we put
together I go I went back to this page
because I actually want to draw
attention to the very specific kinds of
spatial topologies that we're looking at
here and that we that I think we do draw
out in this course so we don't we don't
I don't think we frame it is directly
challenging the Canon or as a new
canonical approach but I actually do
think that there are ways of talking
about
race and architecture that talk about
these kinds of spaces of each of these
categories has a set of kind of very
specific spaces that we're talking about
whether there are the railways or
markets or borders or musicals or at the
suburban house to the hostel or the
ghetto but what it does is it asks it
asks the reader with a student or
engaging to engage with us into thinkin
C is not as these isolated examples
designed by an architect and not
situated in a wider history but rather
to think of the kinds of the ways that
it is situated in a bigger
socio-political history but still good
still architecture
just kind of following on what you were
saying earlier from I'm from again I'm
just interested to know similar to what
you were asking how is a different
lecturing in a with students who are
dealing with raw racial issues in South
Africa is it as raw here or like how
what's your in your experience of your
students and how they respond to what
you are talking through so in both in
teaching in London and in South Africa
have had incredible responses from
students and I think some of the work
that I discussed kind of it's time into
that time and the way students respond I
think so some of the particular
questions are quite different or how
they're engaged with and what is maybe
what is I think particularly notable in
South Africa is that in many ways the
kinds of the way that architectural
history is being taught so that is
actually still very canonical if I can
use that in South Africa in contrast to
a place like London we actually do see a
lot more diversity and what is
considered architecture and ways of
engaging with architecture and that has
meant I think that for students I mean
the GSA is an incredible space we have
this amazing body of students who are
really who choose to come there
specifically for what it offers in terms
of design teaching and are really hungry
for ways of thinking differently so
there has been a kind of yeah enthusiasm
and adoption of this course that was
really that I didn't expect I didn't
expect it well I didn't expect that the
way it was sort of engaged with and some
of the works and I've shown you you mean
the some of it was like for example
there's a mapping that they did which
was done after they submitted their
design work in their holidays as a kind
of you know working on this on the scene
on this publication
out of their own choice which I think
which is incredible to see that they
took the time to do that and to put in
their own energy and that's great thank
you so much for reading wonderful talk I
wanted to follow on from that thinking
about the Canon and ask a quick question
about evidence about our crimes about
how you work with available to us it was
so striking that Japanese internment
camp image that you showed early on how
kind of caught initially depicted the
American government had chosen to lay
out this you know space of violence I
wonder you know when so many of the
evidence that might point us towards the
actually experiences the people who
suffer racialized violence are lost or
never existed in the first place and
then also when colonial governments
destroyed the evidence of their own
mister misdoings a massive scale how to
use a historians and architectural
thinker like position yourself in those
flows of evidence and destruction and
and yet non-existence thank you thank
you that's a really good question and
probably you know part of the reason why
this last course is called methods
fields and archives so this is this is
actually part of a work done by Minato
Cooper who was Japanese
she was interned in the Japanese
internment camp but it was published as
part of a government published magazine
while she was in the camps so it's it's
got this quite interesting history where
it's yeah sort of dual history between
how it's drawn and where it's published
but also that it talks about this other
history and part of a bigger series of
work that she did also post being in the
camp
I think I made this comment about
suggesting that so I think there are
definitely ways of looking at archives
that are not maybe oh well let me
restart I think that with with history
whether an archive is fully formed or
not so whether we have a kind of
complete archive we have to recognize
that the archive is always selective and
it's always I kind of put together in a
particular way and so it might at times
be more difficult to find material so
for example I talked a bit about happy
but I mentioned very briefly hobby
barbarians work on slave histories and
Cape Town and that's a kind of very
difficult that archival evidence is
really archival traces because of the
particular histories and the kinds of
spaces but I think as her work points to
in as many others that they aren't it's
not that there are no archives or it's
not that there is no evidence it's a
matter of where you look for it and how
you look at it and what Evette
Christians are calls looking sideways in
the archive so sometimes the the very
absence of something or someone talks
tells us quite a lot about their
position in space and time and history
and then some and then sometimes it's
things like Philippa boyens work is
really interesting because she looks at
community cookbooks as a way of thinking
about and the kinds of stories that are
told about producing food which he
describes as a kind of embodied practice
where stories of slave histories are
told handed down their oral histories
they have different kinds of I think
they exist within different kinds of
knowledge frameworks but these are still
histories and these are still forms of
evidence that that enables someone like
her to write a history of these kitchens
so I think I I think it's much more
useful to think not about the things
that are missing but to think about
their presence and how we can find them
across varied terrain
for landscapes just thank you who'da
that was wonderful what I just want to
add is a bit of a commentary on
questioning the camera by questioning
the ways that you choose and you
encourage your students to conduct the
research I'm specifically talking about
drawings like this which we don't
usually see in you know history theory
I'm speaking from the point of view of a
studio tutor that you know it's used to
students drawing and exploring kind of
ideas via drawing diagramming but in
history theory it's not very common and
I know that features and it did feature
in your research and that was kind of
quite a deliberate decision I guess so
maybe you can talk to us about that and
and the role it's playing in criticizing
the way that history and theory has been
taught and researched
okay thanks for that question yeah I
think so images like this and various
others and and I think even you know the
way that we put together the race space
and architecture curriculum with this
foregrounding off the visual of visual
material is it's for me really a way of
commenting and positioning architecture
as a discipline which so there is the
stuff that we write about architecture
and then this that the kinds of
materials that architecture users and
its own production and I think it's not
necessarily about privilege in one over
the other but it's recognizing that very
often these forms of whether it's
drawing or visualizing are also also
part of architectural knowledge
production and and start and and reading
those as a form of knowledge and with
their course in Johannesburg so the
student responses being something that's
both drawn and written is is importantly
about positioning that positioning the
course in relation to that so not not is
this kind of really distinct thing but
as a but as a field that does engage
with these medium I do think that
architectural history engages with
drawings and images but yeah it's not
always yeah maybe it's not always kind
of the primary thing or the I'm Jake
thanks again say thank you for such
think presentation of materials I want
building directly on that last question
you know these slides and materials are
so beautiful their design is you know
even the posters are fantastic so I
guess maybe not looking back to you know
blueprints and architectural materials
in the archive but what about your own
practice as an artist you know the
aesthetic of the materials that you're
producing I wanted is that helping you
to think in a certain way in the use of
drawing out of the double sense of that
of that word I think it is so I can't
take credit for all of this work it's
not a lot of it's been done with other
people and we have an amazing graphic
designer at the GSA Francois who helps
with a lot of the work and this poster
if these posters for example were done
with Samia who's sitting here and Sarah
so so it is a kind of but but I think
but yes it definitely is part of what
we're doing so we are so even in in this
colloquium and it may be to talk
specifically about it it was something
that I think if I can speak for us but I
think we thought of as something that we
are designing so it was it's not just
about bringing a set of speakers
together it is about that and it is
about how we bring people together and
how we arrange it but something that I
think of that I definitely think of as a
design in itself as a from the event to
the drawing out of the space to how we
chose to inhabit particular parts of the
space and move audiences from inside to
outside or engage with the street we had
a street gallery for
example so the poster is definitely part
of that and it is also I think part of
how we understand architecture is not
necessarily the building but in this
kind of material that we enact I guess I
think that's a kind of nice moment to
not end but maybe just move to the next
part of the evening which is to have a
more informal conversation over some
drinks and canapes but please join me in
thanking Hooda for really excellent
[Applause]
