hi thank you for coming not least
because metropolis is on in the other
room I think and it's brilliant filmed
you've chosen this though so
congratulations and idiots so yeah I'm
normally I'll talk a bit free film but
for this one because I'm covering as was
mentioned quite a big scope and I'd like
to pack my talks of slides there's a lot
of visual content as well I've sort of
I'm gonna be reading so if I don't make
eye contact all the time apologies but
I'll try to as much as I can and also
there's a lot of slides so sometimes
they might disappear and they won't be
offered very long but any students here
that want the visual references again I
can send a PDF on to you and you can
refer back to them in your in your
studies if you need them so it will be a
whistle-stop to it for landscape and it
will start in medieval countryside and
will end up not only in the present day
but into an unrealized imaginary future
and it will likely argue tightly argue
even that the contemporary city makers
are scrutinizing it won't argue that
they're scrutinizing help staying
historic landscapes as and as a method
of modeling the city now but there are
certain strategies of which been
deployed through the history which
knowingly will not have ended up into
sort how cities are shaped today it will
be a bit of a poetic wonder so there'll
be some nice visual references and the I
won't dive into any particular point erm
and they'll be people in the audience
know a lot of know about particular
elements of it but it'll be a sweep
across the top and hopefully then it
might inspire you to drop down in the
future into certain areas and it will
talk about our identity nostalgia ways
of seeing and recognizing beauty and how
that's been folded into sort of
political city making now so the English
countryside is often idealized as a
romantic ideal of past all tranquility
something which is so wrapped up in our
national identity and is rolled out as
shorthand for what it is to be English
the romantic the pastoral the simple and
the beautiful the green and pleasant
land like back and think of England is
the imagery that's conjured up in war
time to remind us both of what was being
fought for and what's suggestively
laying underneath the debris and the
bombsites
both physically and psychologically but
the landscape was never thus it is as
any students here on the landscape of
course will know the territory of
beautiful fair particular evil protest
labor and ideologies and the British
history which isn't always pointed at in
the tourist brochures or within the
popular and Celtic imagery which you
know we saw in the Olympic ceremony it's
not always the one which is there which
is the told button martyrs or the mass
trespassers of kinder scout or the
battled have been field or battle of all
grief here or indeed rave culture and
traveler sites and all the other
fracking now and other kind of political
relationships to the landscape that
which is important that which is in
pictures in popular consciousness is
often that which is in paintings and
visual renditions of landscape including
this by games and it could be more
powerful often than that meaning in
history that we've just talked about is
confessed within the soil and so often
the conflicts around ownership and power
as with art and paintings are folded
into this presentation regime you can
read them in the paintings in the in the
games through here you know this is a
there are there are certain images in
here so the way that the hay and the
ground has been treated well other
Londoners who saw this painting will
know that this is someone that owns
landscape and he owns machinery
so even subtly through the paintings
there's ways of people in the know to
read the landscape within this and
showing the and the breadth and the
openness and the sight then this person
knows the landscape was made up in the
medieval period as I'm sure many of us
are the GCSE history all know as an
arable system of open fields image
strips of land managed by tenants and
landowners intermingled with large areas
of Heath's and Moors one is common land
with lights for commoners to graze
animals foraging sourcing peat or turf
and from the 15th century onwards this
delicate social system was under
pressure firm the enclosures processes
by which emerging market led
agricultural system was becoming
dominant over that very tight ecosystem
of a small land workers and that was
usually led by rich and prominent landed
gentry connected or connected to all who
were in powers of Paulo working in
politics or closer to politicians and
the morning classes who could then
petition Parliament
to take ownership of common lands with
the argument that they were going to
manage them better more efficiently and
better economic return for the country
by doing that taking away the power from
the regular commoners underneath often
they were politicians of the same class
an Outlook to those who were petitioned
and were pretty happy to award
especially the better and larger pieces
of land to their friends often their
phones so those that were left on the
shared land often left of the scraps
remaining after enclosure which were the
rocky the outcrops or the hilly bits and
well that led to was a number of wealthy
estate owners in a large class of war
laborers who were dependent upon those
landowners for work so we enter into a
laboring class as well I've just
realized I didn't start my time at the
beginning though I'll keep an eye on the
time
initially the enclosures were solely
about taking ownership of the most
profitable and useful lands for the new
owners and the slowly a secondary reason
around aesthetics and security developed
a landowner would rather look out from
his estate house onto a wide-open
landscape of lowland greenery as opposed
to a higgledy-piggledy patchwork of
fields with random laborers going
through them good for the ego but it's
also nice to have your house securely
centered within a large open piece of
land this was an enclosure which was or
really about the power of the gaze and
the look from the country house and in
which the look of a place for singular
individual the owner of that land
trumped that of the social use of the
benefit which had been in that soil
before the secondary benefit of this
enclosed landscape was a great buffer
zone as I mentioned between the house
and the boundary walls which at that
point would largely comprise the tall
hedges and walls as a security mechanism
and also a reference of this sort of
increasing inequality inequality between
those they have and kin and those on the
outside who can't even look in at that
point Gardens tendered to the heights of
the house comprised a boxed privet hedge
oh so this is Chatsworth I know there's
one person the audience who knows this
house very well I used to work on this
house as well which was a great
experience chatsworth house up in in
north of england and governs from this
period were boxed privet hedges
manicured and controlled with high
hedges and walls as I mentioned
separating the enclosure from the world
beyond this was about control and it was
not uncommon for a single parish
landowner to take control of all the
land in a parish and often has happened
as we'll see later on depopulate the
village as a final act of domination as
a way of sort only controlling the land
but also the use of land and often the
people within a large boundary wall and
the secretive nature of grand Gardens
were then also served as a psychological
control of the nearby communities with a
sense of awe and power of what's beyond
that wall or the bits you can see above
man and it was always and still is men
had a long taking control over landscape
and wilderness for applying fashionable
aesthetic traits through the medium of
garden design initially for kitchen and
monastery gardens with the purpose of
generating income and food but as well
from physical out-power consolidated
into these larger and owned landowners
then the control of the landscape akan
one of ascetics gaze and Status the
shaping of the landscape showed to the
world or at least invited guests into
that world the land the owners
contemporary knowledge and taste as well
as embedded ideological ideas within the
very landscape designs themselves in
France designers such as Claude male led
with who was alive in 1564 to 1642 I
think led with modern ideas on gardens
this plan of early plan of Versailles
from 1632 louis xiii
which was then passed on later I mean
don't people know this I now film the
noxious which will show next I think but
any later his son who later became chief
gardener us in James's Park in London
actually later wrote a book largely
drawing on his dad experiences of
Versailles about the main features of
these formal baroque gardens which
consisted here of artificial woodlands
[Music]
artificial which is shaped hedges and
grand avenues terminating and fountains
and statues and these are motifs that
we'll see later in the talk but also
you're probably all quite familiar with
in different variations of going to
visit Gardens or just through
understanding the history of landscape
design but when it was really not just
turned to work on Versailles we're now
into mid 18th century 1746 after louis
xiv inherited it we can see how the
relationship to landscape design has
really grown quite large and those that
have the money in the power had
ambitions to really extend beyond the
reach they had before he greatly
expanded on those principles rigid
geometries now penetrating landscapes
symbolizing humans control not only of
nature but all animals and indeed other
humans hierarchies of order imprinted
into irrational nature so this geometry
which punctures and controls the sort of
the irregular landscape formal party is
leading to smartly laid lawns with
ornamental woodlands beyond and with
strong long axes vistas penetrating
acting as both a mechanism of in plan of
you and human scale and Vantage to look
into the distance right down and into
the horizon it's also worth noticing
here on the right hand side of the image
how the same plan is now sort of
penetrating the spatial management of
the town of Versailles itself which has
grown up hugely around the the palace or
the house so here we're all ready and
we'll see lots of motifs later in the
talk of how landscape has all been moved
into architectural and urban design but
this is one of the earliest or things of
this same logic and geometry now
immediately having an impact in the
streets adjoining as well so this
approach to managing landscape
symbolized the mechanisms of political
troll control and power of the people to
which
just four years later the French
Revolution was in part of the action -
of this control
and mechanistic systems this continental
approach to using geometry as a rational
system of control and shape and face was
also adopted in Christopher Wren's
proposals for London after the great
fire which I think he hands in one week
after the fire was extinguished so he
didn't really hold back the strong
geometry and clear division of space was
here seem to be applicable to both
nature as well as to people to the
country as to the city Nicholas perhaps
in a set of this plan later
ven's plan is wholly french dominated by
the one point radiating streets
principle principle the only concession
to the city and its peculiar character
is that in the center of the largest
square there is not a royal palace but
the exchange the exchange being the
center of marketing finance and trade
which you can see is the center of the
ten radiating streets there perhaps in
the picks up on this the changing powers
of the city to the Tower of London and
the Olson Paul's Cathedral still hold
dominant positions within this gridded
arrangement but the way in which the
Royal Exchange shifts at the centre of
those ten radiating roads shows a
developing importance of capital and
trade to this new growing city a
presence in the city which I just walked
her over Waterloo Bridge today which is
still there and present in the city that
we all know and spend time in it's also
worth mentioning here how the boundary
was subtly altered as we could see in
this drawing of by Kip and Caniff who do
lots of wonderful serve axiom metric and
planned drawings of English country
houses and Gardens the avenues formed in
the garden extended out into the wider
landscape and this is badminton and if
you can see from there if not maybe on
the PDF after you've received it after
the talk if you still want to refer back
to the images you'll see that at the end
of each of the impact boundaries instead
of the wall will the hedge they'll stop
and they'll be a gate so I'm gating
which offers a translucency and a vision
beyond the bell border right out into
the distance so here we have some
offering a sense of control or the sense
of feeling the yeren much larger area
both aesthetically and politically the
boundary of the state remains in close
within hedges and walls and still quite
secure but it had become popular to
introduce the fencing at the gates
rather than a solid wall where the fesh
holders crossed this offers those inside
the estate a semi clear and
somewhat uninterrupted view out into the
landscape beyond suggesting power and
importance beyond the limits of their
own domain at the same time is the at
the same time the popularity of the
Grand Tour was growing for the noble the
wealthy and the lambda classes the Grand
Tour being trips across Europe
particularly to the great Italian cities
from which they'd returned with ideas
and drawings of grand European Gardens
architecture and landscapes and slowly
as all of English culture did certainly
enough Kotetsu as many of you all know
the English landscape gardens began to
incorporate these objects and approaches
that had been witnessed in in European
and French especially Italian gardens
statues grottoes similar curves sublime
nature which was meant to represent sore
plaster waterfalls cliffs terraces and
parties but the Grand Tour has also
brought back other intellectual ideas
and mementos from European travels not
least landscape paintings by the likes
of Claude Lorrain the compositional form
and the structure which was quickly
folded into how British designers and
landowners were thinking about
approaching the actual landscapes
themselves rather than just
representation of and the painting and
drawing of so English landscape movement
developed from the compositional and
framing language of European school of
painters such as Lorraine and then but
then folded into an English Arcadian
setting so so this of the sublime nature
of the European all of grand ravines and
waterfalls which didn't quite marry with
people what people knew about England
although it was often pushed for some
the Scottish and Welsh landscapes but
what we results with the English
landscape is sort of a much more
pastoral a Dilek version so capability
grounding comes into the story here a
name you're probably familiar with he's
the most well known to emerge from this
new British movement and certainly the
best-connected and eventually the most
wealthy by a long long way in 1741
aged only 24 he was made head gardener
at Stowe Gardens this the Grecian Valley
was his first project which is a vase of
classical setting centered with an
undulating and softly considered vistas
far softer you noticed and the rock
geometry that we've just seen in you
know
badminton and Chatsworth before and
Versailles the general compositions were
formed around momentary famed aspects
such as this one so more than the
landscapes of Lenora from Versailles
which were about clear in position
impressions on to nature and about
visible control Brownian landscapes had
to look at the softer touch while in
Molalla reality actually being
incredibly huge engineering projects and
also about the idea being present in the
landscapes are not just a representation
of but actually being in and passing
through landscapes and being frozen by
these kind of scenes that appear a
feature of which was the circuit a
prescribed Walker and the landscape
which felt as if you were choosing your
own path through this seemingly natural
environment but instead was carefully
leading you on a design serpentine route
starting at the main house and passing
through various set pieces such as
degree Sheen Valley compassed grottoes
temples follies and water features as
well as delivering these sort of moments
of famed views inviting you to stop in
your tracks and passively take in what
you're looking at the visitor who would
feel as if they were some kind of
explore themselves would then be
surprised to suddenly find themselves
return to the main house at the end of
this walk having felt that they were
just carelessly wandering out into
nature a carefully curated passage
designed to impart worldly classicism a
sense of experience and display wealth
and power both have been tight sold
wrote in a book about Walter Benjamin
referring back to sort of the landscape
design of this the cleverness of the
circuit is that it does not feel
circular acting as an ancient Greek
labyrinth the moving body within does
not understand the overall mapping of
the path but instead each turn and
opening view actors surprise an
experiential shift a device that was
extensively used by Brown is this - haha
a sunken wall which could only be seen
from one direction so the land comes up
to once height of the wall and it drops
down the upside so if you're looking
from here from the left to the right you
can't see the walls they're a feature he
adopted from French landscape design it
had its roots in warfare and battlefield
engineering and have been adopted into a
recreational landscape to offer
uninterrupted views from desired
Vantage's primarily from the house
itself while stopping undesired animals
or people to get to close early haha'
directly mimicked military
infrastructure
during semi-circular projections like
the bastions of a forward and high
terraces running around the perimeter
allowing those inside to be able to see
out but over time they softened in
nature and were generally simplified to
a subtle intervention in the landscape
this is from the same place from the
other view just you see the two
pavilions just the other side of the
lake that haha continues running
directly just behind those so from this
angle you can't see the haha but it's a
barrier and it's a mechanism for control
but for the gaze it allows the control
of another sense in your direction
John Percival first Earl of a Edgemont
oh c'mon
I think farther to the prime minister
observed of Stowe Gardens where we are
now what adds to the beauty of this
garden is that it is not bounded by
walls but by a ha ha which leaves you
the sight of a beautiful woody country
and makes you ignorant of how far the
planted walks extend Brown also shaped
famously Lakes into serpentine forms in
his process of improving nature the
scale of Gardens increased increased
rigid vistas became gentle undulation
sentimentality replaced liveliness trees
were planted into strategic groupings
and the boundary was made less visible
sometimes as mentioned earlier villagers
were entirely removed once such village
was Lamport near Stowe which have been
effectively cut off without access to
land after all of the surrounding
territory had been enclosed as a deer
park for the owner of the estate slowly
the village suffocated and died all
trace of it eventually removed and it so
happens it always been considered a
blight on the landscape especially when
viewed from the Palladian bridge which
had been built over the serpentine Laker
stone so its loss was deemed an
improvement to the place for those who
didn't that an improvement who lived
there and wanted to show it off having
removed real people and ugly buildings
from the landscape some landowners then
sought to curate their estate by
introducing real or actual people but
often performers into the landscape as
Hermits
some landowners employed temporary
performative Hermits who would secrete
themselves into the rustic hermitage
that was built within the Woodlands so
that noble visitors could discover them
on their
around the grounds as though they were
discovering some sort of ancient
primitive you know folk living in the
woods while some landowners tried to
employ permanent full time permits
Charles Hamilton who owned pencil
gardens in subby actually put out an
advert for a hermit to live on his
estate for seven years for the
equivalent I think now have about
seventy thousand pounds in today's money
for seven years without being allowed to
cut their hair leave the estate or talk
to anyone who encountered them the
removal of the poor for this or
decorative replacement and a
performative replacement of those that
had been removed we move on now to
what's commonly called the picturesque
in 1748 priest and writer called William
Gilpin published a book about Stowe
Gardens musing upon the aesthetics and
developing an idea which he called the
picturesque this was developed twenty
years later more formally with a book
outlining his ideas of picturesque
beauty relating the reading of landscape
with that of making visual images and he
said in it and in his books are an essay
of prints containing remarks upon the
principles of picturesque beauty was a
guide in how to read and create
paintings or drawings considering the
landscape and picturesque qualities
where picturesque was defined as a term
expressive of that peculiar kind of
beauty which is agreeable in a picture
so we're already thinking here about the
relationship of the real world to the
representation of the real world and
what reputation what representation of
the world means to a different audience
to those who are in it and how the two
across fertilising now quite commonly
for the pictures of Gainsbourg onto Kip
and cliff and now on to the side of the
picturesque and and through guilt and
everyone that has access to reading the
landscape in this way later on he wrote
a series of guides which could be used
by those going on grand tours of how to
read and vendor picturesque landscapes
considering the art of sketching is to
the picturesque traveler where the art
of writing is to the scholar looking
back to the works of the painter Claude
Lorrain and his compositional tool of a
obsidian mirror glass for turning away
from the landscape and reflecting the
landscape back so you have a sort of a
manta sized and controlled famed view of
the landscape and his guidebooks are
really worth looking up because they
talk about places in England like
Cumberland and Wales and he's going
around
telling the person where they can go and
experience certain picturesque
landscapes and how they can read them in
a picturesque form then how they can
make representations of themselves so
it's an interesting kind of way of the
period of how landscape was read and
represented he followed this with a
series of books as I was mentioned
looking at the British regions outlining
particular sights of picturesque quality
confessing his reading of landscape art
inspired by the European masters into a
very local and British setting for
Gilpin the picturesque traveller had to
seek out these famed views which are
worth sketching from all the ingredients
of landscape trees rocks broken grounds
wood rivers lakes plans valleys
mountains and distances so all of these
components in themselves they might be
quite interesting but he's talking about
them as a collective whole and how they
can all interrelate amongst one each
other and form to make a framed image a
representation of that landscape
emphasizing it is not only the form but
also the composition of the objects
which is critical his writings
reflectors are shift in how the
landscape was read which was also
starting to be reflected back as I
mentioned this reflexive relationship
into the making of landscapes themselves
and so there started to be an
introduction of similar curved sublime
moments inspired by the paintings
considered picturesque so these cascades
which in a forgotten where bow would
house I would reference of Salvatore
voter who often used the waterfall in a
motif so he would have looked at various
motifs of waterfalls chosen which ones
he liked and then and had been
constructed in his garden in a very much
smaller sort of Disney fied contrived
version but again having this often this
picturesque moment as you're passing
through the landscape Gilpin's writings
were later developed on by those of the
poet Richard Payne night and also Hoover
Dale price price in particular the find
Gilpin's ideas of the picturesque and
more directly articulated them into the
making of landscape rather than just
reading it twice's book the essay on the
picturesque as compared with the sublime
and the beautiful was published in 1794
the same year as Richard Payne nitro his
poem the landscape and they're both
worth reading especially for the
students on the landscape course here
both were hugely influential then the
poem was accompanied
by these sorts of before-and-after
images something we'll see as a motif
again coming forward and that's given
something we certainly see in developers
renderings of buildings and landscape
now which reflect this shift from
Brownian landscapes on the left to this
area of the new picturesque so sort of
saying look this is what was considered
beautiful but this is picturesque and
this is this is implementing all of the
ideas that the guild pin and now myself
I sandwich a pain Knight and others are
thinking about there was a desire for
instance for the ruling over the
classical perfection a kind of melting
together of nature and architecture
buildings instead of standing isolated
alone should be semi covered by trees
and planting as if to camouflage them
slightly where possible existing and
older trees should be retained with new
planting adding to rather than treating
with new planted added to rather than
treating the whole sizes of tabula rasa
and constructing a real looking
landscape from fresh there should be
rustic tropes in the land being worked
up here rustic tropes of the land so
gates cart tracks in the mud remains of
old stone walls even if they're newly
built looking like old stone walls all
adding to ideas of palimpsests of
landscape being natural and being
natural door there and you're just this
latest custodian of it and also history
of people which they won't always be in
those landscapes but the idea that
they're sort of inhabited even in the
estate you own has kicked all the people
away but just have no other function
don't pick tall beauty and he also spoke
of a thing called the glimmering which
he experienced in the paintings of
claude the playing of lights and colors
which often invert the summits of
mountains just as he has seen in real
nature and this relationship of dark to
light shades and tonality roughness of
surface or picturesque qualities which
will be picked up later similarly at the
same time we see pradesh landscape
artists who are developing these similar
aesthetic tropes into their works so
here we see Turner's angler visual
articulations of Gilpin's words on
broken grounds as the European painters
had done with us of an English scale and
scope so they're folding in Gill pins
and prices ideas individual small groups
of characters populated the scenes
adding some scale but also offering some
animation of a human quality
these captors always nearly of a nice
feta sighs poor working-class fishing
here hanging washing foraging milking
cows so everyday label of survival be
treated as a decorative element by the
classes that don't have to do those
things so here we're starting to move
into the city now this is a time when
you know the sort of Industrial
Revolution was kicking in brawling
closures also that we talked about have
been kicking a lot of people out of the
country who have had to go and find
other places just to survive and the
cities which needs a lot of working
loading paper working people for his new
factories is welcoming them masses of
them so the landscape of power is also
shifting into the metropolitan areas and
with it the ideas of the picturesque
start getting folded into the city this
from 1792 which I found in research for
this talk is one of the earlier examples
I could find which considered Vantage's
of London at this time but using the
picturesque ideals that had been talked
about until then as landscape and
natural sort of constructs it's worth
mentioning at the same time as this the
French Revolution had scared all of the
British landed gentry and bullying
classes what if the anger and clamor for
change which has happened across the
channel would be happening here as well
British political response was reflected
in landscape design just as the British
and the French way of controlling nature
and people was reflected in earlier
landscape architecture
so instead blurred the boundaries in
confusing now as to what was auditioning
what was historic what was real was
nature and what the simulation the
things we saw in the pictures reflect a
kind of a slightly shifting of British
politics of the time which is allowing
us a bit more democracy and a bit more
opening up of sort of the suffrage to
make people feel like they're engaged
for a policy from the time even though
there's still often being sort of held a
distance and there's a simulation of
democratic process price said at the
time a good landscape is that in which
all the parts are free and unconstrained
but in which those some are prominent
and highly illuminated and others in
shade and retirement some love and
others more smooth and polished yet they
are all necessary to the beauty energy
effect and harmony of the whole I do not
see how good government could not be
more exactly defined so we're also
seeing here a compression of landscape
and political power as well folded into
these or ideals and the way
thinking about space and representation
of space a burpee veteran who sort of
picked up the baton left by capability
Brown who really picked up his work
about five years after capability Brown
died but was also heavily influenced by
the ideas of the picturesque so he had
moved on from capability Brown saw a
very smooth undulation and wanted to
fold in some of these picturesque ideas
relating to the picturesque and
continuing that country landscape
tradition however and importantly for us
in this talk he also folded those ideas
and brought them into the city and in
particular the London squares so he's
laying out of Brussels grow and bloom
sushi squares both in 1806 offering the
richer classes who had their homes
around the square a sense of looking
onto a private gated enclave of wool
heidi riddle in central london and it
was a powerful instruction to the city
which still really frames a lot of the
way that's Bob London as we know looking
out the window here is shaped here we
see his proposal for some James's Park
from 1808 just after that a gated Royal
Park addressing Carlton house Duvall
residents of the then Prince of Wales
lepton made strong use again of the
before and the after images so this is
the before we see a view of a close park
with glimpses of the public just on the
wall and just upon through the trees on
the right hand side you see people
walking along the mouth so we see a view
of the close public Olympus's of the
public through there which is not ideal
if you want to have this image of a
continuous landscape so his proposal of
this time this is the after image all in
keeping of the picturesque and building
on these brownian ideas as well the view
of distant Westminster Abbey so nestled
the gent nestled within the trees a
gentle raise to the parked land and low
shrubs which conceal the public walking
along the mouth so you have this
distance by the haha of an uninterrupted
view an extended gaze and and love more
natural looking layout with of the
clumps of the trees looking a bit more
like all we've just found them thereof
and it is very delicate planting and
then the party at the front with the
balustrade and some sort of ivy growing
up it and then just a few working-class
gardeners to sort of you know to embed
into that power
Repton really deserves a lot more of
your time than
aloud in this talk but he is really
influential important for serious or as
one of the people that brought the
landscape idea into the city even if the
conduit father people and the movement
of landscapers and strategies as well
into the city tried to developing London
squares he spent five years working in
partnership with John Nash the architect
largely on London villas in which Nash
would design the house and rectum were
designed the garden to go round errands
of the edge lands of London so people as
the wealth and the powers London people
starting to build villas and they've got
a lot of work doing that before then
Nash moved on into grander things will
see in central London concurrent to the
ideas for grand private gardens in the
city the idea of the picturesque was
increasingly popular as a device not
only considering the landscape as the
population became open as I said for
reading the city so this is a book I
came across from 1830 and it includes
drawings of a whole number of English
cities considering them directly food
prices picturesque approach and we see
how nature in a way has now been so
substituted for the infrastructure and
the stuff of the city so whereas there
were clumps of trees before we're now
seeing bits of scaffolding and boats and
trims and there's an interesting
literature here which we'll follow
through shortly about house or the shape
and the framing works but sometimes
nature is being replaced by more built
stuff and then nature will have a
different relationship to that so while
the classical ruin from landscape is now
sort of being supplanted by grand Civic
piece of architecture or simples
Cathedral or grand more often than not
this was city's main religious
architecture often in London it would be
simples Cathedral spires classical domes
nestled within composed luffa
composition of architectures and objects
and this also reflects the mobile
placement of God and the Civic the heart
of these new emerging centres of
population so in the same book cities
often positioned as part of the
landscape in the same way that in the
rule would appear to go right up to a
house in a Brownian landscape so it does
so in these prints where the rural which
you can see through like the fishermen
cows over green trees clusters are in
the foreground of the city rising in the
distance like a mansion would
one of the landscape images also ruins
of the past Abbey's castles walls and
the smoke from industry conflating this
new and old this of a montage effect and
Westminster has drawn dusk there's a
picture of Westminster I didn't include
me abut Westminster's always wanted dusk
in a romantics of Gothic gloom as well
we can see the influence of landscape
coming back to John Nash in his plans
for a region Street which is in the same
plan now but the architecture has
changed slightly but in the same same
plan that gentle curve with occasional
vistas opening up towards classical
moments of architecture with changing
lights and shaders the blessing will
pass in and out of the covered portico
switcher have now been removed it should
be noted a secondary function of the
construction of Regent Street was to
demolish vast poor areas of the city to
provide safe picturesque and luxury
passage with nice shops and commodified
experiences between life through the
city centre connecting the wealth of
proposed Regents Park with the political
and loyal powers around some James's
Park on Westminster serozha it was a
connecting thing it was a beautiful
thing in itself but it was also a
another in a way and saw the does a plan
to remove and clear people who were not
ideal in win the right place initially
into regents park initially proposed as
a property development a vast private
pyle drip discreet manor houses and
surrounded with grand townhouses around
the edge offering vantage across what
appeared to be a private estate Nash's
plans for Regents Park can be read as a
direct imposition of landscape ideals
into urban and elite setting it was
later written in a book called
metropolitan improvements from 1823
about balance but the villas in Regent's
Park were as were marked at the time
planted out from the view of each other
so that the inhabitant of each seems in
his own prospect to be the sole Lord of
the surrounding scenery and mark she
wrote in his book cities and people
later vote a park to begin with was
thought of as an adjunct and amenity for
the houses around it rather than for the
city as a whole and a park development
was always connected with a housing
development access to the park was often
confined to the families in the
surrounding houses so we're seeing here
as well nature and parks being conflated
with property development sense of
ownership and in tide
and land value as well
Nash was later tasked with the
transformation of San James's Park
retton's plans were never carried
through after George the 3rd was
declared insane the Prince of Wales
defense region left Carlton house to
move to queens house which Nash
transformed into what's now Buckingham
Palace which is itself in a rural
setting surrounded by parks and gardens
after completing the palace in 1826
attention moved back to San James's Park
and the MAL a grand approach road
leading to Buckingham Palace we can see
here how Nash is followed though saw the
brownie and landscaping principles the
serpentine and clumps of trees and
unfolding landscape in an urban setting
and here's another before-and-after
which shows Nash's picturesque
transformation turning a rigidly
straight canal which has been there
since about 1660 I'm into a serpentine
lake with islands at the end so you can
never quite see whether lake ends so
there's a sense of endlessness even
within the water as well as to planting
a sense of you know my prospect world
goes on forever which suggests there's
no end to the water nature carefully
composed to look rougher and more
natural even a lane with car tracks and
the simulation of an old rustic Fence
glimpses of an architecture poking out
through the foliage but parks including
some James's Park and squares were still
largely fenced off and private affairs
railings here not only allowing a view
out for the noble who were inside and
the wealthier within the Empire space
but now also allowing citizens on the
outside to look inside adding to that
class differential and inequality and
the impact and the sense of power which
they emit impressing the power and
authority to those who were permitted
inside as well the enclosure system
which we discussed earlier in a rural
setting was still in act to cross the
land beginning of the hundreds of years
and we will see later I think still is
carrying on in many ways and with the
sudden growth of cities a number of
common lands which were previously rural
or semi-rural now found themselves and
packed within a developing city one was
Kennington common which here we see in
1848 which is the first known photograph
of a political rally this is the great
chart
Valley just before the signature of
anything between 300,000 and 3 million
people was taken to Parliament calling
for radical change to political system
some changes were made at the time over
the years we've now had I think five of
their six shortest demands so you know
they would sort of proved right at the
time but very little was given at the
time but there were huge political
rallies in common land floors where they
were happening because they were there
was no rules there was no system of
ownership and they were the places where
people would go to play games to forage
and politics and religious teaching and
all kinds of social activities and
function they were fighting as I say the
political system which had been going
for years decades of the Poor Laws
increasing inequality reduced life
expectancy dominating factory system
which served the powerful in the wealthy
with limited return for those who were
serving them John Claudius Loudon was
the designer of English England's first
public park the Derby Arboretum opened
in 1840 and inspired by the nearby
capability Brown estate at Chatsworth
and the very price escolar good
picturesque landscape and gorgeous
surrounding the town of Derby the first
forty years of the 19th century had seen
derby triple in size to 35,000 people as
Industrial Revolution kicked off the
working faster had an average life
expectancy of 21 the park was
commissioned to offer space for public
recreation event and offer an open space
away from the smoky air of the factories
and here we were seeing the notion of
the the urban city park becoming much
more of an organized system so there may
have been genuine paternal interest in
improving the town for citizens of all
classes the manner in which the park was
designed was drawn straight from the
approaches to landscape design as had
been developed through the ruling class
estates over the previous years that
we've been looking at what was good for
the individual landowner with all his
knowledge and aesthetic understanding
obviously would therefore be good for
the middle and the working classes
Loudoun hoped to make a small simulacra
of the Derbyshire landscape as in his
words with hills and winding ridges an
imitation of the natural picturesque
four mill workers to appreciate on their
one day off a week
the enclosure act as I mentioned was
still going though now moving into more
urban territories and have been updated
in 1845 following the ruling class fears
of the public uprising having witnessed
what happened in France the Peterloo
massacre and the rising of the Chartists
and the fear that not only the people I
be rising up but their hold on power and
system which they've been you know we're
serving them quite well might not be
working much longer so Kennington common
which we saw before was one of the first
to be part this is Kempton Park now four
years after the valley in 1852 it was
enclosed and turned into a managed
public park based on the same things
that we saw in a derby by Loudon just as
with earlier ruling closures it is clear
the improvements were brought to the
site because previously was boggy there
was a lot of illegal activities and also
with the growth of the city it wasn't
necessarily practical to run as a common
for grazing animals and taking turf
because the one day the six months it
was open allowed to be turfed and graze
animals on a year within a week the
whole place would be devastated because
it would just be covered by animals and
people straight away because the
population has grown so much the
response to it was to create completely
programmed organized spaces based on
Louden's model it should be questioned
whether the ruling classes who drove
such changes did so of civic health in
mind all the time or whether they had an
interest in suppression of the
activities which had been going on in
these places organized by others who who
were a challenge to their authority an
interesting commentary of the
paternalistic control of which these
kinds of parks and urban landscaping
could have upon citizenship comes from
frederick law olmsted
writing in 1870 about newly planned
parks and landscaping for the growing
city of boston in america the ideas of
English parks were taken up to America
fairly quickly and copied as a very
similar trope and he categorizes large
congregation assembling for the purposes
of recreation as gregarious as childish
savage while when the number coming
together is small and circumstances
favourable to the exercise and of
personal friendliness it is termed
neighborly so already there's a fear of
the crowd and there's also a sense of
wanting people for doing the right kinds
of
teas in public a theme of large cows
crowd was very much in the root of urban
enclosures such as Kennington breaking
up small self-organizing groups meeting
for recreational debate and in favor of
a tightly program space which encouraged
smaller gatherings in organized approved
activities such as walking studying as
the study of the simulation of nature or
observing one another in a commodified
gaze in observing the young men at
Boston Olmsted said with lounging
attitudes rudely obstructing the
sidewalks he asked if it was possible to
make public provision for the recreation
of this class his solution was a park
where the public can bivouac without
discommode in one another
stroll for now I have Sunday school
events play a fiddle of flute or hub
when I'm in a pleasing rural prospect
with bread milk and ice cream of
moderate fixed charges so here we're
seeing landscapers commodified in
controlled space of an organized
paternalistic model with the opportunity
to buy things as well and I include this
image briefly because I think the Great
Exhibition of 1851 for bridge Paxton who
had long designed pom houses for country
estates including Chatsworth was asked
to design a grand palace for a
celebration of British power industrial
process increasing consumerism and man's
control over the wild forces of nature a
spectacular space of display which
infest visitors from all over the world
declaring England and London with
impressive pomp it's here man made
luxury objects and machines were
displayed and intermingled with exotic
palms and planted nature Walter Benjamin
later wrote of the Great Exhibition
lightly plumed palms from the tropics
mingled with the leafy crowns of 500
year old Elms and within this enchanted
forest the decorators arranged
masterpieces of plastic art statuary
large wonders and specimens of other
artworks
Benjamin called this display of
commodity he wrapped up with the control
of the natural phantasmagoria
a kind of dreamlike or which exude it
from both the objects themselves as well
as the glaze and fetishistic
architecture around them it involved a
political concept of equality displaced
onto things and this impressive
appearance of control helped subdue a
growing fear of evolution from the
Chartist movement and others the people
party subdued by a dreamlike promise of
commodity abundance
it's worth noting under the tree at the
end day in Hyde Park they were
instituting was built around the trees
so here we're seeing a relationship of
nature which is really starting to be
controlled by the sort of architectural
in the urban infrastructure and this
relationship of the architecture sitting
within nature starting to be reversed
into something we will experience
shortly briefly jump forward post-world
War two where we find another example of
the picturesque folded into discussions
of the urban in the architectural review
which was then edited by JM Richards
Nikolaus Pevsner Oz Burt Lancaster and
Hubert de Cronin Hastings sought to
address the rise of the modern movement
starting with a 1944 article by der
Hastings called exterior furnishing the
art of making land making urban
landscape in which he wrote what we
really need to do now is to resurrect
the true theory of the picturesque and
apply point of view already existing to
a field and which has has not been
consciously applied the city the
movement came to be called townscape an
approach which would be constant to
architect a review of the following
three decades a consistent in
architectural view of the following
three decades and would influence
approach at the city making still
including with Gordon Collin Collin
Ruane
Rangel the approach to visual planning
sought to draw a direct line from the
picturesque landscape movement Avondale
price right through to 20th century
urban architecture they felt that
post-war modernism could be incorporated
into a picturesque approach to planning
creating a more human townscape tech of
texture clashing varied materials and a
mix of old and new and argued that there
was a need for a literal picture which
would in their words reconcile visually
in the mind's eye what appeared to be
hearing constancy irreconcilable
elements of any town plan quaint bits
new bits monuments traffic tall
buildings short building's flat blocks
individual cottages etc and suggested
using the picturesque as a way of
shaping the city I think this can be
compared to pricing Gilpin's picturesque
Airy was carefully constructed and
composed version of wild nature how they
have they carefully composed a version
of wild nature introducing a roughness
new regularity to the
to the natural landscape and here we see
Architectural Review writers thinking
about the same thing architectural II to
effect this all the beauty and neatness
and straight lines of modernism offering
it up with texture over and sublime
overing overpowering the free market
clutter of which they were faithful
would come up to the wall because the
townscape campaign was stuffed in 1944
some Paul's Cathedral famously stood
isolated within a landscape of rubble
and ruin a symbol of a damage for
ultimately victorious nation
symbolically cemented into a popular
consciousness the dome has always been a
recognizable architectural moment of
London itself a symbol of urban rebirth
after the Great Fire it's been present
in art as far back as Canaletto
and further and mediated cultural
experiences from royal weddings to the
occupied campsites of 2011 and it's this
embedding of the building into a
cultural social events which is in the
words of a writer Keiko who's written
about icons and disorder neoliberal City
and the shape of architecture is more
significant than its design quality the
social function of it and the
representation of it in considering its
iconic status and and a relationship to
the present illustrating what Jane
Jacobs said negotiating modernity about
being modern the townscape movement was
one with intentions on the human scale
the experienced and a palette of
materials it enjoyed the job positions
as experienced in the City of London for
instance whereby modern architectures
may appear cheek-by-jowl with classical
motifs where one can turn off a narrow
lane before via merging into a grander
story with a wide vista towards a church
quite picturesque principles that we're
familiar with from examples earlier but
it also fed into free-market planning
principles which have shaped London ever
since after the 1986 Big Bang the
economic opening up of economic marker
and systems
London positioned herself as the world
center for banking and finance and the
need for it to market itself as a unique
offer while also offering making new
space for shiny new ideas of
architecture and power men that the town
space ideal on an exploded sale could be
adopted
here we see Richard Rogers Lloyd
building which in part was inspired by
Paxton's Crystal Palace or turned on end
a new HQ for law
ensures and it fits in here well with an
architecture which draws from elements
the historic buildings around it
juxtaposed and creating a new
spectacular view the historic England
listing of Richard Rogers Lloyd's
building says in relation to montage and
picturesque a purpose-built headquarters
for an internationally important
organization that successfully
integrates the traditions and fabric of
earlier Lloyd's buildings from Bo
Woodhouse I'm so including the atom room
moved from originally from Bo Woodhouse
the 1925 copper facade and fixtures such
as the Luton Bell which is still there
the building which looked a Victorian as
well as mid 20th century buildings for
inspirations and it's montage drawing
from lots of lots of inspiration firmly
retains the splendor of its
awe-inspiring futuristic design 25 years
at the time of listing in 2011 after it
opened has many listed neighbors and it
forms a wonderful incongruous back your
backdrop to many of those encaptured
visitors throughout the city with
international renown that cast the image
of the City of London in a new light so
here we see the London London being
represented in form for the world city
you know so this image of a city which
is a now in the the global free market
positioning itself through a whole new
industry of Finance and leisure capital
so into the near liberal City what what
do I mean by the neoliberal city cities
are shaped by ideologies as we've seen
politics and economics of the day is
given and has been seen in some of the
stages of city making we've already
looked at in this talk since the 1980s
and Thatcher's Conservative government
cities especially London have been
shaped under the forces of neoliberalism
an economic approach of deregulation the
do state controlled tax cuts for the
rich crushing of trade unions
outsourcing and a managerial approach to
statecraft in short it is the faith that
is defeat that the free market has the
power to shape society and if it is
failing in any way then that's only
because we are interfering too much with
the economic truth of that free market
so we need to step back and let the
system have more control it's an
ideology which is passed from facture
across different governments to Blair
Brown and Johnson and it's been a force
which has shaped that shaped our cities
by doggedly but also physically as well
the politics of this ideology is as you
she's ex Tate's is where the government
government is very conceived as a
managerial function deprived of its
proper political dimension the
managerial approach in which issues are
dealt with through compromise can I
think be compared to how the English
picturesque sort to find a central
conceit between the beautiful and
sublime how English ruling classes of
the 1800s sort okay both of politics and
landscape which had the impression of
freedom in nature but in essence was
still a simulated and controlled
experience which benefitted the status
quo acting as a decoy of enough
distractions and social improvement to
keep citizens under control but serviced
an increase in capital for the few in
the same way that Gilpin wrote about his
ideas of the picturesque for a series of
guidebooks which people could use over
at home as a desk of study as I
mentioned for their force at home at the
study or in the field in the counties
that he wrote about the next bit of my
talk I will talk about the near liberal
City through some of the devices and
structures that we've looked at that I
observe in the city today and possibly
you will all have other suggestions at
the end of the talk going forward so
image representation what we look at
here is the image of a world's the world
city image of London that has come to
embody you know this classic view some
Paul's still there at the center of
things this all the sort of ruin in a
way it's a standing in as a room because
religion doesn't hold the function it
once did so it stands there as a kind of
a symbolic ruin in the picturesque a
montage of past and future and mediated
static form this is not about
architectural and social complexity bare
manageable flat render of London as an
easily projected message to global
audiences where the business tourists or
political gasner whose first name I
forget a guy I guess no I think is a
writer about this and he explains us
eloquently as reducing the cityscape to
a singular skyline and conceptualizing
it as a compositional hole as it is a
neoliberal approach in that it is based
on the belief that one must govern not
because of but for the free market this
is a crucial point because the visual
protection of some pools has
increasingly be turned into a planning
tool that benefits the construction of
speculative new towers so sight lines in
London which anyone in here who is
impacting architectural will know about
these as opposed to all caps
the near liberal London rebuilt itself
over the second half of the 20th century
some poles would become central to the
picturesque rendering of the sidelines
from numerous angles and location direct
sidelines of the dome are protected
through planning law forming a shaping
of the modern city around this nostalgic
cultural artifact initially affecting
1935 policy of architectural height but
now in much more dramatic ways the most
the last in 2016 the Greater London
Authority London plan outlines three
types of strategic few London panoramas
River prospects and townscape views well
some Paul's Cathedral the Palace of
Westminster and the Tower of London are
singled out as the three prime land lots
of protection within landmark viewing
colors as park corridors and wider
setting consultation so the same ideas
of the picturesque but here were some
pools as the framing device the
dominance of some pools in relation to
the form that has been constructed
around it has not only ER to the flaming
through views and silence but also had a
hand in the very form of the
architecture now constructed architects
needing to conform to planning sight
lines now create form following
regulatory instruction designing unique
geometries allowing for sight lines
which have created a London
interpretation of the icon approach to
architecture where as globally iconic
mega-project architecture dominates his
space and form does not need to be a
relationship to context or historic
presidents this being a very visual
element of ikana uniqueness and status
London's montage townscape approach and
deficits are both have led to forms
which either do or a market marketed as
relating to the cluster history and
context and simples so for instance as
we see here on the will see in a moment
the Leadenhall building nicknamed the
cheese grater the big triangular one
you'll be familiar with from the city is
a wedge-shaped Tower which took the form
as a need to minimize the impact of the
cathedral views from Fleet Street the
scalpel more recently opened
I think I think it's just opened as
geometric wedges chiseled from its or
cuboid Hulk in order to satisfy views of
the important dome from different side
lines of architecture away from the city
cluster still relating this narrative in
relation to some pulls the shard across
the river in London Bridge was said by
its architect to kiss some poles when
viewed from protected views from hamster
teeth
such sightlines have been considered for
several years in London planning
frameworks and on a media go to
regulation for campaigners opposing
particular developments such as
strategic views up and down the river
thames academic the same academic
admission Gregor Gaz no state sis's
constructors a historicist image as much
as a world city image the New London
skyline is best understood as a space
that is defined by an ideology of
economic growth and a static highly
limited framing of civic importance so
some polls are central to the
picturesque vista of the cheese grater
here on the left does not just represent
civic importance is symbolic ties to
world war ii the great fire and colonial
heart of empire are now also pulled into
the collection of neoliberal
organisations and institutions
represented through the glass towers
which are its frame and backdrop this is
the creation of a picturesque moment
through planning a strategy which is a
relationship approach to the picturesque
landscape design in which sight lines to
historic architectural moments such as
church towers are incorporated into new
landscaping to give a new rootedness and
authority to the to the place which has
been constructed simon Pugh who wrote
about landscape in relation to early
eighties capitalism wrote frames and
perspectives to be famed as to be forced
into another structure a structure that
is not one's own to get things into
perspective is to make sense of the
confusing the impermanent the uncertain
to fabricate to make what is free
dimensional into a two-dimensional
effigy to fame is to exclude to select
to synthesize the circuit as we talked
around the landscape there's a lot of
academic study into the design of
shopping centers this is Westfield in
Stratford mainly from America and the
shopping mall but also in British
shopping centers after which really came
over after Elgin Square and 90s again in
nineteen eighties economic sort of
actuate free market boom there is
something of the picturesque in the way
that they employ as we saw in Regent
Street and in Brownian landscapes of
having prime shops at distance points
sort of as the sort of the iconic pieces
which encourage traffic between and also
open up as one walks on curved vistas
areas detail themselves they have themed
environments and programmed
entertainment surprises and
the cell from the normal structures of
time and place as chunks of the city
that developers manage gets larger this
can be wrought on a much bigger scale
how much of our individual wander
through an urban space has simply has
the appearance of self navigation in
free will when in fact invisible systems
of persuasion control and navigation may
be guiding us as we walk through the
city a city that is designed spatially
and philosophically around creating and
controlling consumers and consumerism is
not one in which free agency can
flourish it is one in which choice and
opportunity is built into the very
aesthetic and offer but in fact there is
often a singular or limited path and
mode of behavior built into the very
identity and aims of a neoliberal city
will Hudson the economic writer says of
this commercial developers want to be
free to configure where we walk what we
visit and who has access because thus
they can maximize sales per square foot
of shopping and went into the
picturesque and the montage Chomsky this
is Liverpool one massive source shopping
area chunk chunk tau to the center of
Liverpool the shopping centers we
experience now have a generation beyond
those of the clothes shopping mall
increasingly after with bristled cab a
circus or here with Liverpool one they
appropriate huge chunks of the city
including internalizing roads which used
to be public thoroughfares to create
open malls which have the appearance of
the city but have actually vast private
carefully controlled landscapes this
seamless blend from private public to
private acts I think in a similar way to
the haha on a Brownian landscape the eye
is fooled into reading these two
distinct parts of the city with very
different rules and structures as one
and it's only on closer inspection where
one can observe the haha ditch as which
on the landscape it's only on float
inspection also in the city that you can
see there's tucked away a legal notice
or some stubs on the ground or something
which dim marks the territory changing
but to the gaze to the eye which is
all-important now they are one in his
review of them 2011 publication of peps
Anna's writings on town scope oh and
heavenly the architecture writer said
the only scheme in that book which has
real townscape ambitions is Liverpool
one the retail district planned for
Grosvenor by BDP architects the
as its function maybe the walkways steps
and differing registers convincingly
create a place the unspoken snag is that
all this is a privately patrolled place
effectively closed off from the rest of
the city but all those Oxford
quadrangles wood fiber spacers to
townscape for the gown closed off from
the town as the squares in London were
as well before opening up pet owners
praise of the council estate in the
1950's suggested there was a moment
where townscape as architectural review
talked about could have been truly
public a moment which heavily writes in
2011 has now passed developments on such
a vast level of regeneration in London
which started of the Docklands in the
1980s but now increasingly commonplace
with things like Kings Cross Elephant
and Castle old claw old court and
Stratford are called
big upon are called by writer Ian
Sinclair as the London of post enclosure
as right or as writer michael Sorkin
American writer Michael Sorkin says of
this modeling of the urban upon the
image of a retailer in his 1990 book
variations on a theme park which is
really interesting relation to landscape
and cities he says this is the meaning
of a theme park the place that embodies
is all the agoraphobia the surveillance
and control the simulations without end
the theme park presents its happy
regulated version of pleasure vision of
pleasure
all those artfully hoodwinking forms as
a substitute for the Democratic public
realm and it does so appealingly by
stripping troubled urbanity of its sting
in the public spaces of the theme park
or the shopping mall speech itself is
restricted there are no demonstrations
in Disneyland the effort to reclaim the
city is the struggle of democracy itself
we do this in London different ways as
well Business Improvement Districts such
as the north bank bid just on the north
bank of the Thames which stretches from
Trafalgar Square over Aldridge nozzle
privately managed spaces work in same
ways Liverpool won so few bids business
improvement district local quangos can
take semi control of whole parts of the
city including for security cleaning
spatial management and often rates of
buildings instead of local authorities
this goes back to the managerial
function of government that we have now
here hollows of the city and managed to
work primarily for selected businesses
in the area and attract the right kind
of people sometimes forcibly removing
the wrong type of people from the area
this is the marketization of the city a
result of a managerial approach to
politics in place which treats value in
terms of capital and gives powers to the
unaccountable bodies in order to lighten
the load of the state just as English
landscape was populated with surprising
moments of pleasure such as grottoes
follies or indeed Hermits to be
discovered on a walk so to our bits in
her book ground control annum intern
interviewed a manager of a bid and he
said we probably are a bit controlling
in your terms but we want quality
control there's a trade-off between
public safety and spontaneity what you
want is a few surprises
I grew of that so we add in
unpredictability with lighting schemes
and water features and activity anything
anything that adds to the quirkiness of
what happens when you walk around the
corner as a consumer we may huge effort
to import vitality and I can't help but
think of that hermit jumping out of it
house a surprised
tourist of a grand estate there is a
sense here of the moving the very truth
of civic life and the people of civic
life to then replace it with a similar
core a controlled and curated monetized
version of it to produce an appearance
of a functioning City which acts in
other interests well Graham Gila a write
of Walter Benjamin again explains this
the modern city endeavors to present
itself for its monumental facades and
structures as the zenith or culmination
of progress the past as much as a part
of as much a part of the phantasmagoria
of modernity as the commodities and
dreamlike architecture of the cityscape
for Benjamin however such monuments read
critically unveil the metropolis as the
locus of self-deception and folly
influence and inhumanity myth and myopia
surveillance and security bids populate
their areas with private security who
are often able to issue penalty notices
or enforced removal from an area even
though it's public area so those who are
not in a place to consume it either
passively spectacle or through
commercials spend are made to feel less
welcomed or instructor to leave this
could include homeless people
politically agitated group
of young people photographers
skateboarders etc these stories pop up
in the fests all the time their laws and
regulations which go with these kind of
places are well documented Nezzer
there's a large movement in in
opposition to them anyone not using the
city in the prescribed and controlled
manner really he's not welcome in these
places well thank you problem to jumping
forward this approach to surveillance as
you likely will know is developing
exponentially away from simple private
security guards through to things like
Wi-Fi data gathering facial recognition
and the doubt deeply culturally embedded
vast network of CCTV cameras which mean
this level of control and Benthamite
monitoring is only rising London
Assemblymember Jenny Jones former London
assembly member Jenny Jones for the
Green Party said talking of more London
where city hall near tower bridges in
who'd privately managed area there it
took her eight years to negotiate with
the managers of more London so that the
politicians of City Hall the politicians
of London were even allowed to do a TV
interview outside their own building and
as we see here nature is also used as a
kind of a fig leaf to decorate security
strategies this at the same time as the
existing love trees such as these in
Sheffield has been highly documented are
being removed by managerial approach to
managing the city where it's simply
cheaper to cull streets of trees back in
Sheffield rather than budget for ongoing
maintenance trees in pots are much
easier to manage the nose in the ground
and can be deployed strategically here
in San Francisco
boulders have been placed into the
street to reduce the possibility of
homeless people pitching up tents the
use of nature as a local control
mechanism which solves no problem
just displaces ones and uses beauty to
hide other functions the best kind of
nature as was discovered in the creation
of landscape gardens is that which is
entirely controlled managed and to serve
more function than simply being pretty
nature this is the case with 20 feature
street known as the walkie talkie
designed by Rafael viÃ±oly it was given
permission to disrupt one of the
important protected views of London
which was so important to planners on
the main reason that it promised to give
back to the public a new Park a new kind
of Park right at the top as some of you
have probably been in the roof
what was promised on the left this sort
of fairly picturesque idyllic vision was
very different to the right what was
constructed and was behold and they
forgot they behold into many rules and
regulation times entry limits on who can
access when they can access they'll do a
check on you before they give you
permission and it also didn't turn out
to be the picturesque version from us
but of course by this time the building
had been built the developer was always
receiving income so it served its
function purely as a representation of
place before word even existed as a as a
garden of any kind facade ISM it's
however it's noticed at the skin of the
building is only that which has the
perceived value it's the look of a place
the gaze upon architecture is more
important than the holistic or the
experiential or the internal qualities
of architecture itself or the historical
the growth of facade ISM in London is
noticeable to anybody who's walked
around where the entirety of a building
is demolished say for the wafer-thin
frontage because it alone has the value
in financial terms to be incorporated
into a picturesque montage experience of
the city architecture perceived as a
skin as an appearance and something I
think which relates an interesting race
to the ruffle a roughness rustic ideals
of the picturesque not to mention the
ideas of folding in some working-class
realness into a landscape which is
otherwise serving a very different class
and function we saw earlier sometimes
how all villagers will move to improve
the landscapes of a wealthier class such
as a stove and I believe it Chatsworth
as well I think and this can also be
seen in the liberal London this map
which is produced by architects for
social housing indicates many of the
council housing estate which are to be
demolished or at risk from local
authorities looking to improve their
areas this is an ongoing concern for a
great number of Londoners who live in
these houses with good examples being
Crescent Gardens not far for me in near
Brixton which appears to be allowed to
fall into a state of decline by a local
authority who were very keen to sell the
land which overlooks the picturesque and
beautiful block well park to a developer
another example being the hay gate to
stay Elephant and Castle which was home
to an actual forest in the centre of
London and three thousand people before
it was demolished in a partnership
between Southwark Council and Bentley's
residents who owned their flats and they
often borne food like to buy were given
compensate
less than 40 percent and first refusal
to buy flat which I believe started
anything between four to five hundred
thousand pounds so what resulted is what
was on this is the scheme that was
offered elephant Newcastle you know the
sort of a picturesque landscape rather
than an actual landscape which was there
the fiber scheme which replaced it of
which many users units were sold to
offshore investors I think the first
whole batch was sold entirely to
offshore investors use the ideals of
picturesque and impressions of greening
to sell this ideal this is in essence I
believe a modern form of the enclosure
in which are publicly accessible lands
and the homes publicly owned homes of
those who live in them are taken into
private hands with exclusive beautifying
and improving we're huge huge amounts of
private capital for developers is gained
a public loss these two maps by Suffolk
notes in the 35 percent campaign
illustrate the displacement of these
3,000 residents on the Left the tenants
of the council homes and on the right
lease holders people who had bought the
houses of food right to buy and where
they were forced to move to so this is a
displacement that we saw in the
landscape now happening in central
London not only to leave their home and
community and neighbors be in many
instances to entirely leave the city
before it was decided to reclad grenfell
tower plans had been made to demolish it
because in the words of a 2009 Royal
Borough of Kensington and Chelsea
Commission master plan for the area it
was a blight on the area one of the
reasons given for demolition is that
there was no public space for residents
in the tower to use locally however the
reason there was no public recreation
space is because it had been taken away
there was an existing recreation land
had been taken away by wool bow against
new Chelsea and built over privately
managed Academy school after the 2008
financial crash the council plans for
the area changed and there were less
plans for more new privately sold
housing surrounding the park which was
going to be where Grenville tower was
stood so instead it would have had they
decided to have a new cladding to make
it look more attractive for future
private residents who have been in the
area and the existing ones in the
wealthier community to the south of the
site where house prices averaged over
one and a half million and in their
planning
I think and says the materials proposed
will provide the building of a fresh
appearance that will not be harmful to
the area or views around it due to its
height the tower is visible from the
adjacent Avondale Conservation Area to
the south and the lab book conservation
area to the east the changes to the
existing tower will improve its
appearance especially when viewed from
the surrounding areas
therefore views into it and out of the
conservation areas will be improved by
the proposals to record of the
development plan by ensuring that the
character and appearance of the area are
preserved and living conditions to those
living near the development suitably
protected I won't say what happened
another huge piece of recent city making
racing towards the end of the talk near
London was the Olympic site where we
started this talk a vast creation built
and spectacle and all with the sales
pitch of improving and greening
landscape and also a prime real estate
project creating huge wealth for
developers and commercial agents in
partnership know how the shopping center
we looked at earlier Westfield Shopping
Center acts here is the gateway to the
park from the underground and the
transport interchange and by passing
through the control space of Westfield
Shopping Center acts like a lobster pot
and it emphasizes the way in which
public offer is filtered for a private
gain and modeled on a commercial
experience a quote of the landscape
designers are the the I think the
landscape agents who followed through
the design Hargreaves
for the north over the park which is the
most picturesque of the two sides of the
Olympic site said it's supposed to be a
designed is supposed to designed to work
with the venues and the surrounding
buildings and views and vistas in fact
if anything our president if you want to
use a historic president
it's a picturesque landscape it's a
development of the English picturesque
movement but with a Hargreaves pitch to
it I suppose however it was also again a
huge displacement exercise of clearances
this was on the on the pre Olympic site
there was a vast network of 254 highly
specialized industrial companies crucial
to operations of London if not pretty
and attractive looking businesses and
direct and indirect employment and many
many thousands of people who lived in
the area they were referred to by ever
sheds the landscaper for the scheme has
them
mid 19th century industrial use when in
effect they were actually a very tight
and very critical ecosystem here nature
is a spectacle the image to help drive
capital as a driver private developments
the question remains as to what benefit
the Olympics has really given us other
than a burst of two weeks of pleasure to
distract her from the rioting of the
year before a recent GLA report states
this is the GLA the London gums and
London authorities say the data shows
that while the games provided an initial
focus for new investment activity it was
short-lived and resulted in mainly
physical and economic games the gap in
many caught in in many the gap for many
called for the quality of life
indicators between the six house powers
and the rest of London is not being
closed the gap in terms of sporting
office and physical activity rates has
got worse here are three people examples
who were displaced from the site on the
Left lion Pahlavi who's finishing a
stained glass panel of goddard and Gibbs
studios limited established in 1868 they
did work for Westminster Abbey and the
Chapel Royal at st. James's Palace they
were forced to move in this place from
the Olympics but they had to close down
because it wasn't sustainable in the new
location in the centre timbered a new
image upholstery Tim ran the company
with his wife since the mid 90s they
decided not to renew the lease due to a
huge rent increases atomic Olympics and
they were forced to close down their
company on the right while he'd rushman
own with JJ autos limited traded for ten
years of offering recycled spare car
parts from the pair work until 2007 when
he moved to South Whitford with the
displacement of the games and the cost
of relocation courses company two closed
in 2013 and this countless countless
examples and each one of these companies
that closes is not just a few people
that work there
but the all of the other businesses in
the ecosystem that rely upon them in the
name of landscape improvement here we
see Thomas heavily
lifting up and manipulating rooftops of
two historic pieces of architecture in
Kings Cross a sense of improving the
found state of place but conforming to
picturesque qualities both in terms of
roughness and rustic nature of material
and surface and with quite manipulated
ideas of a controlled Vista to create a
picture-perfect
the picture now being Instagram and your
cameraphone may be more than a
picturesque painting or drawing but
still so shortly I think we've got about
10 minutes left cell 20 some of the
questions I'm going to battle through
one case study as a summary and it's a
case study which I have given lectures
on for how is in itself so I'll try and
contract it down to a five minute bullet
point thing but over this talk we've
seen we tracked the idea of English
landscape from the rule and deep into
the modern conception of a city we have
seen how ideas of beauty can mask
mechanisms of control and power and
we've seen how structural components of
these have been adopted into
contemporary city making strategies as I
say is a summary and by way of
conclusion I want to quickly run through
a number of these strategies and see how
they work with critical elements of a
project which is deeply relevant to I
believe to the analysis of a neoliberal
picturesque the garden bridge which some
of you know I know fairly well and was
not and will not be built the local
community sector experts and other
opponents including myself helped ensure
that it wouldn't be built for many many
reasons and many more than I'll go into
here but happy to talk after and there's
plenty of writing and there still will
be more coming out about it there were
many reasons why different people
opposed it there was not one singular
opposition to it but here I will quickly
use it as a quick summary case study to
summarize some of the elements we've
discussed in the talk and it's
interesting because as the Crystal
Palace was earlier as the Crystal Palace
was a reversal of the picturesque where
nature is now in toads within like a
framing architectural object as opposed
to in as I hear of stone the of the
architectural object nestled ravine
landscape we now have a city where
nature is being treated in a very
different manipulated way in the same
way that architecture was previously
[Music]
similarly I think the garden bridge did
the same thing as I saw this this very
controlled organized bit of nature so
firstly massing through them picturesque
was used in the CGI imagery there was
always the size of a floating again the
phantasmagoria and the all-weather
Benjamin writes about this idea of a
a dislocated and fairly dreamlike place
that as the gaze over haha would look
like it's connected to the city you know
just a fluid extension of the city in
some way a sense of seamless connection
like the haha but it wasn't aged and
there were things like this gated you'll
be closed many hours of the day of the
night time would be closed a number of
times a year for private use
they had big shutters extra this down
this was going to be a commercial unit
on the bottom which would've had a
rental income on the top it would have
been a queueing system so controlled
entry queuing security commercial
development underneath some of the
tropes that we've been talking about
through the whole of the park movement
it removed existing public green space
so removing actual green space for like
a controlled simulated green space you
know on the site here was the actual
commercial unit this itself would have
been a nearby development which
incidentally people who are on the
charity board of the garden bridge had
connections to some of these big
commercial developments had a huge
financial uplift even on announcement of
the garden bridge even if the thing
didn't get to be built because they
could use the image of on marketing
brochures all around the world
60 million uplift value instantly to
penthouse flats in commercial units
which was the amount of public money at
that time which was said to be going in
so uplink to all the properties in the
north bank garden bridge were a member
of the north bank Business Improvement
District obviously nearby and also on
the south bank as well big massive
neoliberal developments which would have
had huge uplift from the garden bridge
the control of nature I'd like to
compare this section of the garden
bridge with the unbuilt proposal by
excellent artist master Marcus coats for
2013 for the fourth plinth in France
Square because Marcus Coast folds in
ideas of the picturesque I think but he
doesn't they're very knowing kind of
clever subtle way and a kind of a joke
and also referentially whereas thomas
heavy Raqqah thing doesn't he he doesn't
have the wits about him to think about
place in that same level i think he
takes things very literally and he's
very serious whereas you know this you
can't take a tree stuck into 13,000 tons
of concrete and
and say it's a green project that is not
a serious proposition here we see the
control of nature like we saw in the
artificial planting systems and dobry
Arboretum conforming an idea of nature
to a new form a form of how nature
should be seen by the city dweller
to the representation of nation to the
marketable image but not nature as it is
should be or benefits from the land grab
we talked about enclosure as enclosure
of land and space but I think the garden
budgets worth considering in terms of
enclosing airspace as well the the view
up and down the Thames has a protective
view and as one continuous element of
London while the whole of the city has
changes this open bend in the river on
the left is the site you'll probably
familiar with walking up and down the
South Bank on the right is from the
planning application of what the bridge
would have looked like again some pools
you know the view of simples which we're
told is the most important thing in
planning as Fincher Street was allowed
to swap to view so simple could be
disruptive to the garland bridge because
the garden bridge would offer new views
so this is a sense of enclosure I think
as well it's a very liberal waving
version it's thinking about space in
different dimensions but I think we can
we can think about it the same way so as
Fenchurch Street allowed interruptive
views so the garden which would have
introductions a number of these
strategic views which is completely
against planning regulation and even
some Paul's Cathedral opposed it on
those grounds as well but it was
creating new views it was improving the
public offer and again these news views
were privately owned privately managed
and they were carefully manipulated and
controlled for the benefit of maybe not
Londoners per se but certain guests that
they wanted in this privately managed
space like the Business Improvement
District new views like those from
Fenchurch you know 25 interest rate
offered a new park so we see static
picture faint views heavy surveillance
surveillance through Wi-Fi gathering
through private security through heavy
CCTV also the planting which would have
had no all the trees were cut to would
have been cut all the foliage from two
meters down and none of the shots were
allowed to grow more than a meter high
so there was a uninterrupted Vista of
between 1 metre and 2 meters offering
them to have secure vision all the way
through so again nature
verse of nature whereby we were still
allowing a gays to bend for my
controlling gays gates at each end as I
mentioned planting trimmed Wi-Fi
gathering sight lines which sort of go
along a curved path but still offer the
secret of five security guards of view a
display of wealth and power of the city
as well you know as the Great Exhibition
had these monuments of the new world
dropped into nature and landscape so -
the view from the garden breach was for
you to passively stand back and look at
the neoliberal London skyline
the sort of Banksy you can't afford to
invest in and the wealth and the sort of
the glowing warthunder misdeed aboard
roads the spectacle is capital
accumulated to the point where it
becomes an image and L finish I think if
there's any questions I think we've got
like five or ten minutes to talk about
things
[Applause]
or just relax because I know there's a
line in there and a lot of pictures
let's have you just want to like three
that's fine too
yes yesterday there was a talk by
Chinese professor called modern bamboo
which was sort of the opposite of this
and all over the world there are now
very much bottom-up movements like in
Yunnan Province where there was a lot of
earthquake impact then our building with
the villagers researching the mud so
that it will be you know I mean it's
sort of exactly the opposite that's why
I'm mentioning it not here there is this
kind of bottom-up development going on
in South America yeah you know of people
I just I think it's interesting talking
about not to use nature as well rather
than just community-led housing that we
have here or you know grassroots
projects but actually to use the place
which is going for a landscape thinking
to use the place as a source of that
because that's in there before the
people and will be there after the
people certainly in London there's a lot
of grassroots movements but not to that
level I think that sounds great but like
I'm the trustee of a charity which is
building cooperative housing there's a
lot of CLT movements and a lot of things
like that it's harder and harder with in
this political framework for those
things to get traction but that's some
type of talk of like to Conte maybe I
forgot the name of him after because
I'll yeah because I can read it after
yes as a question behind you thank you
though thanks for a really durable talk
I was wondering in the role that
sustainability's plays today and the
creation of this imaginary of the green
citizen and the folding of
sustainability ethics into a housing
product was not president now this talk
of course also because it was focusing
on the aesthetics of the picturesque but
I'm wondering if you were to comment on
the emergence of sustainability as a
parameter within the picturesque and the
framing of a healthy lifestyle as
commodified form of of living in buying
housing products
what would you
I think firstly like that's one of the
most slippery words in architecture at
the moment sustainability I did a piece
of writing recently why I looked I think
in and I think it was in the London plan
for the how sustainability was mentioned
and I think they were like 53 different
meanings to it in relation to community
environment planting road traffic all
sorts of things and by that very
definition it kind of means nothing
and yet is the most important things
only in architecture you know a time
when we're demolishing things I elephant
and castle shopping centre or housing
estates with huge embodied carbon to
them build things new things mainly out
of glass is just bonkers and any
architect that has signed off to
architects declare and still goes ahead
with projects like that by Foster's
we're trying to do with the sort of the
big needle above and you know in centre
of London is just absurd and insulting
to the industry I think in terms of how
relates to the picturesque yeah I might
need to think on that a bit more
certainly as I mentioned in the talk so
personal and social improvement was
embedded into the vision of nature so
sustainable communities in the sense of
people who were working together you
know often in for God or for the
community or abstinence or doing sports
it's exercise but organized support so
Kennington common used to be the place
where everyone in London would go to
play cricket
very disorganized rough ground people
make their own cricket stumps as part of
the deal of enclosing Kennington common
and turning into a park they the royal
palace gave some land which became oval
cricket ground and by doing that
controlling what cricket is creating
laws for the game controlling who can
play who has access to it so there's a
sense of stability health beforehand
everyone could go and play cricket now
there wasn't the space to gameplay
correctly you weren't adapter in the
park but you could if you were the right
kind of personal you allowed to so it's
sustainability in that sense of for
those doing the right things and to the
right benefit but I don't think that's a
good definition of sustainability in any
term because often the people who are
creating
Jules have other agendas that play I
think they'll be I'll think anymore I
think it's an important question in the
crisis breakdown the climate victim that
we're in to think about it in everything
we do
silence I'd never know if that's a good
sign or a bad sign
reading to the construction of
neighborhoods and if new neighborhoods
for pacing council estates how how do
you see the like now this image is
incredible with the supposed to poor
people fishing like how how does that
reappear today like the image of the
poor that is fetishized within the it's
totally so there was a number of slides
I didn't include you know in particular
within the creation of new neighborhoods
because of course it reappears with
homeless people in the street and so on
but yeah in the construction of these
like eco shows whatever you and you
saying hole what they call new parts of
the city which I never knew parts of the
city just there was built the city there
before it's just you're using
differently the sort of shops you get
that pop up in for instance the island
around Docklands were there's lots of
new towers have gone up I forget the
name of bits of London
I'm sending around Kings Cross
especially in the better development the
kinds of shops they put in really a
quite formulaic to a sort of the shabby
chic thorne to a better word still have
globalised rustic I think which sort of
falls into a picturesque is like the
sort of furnishing you go to any coffee
shop anywhere in the world and you'd
feel familiar in it because using the
lights off lights and it's using a sort
of wooden edging surface and those
chairs I know them and and that's
something of the rustic they're usually
working class implements to solve the
chairs and the stalls I sort of thought
of things but everything repurposed so I
think there's that in this or the
deployment of strategic deployment of
some of those ideas because they carry
with them a sense of familiarity but
also a sense of local even if the of the
neighbor in the community is a
completely new one that's being
transplanted into an area there's
something familiar about them and
therefore you feel like this coffee shop
has been here forever
like the fence or the car tracks in a in
a picturesque view similarly you know
the way the working class has started
things have bent or folded into a
gentrifying area
it happens a lot there was a good
example of Deptford I think five years
ago I think it's still there a bow in
Deptford which is took over a
closed-down job Center in the in the
austerity government closed down a job
centre because of the minimizing the
state despite the fact normal people
unemployed and in its place some people
as modernist set up a bar there called
job centre where it was had the same job
center sign on the front and it was a
themes or a bar and it's I can't think
of anything more grotesque than using
the desperate language of the people who
have been displaced to then kind of
welcome in a sort of a new colonial use
of that space and it's you know we see
on a small level but there's
occasionally things like that crop up
and I think it's disgusting and and I
think it's or relates to this in many
ways being a completely different or
framework and aesthetic
thank you can everyone hear we got the
mic cause yeah thank you and thank you
very much for the thorough lecture and I
like how you explain what's pictures and
what is also beyond picturesque my
question is where I'm interested in this
topic it's about the relationship
between parks and pizza people
especially after Victoria and time when
people are so use parkus things in the
space but what seems as a space for
people to express their national pride
as far as um it's like seeing as a place
for freedom of speech at the same time
there are acts being proposed sort of
limits the things that you can say in
the park and the things you can express
and also eliminate a certain group of
people that could have access to the
park so I wonder your cuz you didn't
really talk didn't really cover the yeah
there's a huge amount about that and
there was bits of the talk I took out
which sort aught a lot more about the
park movement I can send some if you're
are you studying here yeah I can send
some links to certain books which a
really good reading on that but you're
right one of my favorite parks in the
city is actually Burgess Park and it's
not fenced so you can go into any time
of day or night and and it's it's a
modern park and it was built on old
industrial lands and it's down in
Southwark and I encourage you to go but
it also has a completely different feel
to the old Victorian Park and if you
were to go through a weekend there are
people just playing football wherever
they want and there are people having
barbecues everywhere and there's a bit
more chaos about it but because of that
their sense of national identity their
sense of people using in their own way
in different places but it's still a
really beautifully landscaped park and I
think there are good examples they're
not all does example I was giving there
are really good examples too in terms of
town squares a really good example I
think is in Brixton and Windrush Square
where there's a lot of town centres have
tried to dissolve the Business
Improvement Districts with highly
managed control spaces in Brixton and I
don't congratulate Lambeth Council on a
lot of stuff I think they're not the
best counselling
but when Josh graphing has been a huge
success and they're using certain
elements of picturesque Oh in terms of
boulders and natural landscaping but
it's completely open and you're
completely comfortable to sit down and
chat there whether you know there's
homeless people there there's people who
in other areas would be considered
problems and disposed of but it's their
place they're citizens so entitled to be
there and it all just works very well
it's next to a busy road but it's I
think that's a nice place to come visit
to so there there doesn't they don't
have to be tightly paternalistically
controlled spaces but it's a thing that
we kind of have built into our model of
parks in this country and was copied to
America especially in like Central Park
and things by homestead as well and
through that way of treating people and
a way of thinking about what nature is
and controlling politics and freedoms so
yeah I can send you some links to books
and there's a lot more to say on the
area so that's if you're going to unpack
that for your writing and your studying
there so that's really exciting thank
you very much I think we have to leave
it here I just wanted to add that
throughout the whole lecture a the
conclusion of Dennis cosgrove formations
came to my mind because it's really an
example or model on how to break the
landscape frame through the very visual
aesthetic apparatus throughout your
lecture so I would like to congratulate
and thank you before really really
interesting lecture thanks thanks a lot
and thanks
you
