thank you Thank You Simmons first of all
thank you very much for being here thank
you very much for inviting me it's
always a huge pleasure coming back here
for those who don't know me I've been
external examiner here the mrmc
sustainable environmental design a
couple of years ago and it's always good
to come back and see the amount and
quality and rigor of the work that
students produce that's taken as eight
hours to go through 11 projects so if
you see me slightly drain then at some
point things sort of start drifting
don't worry just just wake me up I have
a glass of wine here well I had a glass
of wine here is almost gone but I'll try
to be awake as possible I'll try to use
this microphone and stay behind the
lectern because I know that normally
with camera recording is a bit more
challenging than to follow me because
I'm very mobile but anyway if I cannot
really sort of stand still I'll signal
you and then and then you'll know where
to go when Simmons invited me to give
this presentation I said okay I know the
quality of these guys there's not much
that I can really teach them so what if
we actually do something else what if we
look at what we know and then try to see
ok is what we know really so much fixed
in stone or is there a way to sort of
give a critical overview on what we are
building upon in our practice and try to
reinvent it and try to sort of
reinterpret in a different way this is
the reason why when what Simmons
actually also asked me to sort of
provide an image for the presentation
was about to give the first thing I
thought okay I'll do a graph of a study
of whatever comfort well-being but
done probably we need to be a little bit
more metaphoric and and then at the end
I chose this image this image that
represents some blocks of ice on shore
and why did they choose this because of
three reasons first of all because ice
and then water is in continuous movement
so it's dynamic and it's variable as
should be a comfort in our being then
second is because it represents a moment
of change of state so from solid to
liquid and then a continuous and dynamic
change of state from solid to liquid and
then thirdly of course the the ice issue
the melting of the of the glaciers
represents quite well the challenges
that we have to deal with on a daily
basis however I want to start from
something which is a bit more basics I
want to start from the reason that
brings us here and probably the brings
you here as well is because we're
interested in architecture we're
interested in the value of buildings and
this is not of course something that we
discover today I mean it's been
centuries since since we truly owe that
we know that architecture is something
different than building is something
different than just providing shelter
because architecture actually is
something that provides and gives order
and meaning to the idea of a shelter
however when we look at the current
state of the industry the current state
of architecture the current state of the
construction industry very often we're
faced with this very often we see those
percentages we see that buildings are
responsible for 40% of emissions of
carbon dioxide's and buildings consume I
like using use because consumption is
not very much in thermodynamic
principles something that belongs to the
idea of energy buildings use 40% of
energy but then every time that I see
this kind of of of percentages this kind
of statistics always wander myself it's
my building using any energy well if I
just leave
the building doesn't actually do
anything I remember when I I have spent
a few bit of years at Nottingham and at
some point when I went to my interview
there was one professor who didn't
really like me I was talking about all
of this idea of sustainable
environmental design and then he wanted
to ask me a very large question and say
okay if you have to do a passive house
how would you do it okay I can I can do
it quite immediately let's let's all
leave let's leave the building as it is
switch everything off and the house is
passive
it was quite upset that then they gave
me the position but actually the point
is is right that is that buildings don't
use energy as we know and we've known
for for quite a while these people that
that use energy so if we really want to
tackle the energy issue and particularly
the energy issues together with the
comfort and the well-being but probably
we have to focus a little bit more on
people and actually again this is not
something that is new we know that
ninety percent of operating cost of any
agencies actually given is actually
going to the salaries of people not to
the energy that the building used so
focusing on people and focusing on the
conditions and the indoor environmental
conditions that characterize the
environment where people live and work
is probably what it should be so we all
know about this idea of IEQ indoor
environmental quality indoor
environmental quality that is normally
has is represented here but the various
categories which are assessed by the
Center for the built environment
occupant survey well they provide a sort
of an overview of the qualities of the
environment in buildings so they go from
assessment for example of the general
building the workspace the quality of
the acoustics or the air quality the
maintenance thermal comfort lighting and
so forth however if we look into the
definition of indoor record or
environmental quality is one element
which is quite interesting
this definition which is provided by the
American Institute of Occupational
Health and Safety actually tell us that
IQ is the quality of a building
environment in relation to the health
and well-being of those who occupy the
space within it okay there's something
interesting here those who occupy the
space within it which means that
depending on who occupies spaces and the
activities that is actually performed
into a space the i q-- will actually be
different because the conditions that
are then conducive to the health and
well-being of people inside this
building are different let's take an
example this building is a bank this
building is a bank in Denmark and
actually is a kind of a Stock Exchange
you see here people that are working
with a number of screens in front of
them in order to make sure that they of
course can monitor the situation
happening on markets all over the world
and well one single mistake of those
people can actually have quite a
significant impact on the financial
balance of the global economy so it's
actually quite important that these
people work in conditions that are very
much conducive to the health and
well-being so those things there that
you see on each workstation are actually
personalised fans so people can actually
control the amount of air that they get
in order to make sure that at any time
when they operate in front of those
screens they are first of all awake and
then they can perform to the best of
their obviously cognitive capacities now
from that perspective perspective there
been a number of studies that have
looked at how the performance of people
actually change depending on the
conditions upon which people work so for
example I refer to these studies that
were done by the Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory in 2006 these
studies have actually looked at certain
task performance that people were
actually performing under certain
conditions and they've actually seen
that at a certain temperature at a
certain level of ventilation rate the
performance so the cognitive task
plateaued
so essentially that could be an optimal
let's put it under inverted commas an
optimal temperature an optimal level of
ventilation rate and which people could
perform at the best capacity however
this has been taken by standards and and
Building Regulations worldwide and as
then ended up in saying okay everywhere
in the world we have to have 22 degrees
and we have to have at least 6.5 liters
per second of rental of F fresh air is
provided by people okay fine
fair enough but is it the right
conditions in which people work do we
need in order to perform at the best 22
degrees C and 6.5 liters per second of
fresh air well the question is when now
let's have a closer look at the way in
which the organism of the human body
works and let's have a closer look at
full markers of Baalak well-being the
amount of cortisol which is the so
called stress hormone which is
essentially the hormone in our body that
represents our activity the amount of
melatonin which is the sleep hormone
which is the sleep essentially that
induces a state of sleep body
temperature if we assume that we perform
the best at 22 degrees C and at 6.5
liters of fresh air then we would assume
all of those to plateau at a certain
point well actually if you look at the
way in which they develop throughout the
day we can see that all of our
biological markers go through a number
of different states a number of
different states that are linked with a
metabolic metabolic functioning so is
there anything static about humans no no
not really but then at the same time is
there anything static about buildings
well if we started measuring campaign
and we look for example of air
temperature or we look at surface
temperature or we look at air
infiltration or we look at
the amount of discomfort glare or and
weight the distribution of lighting onto
a workplace we can see that any building
goes through a number of dynamic states
to whom of course we have to respond how
do we respond to those dynamic states
well we respond with a certain behavior
and this goes back to the idea of
adaptation and the adaptive control that
people actually exercise in order to
achieve maintain or restore the comfort
well this is where at the moment we have
a big question mark at the moment we
still don't have robust models that can
actually tell us what behavior people
will take in response to a change in
environmental stimuli and probably the
fact that we miss this understanding of
the link between a certain change in
indoor environmental quality and the
resulting behavior from people is one of
the reason why we keep measuring the
famous performance cap so the
performance gap between the predicted
and the measure energy use but I would
also say the performance gap between
satisfaction of people inside buildings
why because we provide constant
condition we provide conditions that the
standards say would be acceptable for
the majority of people but then we ended
up with buildings where people actually
have a complete different perception or
the very same environmental qualities so
why is this happening well this is
probably happening because of the reason
that I said before this is probably
happening before all of our standards
and building regulations are actually
measured against what is called standard
average user but the standard average
user is action idolization I always say
that the standard average user is
normally six foot tall 35 years old
looks a bit like a certain condition so
standards are probably not successful in
providing satisfaction or providing
general satisfaction for people because
thing that is missing in standard is
recognition of the inter and intra
individual differences in the needs the
preferences and the habits of their
occupants and I'm saying inter and intra
individual differences which means that
there are differences between different
individuals so the inter individual
differences but there's also differences
between the individual and him or
herself at a different time why because
we saw before the based on a circadian
cicle all of our moons are of a
metabolic processing is actually
different in cycles throughout the day
so we should look at the state of the
individual specific state in time of
specific moment in time you don't have
to understand what are the conditions
that are conducive to the comfort health
and well-being comfort health and
well-being everywhere today we actually
see those three words put together like
if they were provided by the same
conditions but now the questions I'm
asking is a certain temperature of a
certain lighting or a certain level of
sound pressure provides the same amount
of comfort well-being and health well
actually this is not something that we
can say why because comfort well-being
and health a multi-dimensional psycho
physical and physiological constructs
and actually the complexity of those
contracts constructs derived from the
complexity of the human body the human
body is actually made of a number of
different systems this image comes from
some of the research that underpins the
well building standard so all of our
building systems that avascular
digestive endocrine immune so forth have
certain conditions that actually are
important in order to trigger their
functioning but on the other end they
influence each other so there are very
complex interrelationships among each
other most of which we still don't know
and we still actually grasping the
surface of the research in the
understanding of how the work how the
body effectively works and the reason
why we have a
characterization of those stochastic
processes that actually drive the
responses to stimuli and therefore drive
the responses to changes in
environmental conditions so this is a
bit of the premise to what I've been
sort of aiming to tell you in order to
start trying to understand how we can
define how can we can design for
conferring for well-being we are first
of all to try to understand how and
whether it's possible to define
conferring well-being and also try to
understand how come from well-being in
certain conditions differ from each
other now let's start from comfort and a
sip of wine just to make sure that you
know with comfort comes also comfort
from the speaker I'm referring here to
the definition of comfort which is given
by the Astra 55 standard so it's thermal
comfort but by analogy we could actually
expand this definition also toward the
spheres of our environmental the stimuli
so in here thermal comfort is defined as
the condition of mind that expresses
satisfaction with the thermal
environment and is assessed by
subjective evaluation so two interesting
keywords in here on the one hand
satisfaction and on the other hand
subjective evaluation so there's not
anything objective about comfort there
could be some generalization but comfort
is a subjective construct but then I
went to see whether there are all the
definitions are comfort and I've seen
the Sipsey knowledge series on comfort
where thermal comfort is defined as
where there is broad satisfaction with
the environment so people are neither
too hot nor too cold
another way to regard this is the
absence of discomfort okay in here I'm
starting to have problems
I can see comfort
expressed by personal satisfaction and
by subjective evaluation but on the
other end have a bit more trouble in
seeing comfort as the absence of
discomfort because that would mean like
if white is represented as the absence
of black and I don't want to go into the
fifty shades of gray because we could
spend the night here but probably in the
definition that is still something that
is missing there but then let's see what
we can say about discomfort so this
comfort again by the CBC knowledge
serious guide on comfort is defined
where people start to feel uncomfortable
so they are too hot or too cold but are
not made and well by the better
conditions so essentially this comfort
is where people starting to deviate from
a certain neutrality but what neutrality
if a body changes in temperature
cortisol melatonin and alertness does
not suffer medical symptoms
okay so discomfort is now the absence of
comfort but without affecting health
with those definitions let's see what
health is health is a state of complete
physical mental and social well-being
and not merely the absence of disease or
infirmity
okay so health is not where I'm not ill
but it's where there is a complete
physical mental and social well-being
but then what is well-being so in all of
these definitions there is always
something to me that is missing there
are always relative definitions to
something else which is not defined by
the definition itself so comfort is the
absence of discomfort discomfort is the
absence of comfort but the absence of
health the absence of your health sorry
but health is the presence of well-being
and the absence of disease to me it's a
bit complex to try to reconcile what we
actually mean by that okay let's let's
start from the basis
everything revolves around the concept
of satisfaction so maybe this is what we
should be looking at but what is
satisfaction satisfaction implies a
state of mind that is driven bracket
gratification from a need or desire as
it affects or motivates behavior haha
okay now I have behavior which is
responses to assess certain changes in
stimuli and I have a driver I Drive it
because I'm gratified due to a need or a
desire a need or a desire which is by
the way very much subjective so cannot
be generalized so we have a number of
different definitions and then I'm
starting asking myself some questions ok
so how can I achieve and maintain
comfort which should be the aim of most
standards
well achieving and maintaining comfort
is a bit of a challenge because it
requires knowledge of physical phenomena
it requires knowledge and understanding
of physiological processes within our
body and it requires also a need to
define up psychological and behavioral
responses that all day in order to
increase satisfaction so it's actually
quite complex
however can one be satisfied with mild
discomfort
thirty-two degrees 95% humidity I'm
outside on any comfort zone by I'm in
front of a pool I have a Singapore sling
on my in my hand there is music running
around there's a group of locals coming
in I can tell you that I was in mild
discomfort but I couldn't be happier
so that's responding to your
satisfaction actually can provide you
comfort even when the standard tells you
that it should be really uncomfortable
well maybe yes but then the other
question is can one be satisfied we
conditions that lead to you being so the
question is if I try to increase my
comfort that's increasing my comfort
necessarily lead to more well-being so
our comfort and well-being linearly
related well if you go to the
Oktoberfest there's actually what you
find you can actually get a lot of
comfort but I can assure you that you're
not gonna guarantee you well-being after
a while so there is something else that
needs to be defined that is something
else that needs to be questioned first
of all if we want to tackle well-being
how can we effectively set well-being
goals then how can we design towards
well-being so what design approach
should be adopted
then what metrics and tools should
measure the appropriate indicators of
well-being what methods can be applied
to collect and feed data into our models
other models actually aimed towards
well-being or aimed towards comfort
because these two things may not be the
same how to effectively inform the
control strategies of our building
should the control strategies of a
building aim towards a neutral
acceptance of conditions or may be
should actually recognize that people
vary
and different it needs and habit both
with an inter and intra individual
variability how can you reconcile the
gap between research and building
practice and then finally how can
standards and codes evolve so these are
a number of questions and I think that
if we want to define how to design for
comfort and well-being these are all
questions that we need to ask ourselves
so very briefly I will try to give a bit
of an overview of the responsibilities
that we have towards responding to these
questions and then obviously living up
to you to respond to some of the to you
to us to respond to some of the
questions that are still open the thing
that is important to mention here is
that well-being is a recurrent term
which now we see almost everywhere but
that requires a departure from
conventional agendas well-being requires
more than just comfort although
well-being is very much apparent and
very much used somehow almost
interchangeably with with other concepts
such as wellness comfort quality of life
health and we have to make sure that we
can actually the mark very clearly the
boundaries of each on the other one we
have to say that there are a number of
scales that we can see the scientific
literature that can actually measure
different indicators we have always to
make sure that we measure the right
indicator and we use the right scale for
the right indicator we have to consider
that well-being a multifaceted construct
which is made of physical physiological
social economic and psychological needs
and we also have to consider that
well-being actually integrates two
different things on the one hand
integrates hedonic dimension so feeling
well and on the other hand it integrates
what is called as eudaimonic dimensions
of functioning well well-being has to be
measured by both quantitative and
qualitative relations and metrics
and actually well-being requires a shift
from an approach that only look at risk
reduction to actually promoting health
and promoting these positive feelings
into buildings and then of course we
have to look at how well being can be
included into building practices and
standards so let's look at this let's
look at the moment how building
standards are actually promoting well on
the one hand comfort but then on the
other hand well-being if one looks at
the various standards or rating tools
that are available worldwide one will be
surprised to see the variety that is
actually out there although at the end
of the day most of the standards are
actually very similar in the structure
but are also very similar in the way in
which they respond to certain conditions
inside buildings all of those standards
actually start from the very same basis
most of those standards were actually
initially formulated in order to respond
to criteria that related very much to
energy but also then context and also
then concepts of citing resources and so
forth recently we started to have new
credits which address well-being
requirements and those new credits those
new criteria that are now starting to be
embedded into standards relate for
example to aesthetics economics
inclusiveness Biophilia food sleeping
traveling and so forth but why those new
credits have been embedded well those
new credits have been embedded because
after a certain number of years that
we've used standard and rating tools in
order to drive our design we've seen
that standard and breaking tools do not
have a very close relationship with the
experience that people have inside
buildings what I'm showing here is a
study that was done by Monica Fronsac
stefanos Kevin and a number of other
authors at the Center for the build
environment in Berkeley where they look
at 351
things 52,000 occupant responses and
we're on the x-axis is expressed as
satisfaction with a number of different
categories one thing is actually quite
interesting is that there where the
building performs
the list is actually under the visual
equality sound temperature categories
which are those indoor environmental
quality that we as architects and
engineers should be able to control in a
more faraway on the basis of this study
a couple of years ago I spent my
sabbatical leave at the University of
California Berkeley working with this
research group the center for the built
environment and we've looked
specifically at the buildings that were
certified by one rating to the LEED
rating tool and we specifically analyzed
the occupant surveys that were coming
from 144 buildings 65 buildings which
were rated by lead and 79 buildings
which were non rated by lead so overall
we actually looked at twenty one
thousand four hundred and seventy
seventh occupant responses and in here
I'm showing the satisfaction the
documents expressed with the building at
the workspace well what is interesting
is that the mean and the median
satisfaction does not change so the
building having received certification
by lead did not lead to any change in
satisfaction with the building with the
workspace meaning that the criteria upon
which the building was designed were not
very much looking at the comfort and the
satisfaction of people one interesting
thing was that the only way in order to
see some certain variation of
satisfaction was when looking at the
amount of time that people had spent in
that specific building well
interestingly people that actually had
recently moved into a LEED building at
the highest of this fraction of their
environment but actually the highest
satisfaction faded off quite quickly
after just one year which means that
psychological processes are also quite
important
people think I'm moving into a building
which is rated by a green certification
program so I must be good I must be
feeling well but after a year obviously
that sort of effect start fading off
this is not something which is related
to our friends on the other side of the
ocean we did a very similar study a
couple of years ago also with building
which were rated by briam so the UK
system this was a study done at the
University of Nottingham and actually we
found very similar results actually in
this case even worse because in this
case the satisfaction of people was
higher in building that were not rated
by briam so in this case we went there
with equipment and we run a number of
right now surveys and we found out that
one of the reason where people were
least satisfied were less satisfied in
buildings non certified by bream is
because in buildings no certified people
had the perception that they were still
in control so again another important
element to take into account the
perception of control of your building
which adds to the psychological
conference well-being that is part of
the overall perception that we have of a
spaces referring back to the lead study
we also looked at whether having
achieved one specific credit under a
certain category that actually brought
an increase in satisfaction so we have
here comparison between buildings that
have achieved or have not achieved
accrediting ventilation but the people
were not more satisfied with their
quality and here we have differences
between buildings that have achieved and
not achieve a credit on daylight and
views
well the difference in terms of
satisfaction with a lighting in views
did not change substantially here we see
that the more credit people had the more
credits building had received on the
indoor environmental quality the least
satisfied people in this case we're with
the
space there is something that those
studies have to tell us thence these
studies actually have to tell us that
the way in which we have thought green
building certification systems and in
general standards for building so far is
probably something that needs to be
somehow changed until now our green
building certification stint systems our
building rating tools are very much
focused on the building well actually if
we want to really increase the comfort
and well-being of people we need a
paradigm shift we need to change the
culture and going from looking at the
building to looking at the people that
occupy them this is the reason why for
example a number of green building
rating problems such as lead or briam
trying to renovate the basis upon which
credits are given for example lead
actually has a number of impact
categories in which the specific aims to
promote the health of building occupants
in user the surrounding community and
the supply chain so perhaps starting to
have a much wider understanding of what
is the process of designing constructing
and operating a building and together
with the more traditional lead Imbrium
there's a number of other programs which
have started to really show us the way
in which we should progress in order to
provide the confident well-being to
people like for example the live
building challenge with the southern
battles and imperatives that are there
to remind us that living buildings
should give more than they just take the
problem of fit well which is an
evidence-based approach in which a
number of categories are very much
related with the perception of people
inside buildings for example feeling of
well-being promoting safety and physical
activity and then the world-building
standard that the more and more we
starting to know and appreciate with the
10 the concepts that go well beyond
concept conventional indoor
environmental qualities that we have
scene into buildings so let's go back to
what we said so far so far we said that
there are differences probably between
what we should do in order to provide
for the comfort of people and what we
should do in order to provide for their
well-being satisfaction is an important
aspect that needs to be looked after
satisfaction that implies a way in which
we relate with the indoor environmental
qualities that characterize our
environment so what is the relationship
between indoor environmental qualities
and well-being what is the state of our
industry let's go back to the thermal
environment let's go back to heat and
let's refer to the spectrum of occupant
experience which is represented in here
as we said before at the very bottom and
the spectrum is discomfort deprivation
which is a condition that people are not
satisfied with their environment they're
either too hot or too cold although that
doesn't actually make them hill if we go
one step up comfort and sufficiency
which is what the standard thresholds
that we read for today the 80%
acceptability that comfort models such
as Astra 55 sort of giving us as a
target however if you were the producer
of a car if you were the producer of a
laptop would you be happy is one out of
five of your customers where an active
so 80% acceptability means that 20% are
unhappy so running a business knowing
that one or five clients are unhappy is
probably not going to leave you much
room in in in a certain market and still
we accept this in the building industry
probably we need to do a little bit more
than that probably we need to go above
conference efficiency probably we need
to start looking at daylight when you
start looking at productivity we need to
start looking at physical social and
emotional
health but how can we provide that
inside buildings so if we start for
example with the thermal environment
thermal conditions inside buildings very
often actually do try to target
conditions that as we said before are
kept constant and under very narrow
range this is probably not something
that we should try to pursue because we
have proven that is not something that
is conducive either to a comfort neither
to our well being one way forward in
terms of try to understand and try to
provide conditions that are very much
very more dynamic is for example by
looking at a thermal experience which is
more personalised and from that
perspective a number of advances have
been run with personal comfort system so
personalised occupancy funds or foot
rooms or for example the personal
comfort chair which was designed by the
Center for the built environment at
Berkeley and actually even more so but
the use of personal comfort system we
can also provide an advanced in terms of
the way in which we model comfort
comfort at the moment is modeled by what
is called by population models for
example the PM v DB d or also the
adaptive comfort model that is based on
a standard person again the standard
average person that we mentioned before
but actually if we look at the
prediction accuracy of those models the
prediction accuracy is very low on the
other hand by the use of personal
comfort systems we can start looking at
a new generation of personal comfort
models that can be based on IQ factors
can be based on the feedback provided by
people can be based on behaviors and can
be based also on the physiological
parameters that we collect from people
so by looking at a different way in
which we provide comfort which is
personalized towards the occupants
rather than standardized of the building
we can offer conditions that are more
conducive to the satisfaction of people
satisfaction that we saw as we said
before is key to provide the comfort and
a step forward to provide the well-being
I said the step forward to provide
well-being why because well-being is
actually something that as we said
before it's not necessarily given by the
maintaining narrow and constant
condition but actually thermal
variability and temperatures without
which are drifting temporally and
spatially can actually and I've been
proven to be much healthier for people
there's an interesting study that I
would invite you to look at which is
called healthy excursion of sidon
thermal comfort zone this study have
actually looked at the way in which the
body reacts to drifting temperature
temporally and spatially and has
actually seen that a number of metabolic
processes such as for example metabolism
energy expenditure glucose metabolism
and insulin sensitivity are actually
heightened by the presence of those
drifting temperature and we all know
started to know the concept of
anesthesia so the concept of the ionic
pleasure which is given by changing
temperatures in our environment so from
that perspective of course we can move
forward from the standard average
comfort provided by our environments and
try to sort of understand that by
drifting temperatures our comfort is
announced and camuto was well being but
is it's something new is the fact that
going from a cold to a warm environment
can actually stimulate our metabolism
something that we didn't know before
well I'm from Italy and I can tell you
that Romans had actually mastered that
2,000 years ago so Romans has already on
this feat that thermal shocks to the
body can actually provide for the
metabolism it can actually provide for a
heightened response to the way in which
our body works
these words from a thermal perspective
but also words from a visual perspective
so most of us standards and we seen that
throughout the day look at maintaining
certain conditions
the amount of horizontal illuminance of
the desk in order to perform a certain
task however research of the last 20
years
Estelle has told us that the eye
actually has two different functions not
only a visual function but also a
function to provide an input to the
circadian system so providing a constant
level of illuminance throughout the day
on an oriental plane may not respond to
all of our metabolic responses they're
actually ignorant with our circadian
stimulation and this is something quite
important because beyond visual
performance can actually provide a very
important stimulus to uh sleep memory
immune response growth and metabolic
health so again looking only at what is
in the standards what has been there
since 1917 the photopic luminous
efficient fashion which was produced by
the CIE more than a century ago is
probably not enough of course the
photopic visual efficiency function
gives a very clear understanding of the
visual photoreceptors inside the cones
respond to a visual stimulus but they do
not tell us the way in which the human
eye responds to a luminous stimulus in
order to activate all of the various
circadian processes that then influence
the neuroendocrine need of physiological
and neurobehavioral processes upon which
our body works again this is something
that is not new this day of a few years
this is the famous panel that was
actually introducing the use of electric
light into building and it's quite
interesting to say that the use of
electricity for lighting is in no way
ansel to health you notice is the fact
the soundness of sleep well yes correct
but incomplete the use of light does not
is not harmful for
but it can affect the soundness of sleep
because research of the last 10-15 years
has told us that we respond in very
different ways to light that has
different intensity different duration
different spectrum and also different
light different history of light
exposure and one of those interesting
thing is looking at the different cycle
of the spectrum of light throughout the
day at the morning at the morning light
there is a very rich nosov blue light to
whom intrinsically photosensitive
retinal ganglion cells are very much
sensitive to while on the other hand
throughout the day the correlated color
temperature so the spectral quality of
the light continuously change and a body
of course has adapted to those changes
throughout this evolution well it would
be important to bring all of those
changes inside the buildings rather than
responding with very constant level of
illumination both of a horizontal and a
vertical field one interesting thing is
that of course we can talk about
circadian stimuli and we can talk about
the way in which we respond the
circadian stimuli but we also have to
think that as we said before all of our
responses are integrated so our visual
and visual response are very much
functioning at the same time so we
should try also to coordinate between
all of those aspects and there are still
so many things that we don't know for
example in terms of how to provide for
our visual comfort and I just want to do
a little drag action in terms of this
comfort layer because of course in our
standards we have a number of
indications about how we should provide
for an environment which is glare-free
and most of the time we see light
relating factors that can actually
provide us a way to avoid the occurrence
and magnitude of glare inside spaces
most of our standards are based on
indices that depend on the luminance of
the sauce in updation level the
conscious effect the saturation the size
of the glasses of the position of the
glasses no novice standards actually
looks at the inter individual
variability or the intra-individual
variability that I was referring to
before so for example none of us in this
is foreplay
includes the subject related factors
such as gender age culture through no
type photosensitivity or the ingestion
of food caffeine and so forth
none of our standards actually look at
context related factors such as what
time of the day we're looking at what is
the view to the outside what is the way
in which we are actually rating clear
this is something which I've been
thinking for a number of years and I've
had the chance of meeting some very
talented people Michael Cantor diversity
of nothingham gluteal Pearson at the
universitÃ© catholique the van that
looked specifically into the context of
this Comfort player for example together
with Michael Kent which was my PhD
student at Nottingham we started a
series of experiment in terms of trying
to understand something which is very
much codified for the last eight years
like this comfortably does it changes
throughout the day do we respond
differently to again sauce in the
morning then we do in the afternoon in
order to do that we have set up a number
of experimental conditions very much
controlled in order to see effectively
what was the response of people to the
glezos we then run semi controlled tests
this was done at the single best
facility in in Singapore and then we run
some test room studies with the presence
of daylight well the results that we
received from that was actually quite
astonishing in fact the results that we
received on that was that depending of
the time of the day the same glass
source can actually be assessed with a
complete different magnitude of glare so
in here we have a
in which we have the for glare sensation
votes that are used by any scale just
perceptible just noticeable just
uncomfortable just intolerable and we
have for each one of those four
different times of the day morning
midday afternoon and evening what is
actually quite interesting to see is
that the same level of great sensation
is given to illuminance source of
different magnitude depending on the
time of the day at which we have so as
the day progress we become more tolerant
to glare something which is not embedded
into any standard as the day progressed
we become more tolerant to glare means
that we respond differently to glare in
the morning than in the afternoon but in
the morning is where we need to receive
this high level of luminous that can
actually trigger a metabolic well-being
again the relationship conferring will
be is something complex and something
that requires understanding at the same
time of physical physiological and
psychological parameters one more
interesting thing that we realized when
looking at those studies on this comfort
layer is if you're familiar with this
comfort layer those glare sensation
votes Arabic e-juice everywhere you see
the just perceptible noticeable
uncomfortable and intolerable and
actually what is quite interesting to
see is that those glare sensation votes
that we see in every standard derived
from studies that were done in the 40s
and in the 50s with six subjects the
multi criterion scale of up concern was
done with six subjects and then of
course we taken in other studies in
order to create the famous nine-point
scale of the bear which is reproduced
here now let's look at this we have
glare scales imperceptible perceptible
acceptable in comfortable intolerable
and then we have thresholds just
imperceptible just acceptable just
uncomfortable just intolerable
we went back to see how this scale was
produced this scale was produced by
adjustment procedure so in this scale
people were presented with the glasses
the glasses was increased until a
certain threshold was achieved so for
example people were presented with the
glasses which was acceptable then the
glaze sauce was increased until when
people said stop now it's just
uncomfortable and at that point the just
uncomfortable threshold was established
with an ask yourself what if we reverse
this what if we start from uncomfortable
and then we go down rather than going up
so if we start from uncomfortable and
then we decrease the glaze sauce at this
point it is just acceptable so it's
starting to become acceptable so
depending on the way in which you go the
same value of glare will be either
uncomfortable or acceptable meaning that
most of the standards that we base our
design upon could be very much biased by
in this case experimental methodologies
there was another element which was
actually quite interesting and that in
recent years has been investigated quite
thoroughly which is the aspect of view
pivot organza and 2000 in a number of
years ago produced a number of papers in
which they said that okay the way in
which will respond to glare depends on
the interest that we see in a view
towards the outside we actually did a
similar study and without going too much
into detail onto this we saw that
depending on the importance that people
gave to a view so is he here you said
undesirable indifferent important and
very important the higher the importance
given to the view the higher the
corresponding day Leclaire probability
and which people gave a certain rating
of glow
so if you rate your view to the outside
as being very important your rating of
glare will be given to conditions that
would actually provide a higher
probability of being limpid or situation
meaning that you are more tolerant so
again looking at comfort in a very sort
of constant and narrow range way is not
something that is very much conducive to
our understanding of our biological
processes very similar things could be
said in terms of our other senses the
sound our years constantly monitor all
of the events around us and actually
give us an idea of where we find
positive or negative soundscapes and all
of those positive or negative sound
landscapes very much affect the way in
which we perceive our environment and
this is particularly important for
example in vulnerable population such as
for example the elderly even because
they utterly tend to have a very low
level of tolerance to stressors for an
environment to be acoustically sound so
to be acoustically rigorous in terms of
providing for conferring well-being we
have of course to try to understand both
at the requirement of people but also
what are the requirements and the
characteristics of a space because for
example the volume the shape the
materials the construction the usage and
everything that surrounds the space
would be very much importance in terms
of understanding the distribution in
transmission of sound and how this sound
changes to occur over time and then to
conclude with the indoor environmental
quality obviously it's very much
important to look at what is inside the
air that we breathe the amount of
pollutants that are generated by in
those sources are those sources on
products of transformation of indoor
pollutants I don't know if you've seen
this video is called the indoor
generation is a video that was produced
by the village company a couple of years
ago and is actually quite scary in terms
of trying to understand how we the
generation of the 21st century have
actually decided to lock up
our cells into sealed environments and
in doing so we've actually very much
impaired a comfort and very likely also
well-being
a number of studies for example of being
are being done and I refers to this to
the work of Benjamin Jones at the
University of Nottingham on the
production of pollutants from very sort
of household activities like for example
cooking or spraying the other runs for
profits of cleaning or also the other
there is the interesting research which
is being done in in terms of vaping and
in terms of electronic cigarettes and
what is actually in electronic
cigarettes both in terms of what we
inhale and what we exhale from it so to
conclude how can we sustain well-being
and how well-being is effectively
different from comfort well in order to
sustain well-being we have first of all
to look at a very much of Rocchi way in
which our buildings are first of all
managed so our buildings obviously are
very complex the way in which our
buildings work especially the buildings
on the tertiary buildings of the
buildings have very complex requirements
that we have to balance to each other we
have to make sure that we can balance
those corporate goals with environmental
targets and obviously with the financial
budgets and not always seven and saving
energy costs less we said as a premise
to distort that 90% of the operating
cost of a company is with salaries
ninety percent is with people so not
always the energy-saving strategies
would actually save money unless they're
actually managing balanced against the
actual needs of people is important in
buildings that we coordinate human
resources with facilities management and
look very much at the very key needs of
people so for example in this case
running service and understanding
what people need would be key in terms
of modeling what is the condition that
they experience both from a perspective
of Environmental Quality and a
perspective of health is a very
interesting studies that are done by Joe
Allen at the Chang school of public
health at Harvard in the in the US the
nine foundations for health which are
very much importance in terms of trying
to understand how we can also monitor
the well-being inside our buildings and
in this there's another very interesting
question market we have to ask ourselves
today we try to monitor almost
everything I'm monitoring myself with my
Apple watch that constantly every half
an hour says time to stand a rather go
outside and breathe even when I have in
on examinations and sorry I cannot so we
have to see what is the actual
monitoring that we need to have inside
buildings what we need to measure and
how actually we can use those
measurement in terms of informing our
models in so doing of course all of the
post occupancy evaluation campaigns are
very important and we know that today we
have very advanced technologies that can
provide us a lot of information in terms
of the environment that we experience
for example in here we have the
experience of the boss sample tools by
the keep of reach of the deal which is
there in Australia and the way in which
actually we can monitor in experience
are our spaces however we always have to
consider that in monitoring our spaces
we have to look at both the quantitative
aspects which is given by those
measurements and also the qualitative
human experience is always important to
relate with and obviously in doing so we
can also enrich the interdisciplinary
research opportunities that we have
so PUA has to go a little more beyond
just measuring occupant satisfaction
which is what we did in the study that I
showed before Puri has to loot as
at the variation in the Namek variation
of the indoor environmental parameters
over time but also the operational
performance of building and when we talk
about energy efficiency we have to
consider that the efficiency has to move
toward something so efficiency for what
for providing a certain level of comfort
and certain level of well-being to
people in so doing of course we need to
advance in terms of the way in which we
measure buildings but also in terms of
which we analyze our data and the way in
which we handle the data which in
today's sort of data protection world is
becoming more and more challenging so to
finish off what is the message that we
want to give with this with this lecture
we started by looking at comfort we
started by saying that comfort is
expressed by personal satisfaction and
is somehow indicated by subjective
evaluation as an absence of discomfort
we said that discomfort is in itself the
absence of ill health and we said that
health is something which is very much
difficult to define because it's a
multi-dimensional construct in which
physical physiological and psychological
parameters have to be taken into account
how can we provide for that well we can
provide for that by respecting the inter
and intra individual variability that is
part of the occupants of our buildings
we have to design buildings for their
occupants and we have to design
respecting the different preference
needs and habits that people have
throughout time so if we wanted to
provide a model for comfort and
well-being that model has to consider on
the one hand the environment in which we
work and live and the environment is
actually made of a number of
interactions between different factors
stressors that are of course of physical
and psychosocial nature but on the other
end
to look at the human model so we have to
see how different people profiles and
different preferences and needs over
time can characterize the conditions
that we need to provide for people so
determine determine these patterns of
stressor profiles and the interactions
and between different levels is what we
should but actually this is not
something that should sound completely
new to us because as we said before we
have grown and evolved into a very
dynamic world we have grown and evolved
and evolved responding to an environment
that changes continuously throughout the
day and throughout season
so although we spend 90% of our time in
our enclosed space today we should try
to bring all of that variability inside
we should try to understand that comfort
satisfaction and health may not require
a narrow range of average conditions to
operate so what is the message that that
I want to send tonight well the message
is that there may be large discrepancy
between the requirements for buildings
energy efficiency the transient
conditions that users demand for their
activities so their comfort and what
drives their desires the satisfaction
and what they need to feel well and be
healthy over time providing an example
looking at this I'm looking at the way
in which people respond to light this
was luminance mapping that I did on a
post occupancy evaluation into a
building in Melbourne a couple of years
ago winter and summer this is winter the
occupant has one to twenty contrast
ratio between his visual tasks and the
sky and it doesn't close the blind in
here this is some the occupant has a 1
to 10 contrast ratio between his task
and this guy on the outside and he
closes the blind so I interview the
person and I try to understand why he
was doing so and he said well in winter
if I close the bind I then feel quite
drowsy for the rest of the day while in
summer I couldn't care less and I said
okay do you walk or do you take the tube
to go to work and then I realize he was
taking the tube which means that in the
morning it couldn't get the necessary
entrainment from the natural light in
order to get it to the office and feel
already awake so in winter it needed to
have that stimulation so why is that
linked with the idea that energy comfort
and well-being require different
conditions so if I was to design this
space for energy probably I would draw
the blind and I would match it with a
certain artificial lighting in order to
provide 300 or 500 Lux on to the resort
a plane if I was looking at visual
comfort I will probably draw the blind
and tiny and I would make the person
focus entirely on the visual tasks in
order to make sure that it could work in
a complete glare-free environment if I
was actually considering this
performance of the time I would leave
the blind up I would not have any
electric electric or artificial lighting
and I would actually let the natural
stimulus of the natural lighting and
train the physiological activity of the
body so the same condition can actually
be seen in three different ways
if I prioritize energy efficiency visual
comfort or rather metabolic response
over time what is the consequence of
this the consequence is that we should
try to avoid constant conditions inside
building we should try to avoid what I
call the environmental boredom which is
V taking a definition that Allison Kwok
gave about 20 years ago of thermal
bottom so we need a very important
paradigm shift in a building that is
driven by having a
the sensory approach a paradigm shift in
which we celebrate difference and
interaction between factors this is the
only way by which we can provide for
good health and well-being we have to
avoid looking at broadly stable
environments the target acceptability
for a standard population we have to
avoid neutrally acceptable static and
uniform environment that limit dynamic
stimulation we have to consider the
inter and intra individual variability
of people this is the only way by which
we can obviously offer to people the
variable conditions that they need in
order to thrive in order to feel
comfortable being and ultimately this
would lead to energy savings because if
we leave the building drifting thermally
visually and from a perspective of the
way in which people interact with the
environmental control we can actually
relax also the ranges of our
environmental settings this is why I
called this presentation the value of
variance so we tend to design for the
mean regardless of the distribution of
our data
well actually we should start looking
more closely at this distribution of
data more closely at the very a at the
variety and the differences that we have
inside our buildings and this is the
only way by which we can really move
towards well-being inside our buildings
of course we have to stay away from
cliches today well-being is the new
green so now everything has to focus
onto well-being we have to make sure
that we can really try to understand the
conditions that we have to provide
inside the spaces but also understand
the people that use them and then at the
end people and buildings well they are
related to each other because somebody
from around
a few years ago said we shape our
buildings and thereafter the building's
shape us and I think that we have to
take this lesson and bring it forward in
order to make sure that the dream of
Leonardo of a man that could actually
measure its its space in a space that
can actually be designed to the shape of
the man is actually realizable and is
realizable by the final points that I
want to sort of leave to you as sort of
the final message of tonight so first of
all always remember that there may be
large discrepancies between requirements
for energy efficiency confrim well being
neutral acceptable environment can
reduce opportunities for physical
physiological and psychological
stimulation static uniform conditions
might lead to environmental border
dynamic variability my benefit cognitive
performance sensory delight and health
and more important need to keep
questioning how to move from buildings
that just reduce our risks and potential
for your health to buildings that can
actually promote our health and
well-being and thriving in the
environment thank you very much
well up until one year ago before I had
the Apple watch I thought that I was
being obsessed with emails and messages
because I had messages and emails
appearing on my laptop
my desktop computer my iPad and my
iPhone now it follows me everywhere and
I remember years ago you told me such a
how come that you respond in five
minutes after I send you a message
that's the reason
[Music]
so thank you for the presentation I
really enjoyed it
I just wanted to I'm curious to see your
thoughts in terms of how architects can
play a more active role in you know
assessing the comfort you're saying that
you know all these adaptive comfort
models and all these standards are might
not be the most telling when it comes to
you know variants and how people become
satisfied and I was wondering at which
point can we start to question these
models and start to deviate from it or
do our own research are there any you
know do you have any recommendations of
how can we you know identify some red
flags and go beyond the you know the
lead and the well yeah it's a very
interesting and challenging question and
I I'm not saying that the standards the
regulations are wrong actually I
wouldn't they're saying so I'm saying
that probably they're incomplete because
they don't necessarily consider the
people that live work inside buildings
and probably this is where we should
start from we should start from first of
all trying to understand who uses our
buildings when they use a building and
which condition what they need one of
the questions that today I think to
everybody I asked is who's the user of
your building how would you design the
space in order to accommodate the use of
a certain space and don't you think that
it could be also an evolution in the use
of space for example we have seen a few
residential examples and then we've seen
that you've done the circadian analysis
when the house for the dressings was
used but we know that today residences
houses are used in a completely
different way than we did 20 years ago
teleworking is is now becoming so home
working is now becoming quite common
with all the implications that it has
because of course we work in an
environment which is not designed to
accommodate work from an economic
perspective with a heating system that
if it's centralized is not designed in
order to respond to the presence of a
person throughout the day which is
missing to our body but the fact that
we're not going outside so probably we
have to start rethinking by starting
from the actual needs of people I
mentioned the new evolution of lead
briam fit well Living Building Challenge
the well building standard and I think
that this is where they're going now
they're starting to detach a bit from a
pension those the building is energy
performance the siting resources what
goes inside the building and they're
starting to focus more on who uses the
building which is the reason why we
built a building in the first place
so I think that this is where a priority
as architects should go which is trying
to understand a little bit more of the
people that use the building
describe my well-being
Oh house I find it quite difficult to I
mean I don't know exactly what it should
be
and as far as health is concerned I mean
there's probably several things wrong
with me anyway so that there is I guess
this is one reason why people started
talking about defining with in a
negative sense with discomfort because
it seems to be easier the other thing is
that well-being now sounds like a higher
state of being than comfort so then give
us well-being because the only thing
that I'm difficult with these standards
is the fact that they open up a number
of variables and then you should or some
tender and then from one to the other in
order to get to the to the top to the
well-being which needs to combine these
values of these ten which are very
different things I'm sure you remember
all of these that the adaptive range of
do we mean to say then that we go within
it that any different separate
individual then can find themselves
within the broadness that it already has
because if we were to broaden it more to
include others who might be outside then
those adaptive zones can become so broad
anything is possible and it could mean
buildings are design that are actually
less comfortable because the
interpretation allowed became even
yes but two things first of all I agree
that we are very bad in assessing
estates we are very bad in assessing a
state of comfort we are even worse
assessing a well-being we don't know
whether something that we do is actually
going towards well-being or not
otherwise nobody will be drinking or
eating animal fats or smoking or
whatever and actually we're very bad as
I said before also our rating a state of
confidence the reason why when you run a
post occupancy evaluation serving into a
building you may expect a big standard
deviation you may expect a big variance
because of course the opinions that
people give are quite a quite broad so
this is the first point we're very bad
that assessing what actually goes in the
direction of our comfort would cause
interaction of our well-being and it's
the reason why I was posing the question
okay what should we measure and how
those measurements should then be used
in order to inform certain things so
having a watch that tells you every half
an hour you need to stand up or you need
to go out and and have a bit of fresh
air without knowing where the outside
and is any fresher than what I have
inside is another is another thing so
this is one of the challenges we don't
know exactly how to measure and what to
measure in order to go in the direction
of the of the well-being even because
there's still a number of items a number
of issues that we don't know we don't
know what actually is good for our body
because the research in physiology
psychology and the interaction between
them is still not not that much sort of
founded on evidence the other thing is
you mentioned the adaptive ranges and of
course they are already quite broad
but I think that one of the things that
I mentioned is that we should not try to
broaden those ranges small but we should
change the way which we run the model so
rather than running the model in order
to meet the requirements of a standard
person inside the building we should
look at the different way of running the
model so it's more personalized and you
provide the comfort to the person rather
than to the building and is actually
also relevant because today we can
actually see we walk into any kind of
many tertiary buildings most of the
desks are not are not occupied because
there is teleworking because people
actually work in two flexible spaces and
so forth
so providing the conditions conducive to
comfortable being more of a personalized
space by the use of personal comfort
system which is a hidden cultured foot
warmer personalised fun may be more
conducive to personal conferring
well-being in terms of being more
adapted adapted to the specific needs of
the person but also may require less
conditioning of the overall building
because ultimately you are conditioning
a lot of space that is not necessarily
used by people so I think that what
we're witnessing here is a change in
paradigm in what we use as a model so
rather than a model that looks at the
comfort at the standard population and
then uses that in order to control the
conditions inside the building we're
looking at models that look at the
individual and tries to provide those
conditions directly where the conditions
are needed
thank you I enjoyed your presentation
disclosure I'm a researcher in comfort
but but I'm coming from the architect
practitioner perspective so the question
about what to do
I think rather than going the
technological route I would say well how
about the building's themselves about
building fabric how about you know
indoor conditions created by the
architecture itself for an architect
that is the thing that we are taught and
that is the thing that we are actually
trained to do so I would ask well how
can we achieve variety within you know
the built environment the building
fabric rather than going you know with
sort of optimized but algorithmically or
or otherwise big data driven type of
technologies and the other thing that I
just wanted to add is we're talking a
lot about work environments and I know
that that's because that's a huge
element into the comfort research and
that's where a lot of attention has been
placed but we're also seeing a lot of
changes like you said in the work
environment conditions there there is
this thing I found fascinating people
pay to travel abroad in an exotic
location and work by the sea or or or in
an exotic place as a new form of work
space Apple headquarters in in
California has been designed with
completely different standards of
well-being in comfort and relationship
to outdoors as as what we kind of
consider standard so yeah it comes back
to what people do and what people like
to do and what people venture to do new
ways of working but also the question
goes back to again
how about the building called the
building fabric what about the
architecture I don't know do you have
any thoughts on it I mean I'm I'm
looking for the answers I think that I'm
gonna get myself so my starting point is
always the architecture that's the
reason why although I've done the last
15 20 years being more focused on
physics physiology psychology inside
spaces I'm starting from the perspective
of somebody who is very much in love
with with architecture and the way in
which architecture can offer emotions to
people so I think that we should use all
of those notions and knowledge about
conditions of comfort conditions of
well-being in order to really enrich the
way in which we design our spaces and in
this the aspect of creativity is and
which is very much a gift of the
architect is something that that has to
be has to be considered of course
you talk about building fabric and I
think that that's fear and this is where
most of the of the issues are because
the building fabric is very much the
element that then will provide that
connection with the outside there is so
key in maintaining the pulses of our
life in tune with the rhythms that we
have that we have out there from where
we come I think that we have to remember
that that we are
outdoor animals and and we should forget
that I mean we have as the the the Indo
generation video shows we have decided
for a certain amount of reasons to
enclose yourself into spaces but we are
essentially adore animals that have and
get the basic impulses from the dynamics
of of the external world
what you were suggesting to to look at
11 projects from our master students in
sustainable Environmental Design where
the objective is precisely that to do
instill onto the building fabric the the
qualities that can achieve the comfort
hopefully well-being and so we had 11
projects 8 of those were located
somewhere in India around the tropics
most of them so maybe you'll be welcome
to our next event okay I'd like to thank
you
