it is hard to introduce to group a
collective an entity that actually one
knows probably too well but what is true
about cooking sections danielfernandez
Pasquale and Aldona Schwaben is that
they defy in many ways the Disciplinary
levels that society has given us
oftentimes we actually constantly claim
that we want to go beyond disciplinary
boundaries that we want to go beyond
those spaces of expertise that that we
have inherited but in fact we are very
afraid of them well they are not and
they are not in a way that actually I
found from the very first day that I met
them extremely refreshing and powerful
how does one actually take something as
common as that kitchen over that space
of cooking or that actually that sublime
object that keeps us alive that well
food and actually transform it into into
an object of in cream and into an object
of design cooking sections is an
unorthodox collective an orthodox couple
and an orthodox architect one that I
have had the pleasure to work in 2014
when I was the commissioner and one of
the creators of the u.s. pavilion we
selected them out of an international
open call as the principles as one
principle of an architectural office
that actually was trying to reimagine
the way in which we practice
architecture today and that seek those
six months of an architectural
experiment allowed me to enter into
their world by sometimes remaking
recipes of buckminster fuller of tomato
a scream or question under limit icing
the labels of echo and fair that are
written in our foods or trying to
reflect about the origin of airplane
food and how does all of that come into
the production of an architectural
project through films videos cartography
is something that I'm not going to
explain is that something that you are
actually going to see as I said this is
very hard to introduce your friends and
so the only thing that I can say if you
want
with their civvies going to the website
but the important thing about lectures
is that what one is hoping is for a
space that is transformed for an
experience that isn't room for a lie
that is transformed and so with this
pink hue I just want to thank you for
accepting to join us in in this first
year of lecture series at the AAA and
and to try to expand even further what
is that that that we want to say when we
say architecture or we say design we say
art or we say cooking so please join me
welcoming Danielle and alone into the
AAA okay good evening everyone and thank
you very much for having us the
invitation to being here tonight we're
gonna be speaking tonight about two
different projects and I think that's
really it's especially in the space of
pedagogy it's it's much more interesting
for us to have a conversation rather
than just giving you glimpses into
different projects that we've been doing
so really we encourage you to kind of
participate in the evening so above
water and water without water the water
is subscribe have been changing color we
know that sea water has no color but
different color reflections enter our
eyes and sometimes we see blue sometimes
we see gray or black other times we see
brown or green yet in recent years sea
water has been dominated by different
hues and multiple Pantone's you're
looking at Pantone 1555 you looking at
Pantone 1565 years
qinger Pantone 1625 you looking at
Pantone 1575 you are looking at
mandoline 1575 you are looking at
panthan 487 you are looking at Pantone
486 you are looking at Pantone 1645 you
are looking at pandan 167 looking at
panther 158 you are looking at Pantone
1647 you are looking at panther in 1665
you are looking at Pantone 485 you in
sky we heard about the House Sparrow
that had turned salmon how sparrows can
be found in most places where there are
houses as their name suggests there are
one of the most common birds in the
world female and young birds have brown
gray or black feathers while males have
sometimes less dull bits around their
name the sparrow we heard about in sky
had turned salmon it was believed to
have eaten one of the feed pellets from
a salmon farm like a flamingo eating
shrimps the sparrow also turned salmon
salmon today would be great but salmon
can also be red or pink or even salmon
in the water the success of salmon
Scottish salmon as a branding relies on
colouring salmon fish into one of 13 pan
turns fun salmon needs pinky fine
pellets to substitute natural krill
otherwise found in the water indeed
today Scottish salmon is neither
entirely scottish nor is it wholly
salmon 90% of Atlantic salmon swimming
in the seas and shelves in supermarket
aisles is a domesticated species since
the 1970s salmon slowly ceased being an
animal to become a profit equation
selective breeding processes create fish
which can grow much faster to market
size than in regular conditions in the
wild the definition of wild in wild
animals though is something that was
made through the violence of colonial
settlement it is when nature shows signs
of
perhaps the distinction of wild and non
wild begins to appear while salmon would
simply be salmon as wild salmon was only
invented as a label to refer to a system
destroyed by humans that differentiates
the domesticated from the non
domesticated species and as Heather and
sunson remarks domestication is what
creates disorientation in relation to
the environment rather than wild it
would be more accurate to say stream
spawning salmon as many times it is
hatcheries that enhance the spawning of
salmon by bringing juveniles from
elsewhere out in the wild yet foreign
salmon clear clearly the first from
steer from stream spawning salmon it is
fed with fish or port-based pellets
mixed with ground-up feathers
genetically modified yeast and chicken
fat it is also colored artificially with
pigments to make its flesh at choir the
ideal salmon tone it is marked with a
black spot under its belly from
vaccinations its adipose fins are
clipped 7/8 from every serving properly
in the wild again it is heavily
dependent on antibiotics to fight
disease and parasites like little sea
lice resulting from swimming in circles
in close proximity grown in cylindrical
open nets containing about 1 million
fish perform market salmon is severely
affecting both the body of the fish but
also the seabed hundreds of kilos of
salmon manure sink through the openings
their excrements are deposited at the
bottom of the sea suffocating the entire
ecosystem underneath them creating dead
zones invisible suspended particles
float away and give the water
supplementary colors these open nets
function like toxic toilets with open
water sewage which is discharged onto
the open seas by the tidal flow one of
the places associated with salmon in
Scotland where salmon has been food
source for centuries since the 1980s
however the
appearance of multitude of salmon farms
all over the country have been
dramatically changing the aquatic
landscape in 2016 a moratorium on one
fishing so-called wild salmon was passed
in Scotland as their numbers have been
dramatically dropping fishermen have
been blamed for its disappearance
while the environmental impact caused by
industrial aquaculture is not held
accountable on the island sky alone is
about 15 salmon farms that are currently
growing millions of fish per year
recently many salmon had to be
sacrificed in sky it's not even strong
antibiotics could keep the sea lice
under control in such high concentration
of fish hundreds of thousands of fish
have been exterminated in order not to
threaten the entire industry but still
the industry does not acknowledge any
connection between lice infestations and
the high concentration of animals
swimming in the same spots farming
corporations claim that the parasite is
simply a natural phenomenon instead of
sacrificing fish the industries began to
try to clear off sea lice with chemicals
lice are becoming resistant to those
antibiotics so greater quantities have
to be used together with more toxic
components that are frequently found in
pesticides herbicides and some nerve
agents but today Scottish salmon does
not entirely come from Scotland salmon
hatch in Rome is part of an intricate
transnational network circulating
precious genes with eggs fertilized and
incubated in different facilities and
ready to be sent from farming sites to
farm inside to farming sites across the
world
the Scottish salmon company has branded
themselves as purveyors of authentically
Scottish salmon
despite being registered in Jersey owned
by a Swiss bank with Ukrainian and
Norwegian investors
floated on the Oslo Stock Exchange and
used imported Norwegian genetic material
for their farmed salmon great seafood
health lands
sources salmon from the wild waters of
Shetland but while here refers to the
water and not the fish itself
it is not surprised that Marks & Spencer
salmon brand name is La Jolla in the
Scottish wilderness sounding name but
law school is a place that does not
exist on the map Aldi promotes best of
Scotland salmon with an image of a
fishing boat when it is actually farmed
in Norway and the Faroe Islands
Morrison's promotes catch of the day
salmon which is sourced from farms in
Norway and Scottish quality salmon which
is from Norway but only smoked in
Scotland the desire for consumption of
Scottish landscape is rendered through
fish matter five out of six of this
salmon conglomerate's operating in the
Isle of Skye depend on the region owned
capital and consists of corporations
that were legally obliged to monitored
salmon up farming activity in Norway
despite disguising their operations
through branches in different countries
the 11 largest salmon farming
corporations in the world have still
their headquarters in Norway given that
the Norwegian government has been
introducing more environmental
restrictions because of the detrimental
effects of salmon farming under
Norwegian coastal waters some of these
companies have found fertile ground and
water in less restrictive countries like
Scotland or chi'lan murid harvest the
largest salmon farming conglomerate in
the world is also operating in skies
seas when the Scottish clearances
happened some 200 years ago thousands of
kale people were dispossessed evicted
from their villages and banned from
living off the land but today some farm
corporations are replicating a similar
process by clearing the seabed instead
as more and more dead zones are
appearing all around salmon farms and
this new wave of oceanic clearances we
could say is a multi-billion business
but only for a few therefore Scottish
salmon has become a brand that needs to
be critically rethought not only from an
environmental and ecological perspective
but also questioning what the salmon and
Scottish means in that construction
farmed salmon is the result of the fish
becoming a product of by
Capital and biomass and as Elizabeth
lien claims it is a creature bred to be
hungry and it's job it's to put on
weight in order to quantify the salmon
success the equation feed conversion
ratio indicates the quantity of feed
pellets which is about three kilos that
equal in biomass gained around one kilo
and that efficiency ratio three-to-one
is what the ratio under which feed
pellets are converted into into flesh
the new feed pellet factory that has
been built in sky is meant to provide 55
jobs undoubtably an important and
significant amount for a small island
community yet it is still not entirely
clear how many will serve local
population and how many will be
long-lasting positions at the same time
the new plant legitimizes the
environmentally damaging presence of
open net salmon farms in the waters
around the islands to keep up with
amongst salmon is the biggest selling
seafood in the UK but even if it is
labeled as organic there's a big
disparity between the amount of organic
label farms and the non sufficient
amount of so-called
organic pellets available in the market
besides the the fact that the fish
component of the pellets is made out of
Peruvian anchovies among others
it is also living to another form of
colonization of the ocean depleting
resources of local fishermen in Peru in
order to feed the region and Scottish
salmon surrounded by the rugged
landscape indented coastline and narrow
loss of sky there are many ways in which
market salmon performs nature one of
them is how some in the spread beyond
natural reproductive seasons year-round
consumer demand requires the fish body
to be constantly for time farms in
northern latitudes deceive the fish to
make them think that they are living in
a different time of the year for that
purpose a black roof dome is sometimes
added on top of the open net
and to distort their perception as if
they were in a different season in
winter periods of 24-hour darkness
artificial fluorescent lights are turned
on and off on and off on and off on and
off 12 hour cycle simulating light
conditions of spring summer or autumn
helped by artificial under water heaters
dislike regimes triggers the
reproductive season by deceiving their
sense of orientation continuous light
accelerates fish growth so that the farm
can deliver salmon all year round
they're carefully engineered housing
conditions have the power to advance or
delay spawning time to produce eggs out
of season 12 hours of light and 12 hours
of darkness some years have two summers
and others just skip a winter these
accelerated growth has also consequences
for the fish which among other becoming
insensitive and other physical
deformities has also damaged their auto
lids and made them fish become deaf
toxically the fact that farmed salmon
are not here reduces its a stress from
inhabiting the very noisy machinery of
the salmon farm another way to perform
nature is a salmon farm is the creation
effect seaweed habitats as hiding spots
for us a fish being transplanted from
the southwest coast of England to
Scotland to eat the sea lice that
attacks the salmon maiden with stripes
of rubbish bags nice take habitats allow
us to hide from the hundreds of
thousands of salmon swimming around in
the pen and eat their sea lice
comfortably to such extent the wrasse
despite not being eaten by humans has
become one of the most sought-after it's
an expensive fish in the UK another
disruption in the reproductive system is
the way escapees are trapped between
being a domesticated and why
species guided by a memory at a magnetic
field or a symbol of a place or even the
Sun they orient their migration and with
it they fulfill their sense of being but
bred in an onshore laboratory farmed
salmon lost that inherent sense of
memory it can no longer find its
birthplace upstream and return there to
spawn it is disconnected from any natal
river and disoriented in the sea or
providing that it ever escapes where
does it go homeless and outlawed an
escapee becomes an alien species in its
original River in Norway escapees are
listed as a threat to the so called wild
salmon population if they mix with their
counterparts outside of the farm the new
fish will be part of that disrupted
system only a few months ago 21,000
salmon fish escaped from a farm in Skye
this raises the question of where does
an escapee return to and how can its
find its way back upstream if a farmed
salmon tries to swim to its native place
to spawn it sometimes goes back to the
hatchery that created the magnetic or
all factoring imprint in its brain
farmed salmon is only recently becoming
an animal unless a product with more
studies and regulations trying to
understand its feelings it's memory but
also its sense of orientation the
question still remains what is a
domesticated cultivated or tamed salmon
is from some other industrial
aquaculture success or an environmental
catastrophe from the local habitat to
the global market the scales at which
salmon performs are yet to be be
cultured after decades of overfishing an
exaustive salmon farming skies waters
have reached a point where seasonal
productivity ecology and employment need
to be rethought food seasons as we know
them have ceased to exist in a
supermarket you can find strawberries
tomatoes plants or even salmon all year
round and you have all seasons
beyond this flattened continuous 365 day
long seasons what would be the new
period we could eat according to today
if humans have been changing
environments how can also we change our
food system stirred up to them and build
other forms of landscape time' for
explores how to eat as climate changes a
form of devouring that follows the
consequences of anthropogenic landscapes
affected by intensive forms of
extraction different from carnivore
omnivore locavore vegetarian or vegan it
is not so much the ingredients that
define Klima for but rather the
infrastructural responses to human
induced climatic events new seasons a
food production and consumption have
begun to appear dry seasons are
sometimes more irate and sometimes less
rainy seasons are becoming longer but
sometimes shorter the number of frost
free nights has increased in some places
but decreased in others and these known
absolute cycles that are discontinuous
disjointed disconnected and non
sequentially repetitive are in a way
also proposing new types of questions so
would drop in water levels justify
digging deeper wells to exhaust even
deeper aquifers or could we acclimatize
our existence to more flexible patterns
beyond intensive water consumption the
nuding imaginaries landscapes and
infrastructures reveal a new set of
clues for adapting our diet anxieties
and desires to them how to water without
water in a period of water scarcity or
how to water with stones remember aims
to rethink the environmental futures of
coastal inhabitation and the coastal
commons through a diet that can
effectively transform desires and
infrastructure in the case of polluted
shores by summer farms it takes the
title zone as an ambiguous site that
appears disappears and reappears and
constantly changes in size coastal space
has no clear definition and opens up for
murky yet cleaner usership and
become today the entrance into a new
ecology economy and imaginary for the
place other understandings of aqua
cultures in sky and its tidal zones can
become the insight of opportunity for
more sensitive practices human induced
climatic alterations of the waters
ranging from increasing acidification of
the ocean appearances of new parasites
and disappearance of species could be
approached through other forms of eating
and sourcing of nutrients different from
intensive salmon farming that produces
an excess of nitrogen other creatures
the opposite processes they clean the
water by breathing and so do other
filter feeders bulbs like clams scallops
razor clams or barnacles but also
seaweeds like kelp sea lettuce or dolls
they all provides an incredible source
of easy access protein without any need
for fertilizers despite having lost
connection today to some of these
ingredients they were abundant and used
by both humans and animals there
archaeological remains of prehistoric
sheep in Scotland with marks in their
teeth that indicate a kelp based diet
and even in modern times a booming
industry in Skye emerged for kelp based
explosives during the Napoleonic Wars in
the 918 twenties kelp was used to
improve sorry its poor soils for
millennia in places like Jersey in the
Channel Islands the use of seaweed
collected from the ocean as fertilizer
had been a common practice with laws
explicitly regulating citizens rights
but also the optimal seasons for its
gathering certain varieties like help or
blood Iraq had abounded quantities of
minerals that once laid on the fields
would slowly be released and accelerate
the growth of vegetables and tubers
crafters have used the tidal zone not
only for fish traps where all sorts of
fish would be caught by the low tide but
also the forage does and eat it raw or
boiled in soup over centuries
food sourcing from the tidal zone
enabled social struck
Jers where women were the strengths of
fishing economies from sorting oysters
on the beach
lifting the catch the carrying their
husbands to shore o stirs have also been
cheap sources of protein in the east
coast of the US also traders had hybrids
house barges where they would more in
different beers to sell their stock to
wholesale suppliers their mobile barges
were a hybrid between a fishing facility
a shop and impromptu eatery and a home
all together after sourcing oysters from
naturally occurring beds it was later
discovered that they could be grown in
oyster tables structures going hundreds
of meters into the sea where Auster's
were are washed by the tides following
moon cycles on the Isle of Skye our
oyster table functions as a dining table
and opens the discussion around other
aqua cultures that could happen every
day at high tide the structure allows
its $1,000 to breathe with each one
filtering up 220 liters of seawater per
day at low tide the oyster table emerges
above the sea and functions as a dining
table where we placed some humans over
breakfast lunch or dinner according to
the tides performative meals feature a
series of crime of or ingredients where
workshops with fishermen politicians
residents and scientists have been held
that discussed another cultural
imaginary for the islands guests enjoyed
bloody oyster cocktails crunchy shingles
or lasagna for sure among many other
crime avoid delights amen to divest away
from salmon farming and develop
alternative aqua cultures a network of
restaurants was also established each of
the restaurants replaced farmed salmon
with the climb of a dish a food truck a
local bakery a pie shop a bar a hotel a
michelin-starred restaurant they all
saved time of all dal soup or coca-cola
Klima for ice cream or time of work alt
whiskey or twice dived Klima for
scallops or a climb aboard rope grown
muscle labels the ongoing project is
expanding into new permanent
installation the climb of our station in
the old ice house in burr tree to secure
traineeships and placements for local
teenagers from the professional cooking
school sir pedagogical and professional
development the future cooks of the
island can start introducing this new
coastal imaginary the tidal zone is a
space of opportunity for discussing
these spatial constructions of the ocean
and its shores the rethink coastal
policy and facilitate the small scale
independent initiatives the climb
afforestation will also provide legal
advice and consultancy on how to open
your own oyster or seaweed farm but also
will support how to object planning
applications that are constantly trying
to open new or expand existing salmon
farms in scotland and all of these while
serving different type of our dishes
slowly people coming up the sky could
ask for sky kelp
sky dolls sky or stirs or sky mussels
ingredients that we generate the coast
by breathing in this era of increasingly
evident man induced climatic events on
the tidal zones we can determine what we
eat as climate is changing and over the
past years crime of war has been
responding to various non induced
climatic events when we were invited
last year to participate in the
manna-fest 12 manifesto Biennale in
Palermo we started to observe how the
water has saved the islands and
different forms of governance around it
despite being one of the nearest points
to the Sahara the desert lizard the
European country and the European
continental shelf in Sicily over century
has developed a very complex water
infrastructure and agricultural
knowledge that has become the third
largest agriculture engine in Europe so
Palermo has this incredible
infrastructure of tunnels under the city
that are all part of a very complicated
infrastructure that has been tunneling
and terrorizing the whole Sicilian
entirely Sicilian landscape
basically to channel and retain water
and that's also one of the reasons why
has become that raquel chiel
engine and the geography of the city
itself is all surrounded by by hills and
they used to be this very fertile plains
more and more urbanized but there would
be all these very sophisticated tunnels
so the century-old
structures that would collect water from
the base of the hills around the city
and take it into the into the different
parts of the city also this was one of
the point of departures for the entire
project about water in in palermo and
the idea was also to start understanding
to what extent the control over water
was also the emergence of the first
mafia let's say structures in the city
that would extortion eight peasants by
asking for payments for the use of water
and a history of the history of water
infrastructure in sicily is a lot endued
to the persons and the muslims that
basically transferred a lot of this
knowledge from the arab world into
sicily and develop a series of cannot
systems were basically water was taken
through this very similar this is an
example from the person desert where
this water wells have been dipped in as
a way to channel water through a dried
landscape what is particular about
Palermo are these tunnels that are
almost typology that is also inhabited
not only by water but also by some
humans this is what is referred to as
camera della Sera Co which is a chamber
of the wind and this in particular is
under an aristocratic Palace from the
17th 18th centuries in the city that
would on the one hand bring drinking
water into a home but also it would
serve as these leisure space in the
summer where the temperature is
drastically colder as compared to the
harsh summer above
crowds so water during the winters and
cold wind during the summers basically
allowed for ins of inhabitation and
perhaps one of the first air conditioned
systems that was developed on the island
at the same time you here is another
example of the disc um another silicon
where you can really see the social
space that was organized in these spaces
where again like really a chamber for
the wind and a place to avoid the
atrocious heat that comes from the
desert during the summer months what is
beautiful also that these chambers have
been named after the Scirocco wind which
is very dry wind from the desert but
actually they're working for the
opposite which is precisely creating the
sort of microclimate with these cold
wind and humidity coming from the
mountains outside outside the city and
following that typology that in a way
creates micro climates in the city we
started looking at this incredible
Island between the coast of Sicily and
Tunisia called Pantelleria and where the
Giardino pantastico
the typical garden from Pantelleria
exists until today these consist of this
open sky circular in many cases
structures made out of a dry stone wall
that still exists there about 300 still
standing in this little tiny very arid
small island and what is interesting is
that people would put their life savings
back then to to build a garden for a
single tree this is how they looked from
above the typical let's say typical
typology would be the circular tower in
a way but also they were like from
octagonal to rectangular ones oval or
sometimes adapt into the topography but
is this idea that the tree was so
precious that they had to put all these
resources into protecting the tree and
making it survive the very extreme
well not drought with just the days
early
the water in that particular island and
despite the fact that this Pantelleria
is around and completely by water a
total Agron latarian society has been
developed and developed there and exists
there almost until today where they this
Jordan open Tesco was really the center
of the homestead and the family and the
whole farming practices that developed
and it's really interesting that there
is no fishing economy and there no never
have been fisherman's that were working
or using kind of any ports in the
islands what is quite incredible also is
mainly citrus trees and the reason why
there was such an effort logistical and
economic effort into building these
single tree gardens was precisely to
create micro climates and water without
water or water with stones at back at
the time the challenge was to get citrus
fruits because they realized that
otherwise without vitamin C they would
get scrubby's so that was kind of the
kind of the treasure of the of the
family so inspired by the typology we're
looking at other ways of watering
without water or watering with stones
these are some well-known examples we
live from the peach orchards in France
outside Paris that would have these
walls to attract heat in the summer and
increase the temperature of these micro
gardens for fruits that might not
necessarily grow in that particular
geography to another volcanic landscapes
this is in Lanzarote in Canary Islands
which is shares many similarities also
with petal area in terms of climate and
lack of water so how do you create
through all these systems of some people
call them dry farming but basically how
do you either condense humidity or
attract heat in order to create life
that wouldn't would otherwise not be
possible in such climates such
infrastructures have been developing
over thousands of years of course from
the examples of the
society that basically were developed in
these ten systems where different kind
of grains would be grown on different
level of deterrence and just by the drop
in elevation different kind of
temperatures and climatic zones would be
would emerge allowing for different
crops to be grown to like other more
modern universe inventions like these
wind tower developed in the 1930s in
France also for Colin
it was invited by Akhil nappin and again
like through this house had he bring
temperature down to a different state of
course in in Sicily the kind of
investment for hundreds of years in
developing water infrastructure in order
to produce agriculture and farming has
led today to some of the most intensive
and also violent forms of Agriculture's
Sicily has one of the biggest systems of
[Music]
greenhouses thank you where basically
they allow to produce food on year-round
but at the same time have been using
labour and exploiting labor in the
beginning and labor migration at the
beginning from North Africa and in
recent years mostly from Eastern Europe
in Romania where both men and especially
women have been subject to a lot of
violence and rape crimes on the in the
greenhouses so still today these many
instances where you see different
systems of covenants of related to water
how water in a way is also determining
the politics of the city here you see
some of these overlapping systems from
the century old canal system of tunnels
to direct water and on top of these kind
of very kind of organic way of evolving
the city but basically having apartments
or houses or different dwellings having
this parallel system of pipes and tanks
that in a way I passed the governance of
the city so
is the pain which is part of the
discussion instead of pain the city
which is quite malfunctioning in terms
of water distribution it eventually led
to a system where people instead pay to
organize groups that's provided with
water so our protocol and started to
develop we're looking at how we can
water without water as not only a
foreign to kind of respond to aridity
and drought but also as a way to
emancipate from different kind of
systems of control and power we
developed three installations from
Manifesta in different parts of the city
each one was concentrated around one or
a few citrus trees and tried basically
over the course of the biennial which
lasted for six months and just closed a
couple of weeks ago to see how the trees
are performing in these environments
this is the first one is in involve a
suta what was particularly about the
site was that he was it used to be owned
by mafioso and it was there was a
lawsuit complicated but basically
returned to to the public so you
confiscated land that became a civic
space and that's where we managed to
develop one of these structures that we
started using some of the traditional
Sicilian to see their code which is
terracotta pipes that I used either for
irrigation or for drainage in many
places for centuries and on site we
found these some 200 k2z from the 1950s
made out of concrete the world line all
over and the were part of the previous
life of the site when the my future was
live in there and there was an orchard
with Mondrian trees so we chose this
little man Torino and rearranged all
these pipes that were lying around the
semi abandoned field and basically again
try to create these experimental tests
to think of techniques to water without
water and for that also we partnered
with the university of Palermo and a
very exciting group of economists to
also monitor the live performance of the
trees and how these structures the word
test sites could potentially be applied
to other places so what we were doing
was to collect data from the tree inside
and outside and see all the different
parameters in terms of daylight humidity
or solar radiation and see to what
extent throughout the duration of
manifest over the summer and until
November they were influencing the
microclimate inside the structure in the
next site we worked with was a former
garden that it was bombed and then
basically a former palace that was
bombed and became a garden that today is
kind of closed there were six in seven
sorry in orange trees on the site and
using agricultural nets which have been
which is kind of in more popular a very
popular material today to prevent frost
blight wind damage and access of sun
exposure we try to see how that could
also create microclimate around the
trees using yellow net that basically
increases radiation and humidity around
the trees we created another form of the
another installation around the trees
and again measuring the performance of
the trees and inside and the environment
outside of them it's quite complicated
to hang so we had to coordinate all the
neighbors the different balconies of the
square to be like pulling cables up and
down it took some time then the third
one was another site which also I can
create another microclimate around five
exists in orange trees it was
next to these church that was never
finished so the church itself also is
like a Giardina pantastico because it's
this open sky stone wall with actually
they has these very old tree and that
you can see they're growing inside the
church so in the back there were these
five trees where we made another test
site for these watering without water
technique using very cheap available
blocks that used in construction quite
commonly but trying to to rethink almost
the Georgian open Tesco not as
incredibly expensive and elaborate try
wall but rather it's something that
could be easily assembled and
disassembled into other places in this
case basically we created a thermal mass
where in over kind of stirred the sun
exposure was containing the heat but at
the same time allowing wind to pass
through the blocks that were flipped 90
degrees on their side allowing wind to
pass through and cooling the air inside
and creating an effect of condensation
and at the same time with all of the
installation we worked with a series of
restaurants to develop a psycho and
psycho which is basically a dry picnic
box and in the literal translation that
we're serving different like lunch
picnics that could be taken and enjoyed
amongst the trees and the installations
each of these picnic boxes included
different ingredients like carob ice
cream for instance too many are grain
sandwiches oh my daughter Sukanya which
is a specific kind of tomato that was
developed over years and it's kind of
very resistant to drought capers
pistachios and many other ingredients
and really again trying to think through
that and engage with restaurants and how
could we start thinking on the future
diet of Sicily and yeah and basically
through that kind of know that the
finished we've been analyzed starting to
analyze all of the data that we've been
collecting and kind of working with the
the agronomist to see how that could be
utilized because they have been also
using like they like testing having many
[Music]
other sites in bloom and that's kind of
a thing two ways of how we've been in
the past year is thinking of climate for
and how we eat is climate changes and
kind of food as a form of infrastructure
to think how we are adapting our diets
to environments that are changing I
[Applause]
don't know not really a question but
something that if your presentation
reminds me of earlier on with the salmon
and how we kind of engineered this fish
my encounter like this really weird
video on the weird side of YouTube one
day about making fish in Japan where
they basically took the dead salmon that
they fished out they cut it open and
scooped all the eggs out and put it in a
bowl and took a male dead salmon and
then squeezed all the sperm from that
salmon into the bowl and they just start
it and then chucked it into the farm so
it's it's it's interesting that we kind
of like you know you're saying that how
to say once the fish escapes were
treating it as an animal once again
rather than a product and kind of
clearly like we've perpetuated this
thing for so I don't know it just
reminded me of that because yeah well
yeah I mean I think there's many
examples and I think it's a it's exactly
that I think what is very interesting
for us with salmon is exactly the fact
that it's happening underwater and a lot
of these practices if they would be
happy you know like battery farms today
something that is like
well known in like when growing chicken
and things like that and there there
have been a lot of like work around this
question trying to bring these like
practices to light and exposing them to
the white their onions and exactly as
you are saying like a lot of the
practices that are happening today under
water right are not accounted for
because they are kind of hidden away
from the eyes of the public where with
things like battery if this has been
would have been practiced on the cattle
farm or like on a chicken kind of
battery farm there would be like a huge
outcry in society right and I think it's
interesting I mean there's a lot of talk
today of like how the ocean is like a
space that is not accounted for and that
we don't know what is happening but like
it also it works to the advantage like
many corporations and I think precisely
because there's so many cases all over
the world about that I think for us we
believe there's a very important role
from the spatial discipline how to first
understand these spaces where these
things happen I run that so not just
like the way in which they are mixed you
kind of convert it into something but
also what is the condition of that coast
and why is that happening why is that
economic model because many times it is
a matter of lack of employment and how
to think of alternatives but but also
one thing I just remembered to point out
about that video is that it was taken on
a tour of the fish factory so it wasn't
secret whatsoever and actually the
people videoing it which were like
Japanese tourists found it completely
fascinating this is this is where their
food came from but I don't know I really
like your approach because a lot of
people who reject industrial food want
to return to some sort of bizarre
Neolithic way of eating which i think is
like the wrong way to approach it
whatsoever because how far do we go back
how do we you know this it's not a case
about reversing is about evaluating what
we have now but yeah I really appreciate
it you know how much I appreciate your
work
it's a comment and also a question when
comedy is that it's fascinating the way
you communicate it's not only a lecture
it's also curatorial process I would say
the way you communicate so deep with
with a research that is has so many on
it the comedy is about this food
relation that we have in Brazil there is
a national legend about the turkey but
it's not a turkey that we eat in the
Christmas and you imagine 200 million
people wanting to have this board
it's called Chester and it's really no
way that it has more chests and they've
all been alleged that nobody have seen
this before this animal before it's like
a mythical animal like you know we have
also this with the cow for McDonald's
and that and so the way you communicate
it's also getting us way more I would
say in a either a scientific way to
really understand how this process goes
of communication and also to kind of
really put this in a in another part
like like I said under the water or in
the individuals that you said like the
 videos on YouTube right so my
question is about that actually how
would you say like for some people that
for example I also would like to spread
this word that you have you have your
website but how do you could it could
achieve this kind of information that
it's all precious right now because I am
the one that started to eat sound
because I thought it was better but okay
maybe I'll go vegetarian well yeah I
mean I think there's I think they're two
to two questions for there I think for
the first part well yes I think we are
surrounded by these kind of myths or a
cultural construct and we could call
them everywhere and one I mean one
cannot kind of spend even his whole life
and trying to touch like small
percentage of that and of course there's
like a lot of work to be done there
which has to be like
and it's a very open invitation for
people to jump on the boat but I think
at the same way what is interesting for
us is like to really start understanding
how these cultural and how the cultural
constructs work in kind of what are its
origins and like how it has been
developing over time I think someone
here asked us earlier like towards is a
Christmas break like what are the books
that we would have read much earlier in
our life and I think there's like one of
these books
that's called a knife or the tropics
which is by krysta Thompson which
basically talks about how the image of
the tropics was made through one of the
things he talks about like through fruit
and kind of this invention of tropical
fruit and the image of tropical fruit
how it was kind of inventing a whole
tourist industry and a whole
infrastructure of tourism and an
architecture around it through like how
the body and the fruit were like
associated to each other and it's like I
think the thing is like how do we start
to read the world around us through this
kind of knowledge and process the second
part yeah I think there's there's a lot
of sensitive like there's a lot of
sensitivity also in the work we do and I
think we are invested a lot in the
questions around the cultural construct
so it's not only to go and like protest
against salmon farm and to make people
aware that like all their practices are
bad but like how do you actually try to
see an address like the economic
realities and questions around
development in specific places in order
to see whether there could be
alternatives to that and and it's a
process and in that sense I think
there's a very thing it's something that
we kind of discuss a lot you know like
what is the moment that you kind of make
this public and like in which ways you
make it public and make they're like
what are forms of protest in a way and
what are formed like rules of engagement
in these places because at the end of
the day you know we are like here and
we're having conversation tonight with
Lake
a few dozens of like architecture
students in the centre of London but
like there are people on the Isle of
Skye that has been living like a reality
for like a few decades and which is
extremely extremely delicate we're like
lives and make you know businesses
because the argument is that it brings
jobs and also like people know that
these doing many other bad things and
the kind of jobs that it's bringing is
not the ideal kind of jobs so the
question is what kind of tools could we
develop to create that cultural shift of
a place that is more all-encompassing
and it's not just like let's do like
from an economic perspective would be
like to maybe small pieces this but from
our understanding goes much beyond
because you need to trace the demand for
salmon you need to address the economic
viability of restaurants serving
something and someone is the most
profitable ingredient for them right so
they and they were telling us that the
fact that they had they were really
willing to try and remove salmon but it
was at a certain loss that they had to
assume because they wanted because they
again is a matter of ethical values if
you want to engage with that or not and
they how do you replace that with
something that is also manageable for
the for a small business so the question
of like triggers like where do you plant
like certain triggers and when do you
make use them and it's a that's a it's a
process and this is like this project is
an engagement for that you know it took
like 40 years to the industry to develop
and achieve to the place it has it's
going to take some years to kind of
start like shift the landscape but of
course at the same thing we are kind of
you know like there is also an urgency
in terms of time right it's not that
like one can say like okay we just now
take like another 40 years this today I
was having a conversation and I'm going
to then pass the microphone with someone
about this in Famers come and know that
we all know and we all have heard it's a
moment for education what does a break
want to be no and we think of that in
the
the relationship of form and space and
materiality to a particular idea what
architecture is and us for me what is
very he want radhika about your practice
is that that question to the break in a
certain way falls naive yeah it actually
suddenly that relationship between the
object and the subject that you actually
have brought before expands the the
answers to the question of what does
that break want to be and what is that
break able to do and the idea is that
architectures and functionality as a
kind of a fiction becomes an idea of
performance and accountability and
politics and codes and laws and and I
think that that to me is where suddenly
architecture becomes really truly
dangerous not only understanding the
breaking formal configuration as this
image we can see like this image if it
was going to be read ten years ago
someone will read it in a very
particular way and yet the moment in
which suddenly we understand the origin
the source and the effect and the
consequences and the possibilities of
modifying transforming understanding the
power the performative qualities of this
break or of that geometry or that
relationship to the tidal zone is when
suddenly we can really truly see the
power of architecture and so necessarily
who is more of a comment then then than
a question but I think that it is so
important to suddenly start
interrogating architecture in its all
terms right the idea form the idea of
materiality through something that
actually is much more expensive and that
actually was accompanied and today we
just have seen a can a very limited
range of your work but the kind of
cartography and the forms of
representation that accompany the
decision-making and the design process
that goes behind these forms but we have
a question here I wanted to made in
previous question about your
presentation being very much designed
and I wanted to ask you to talk a bit
more about that
I particularly wonder about you know
your choice of well the set and the
props that you're using and the
performativity of your presentation and
how that plays into your work in general
yeah
when I think it's it's a big it's a part
of the way we are exploring of like how
to kind of disseminate and kind of
communicate information and kind of what
is there how do you speak to different
audiences and how do you like how what
are the rules of engagement right like
how and this is something that we treat
you know it's in a way trying to bring
to kind of anyway maybe try to bridge
the graph a gap of like what it is to
kind of be surrounded like if we were
sitting now in sky all of us on the
table having like oysters and drinking
like bloody cocktail like Easter
cocktails how kind of how the can that
also be transformed into like this kind
of setting of like the classroom let's
say and I think it's something that we
explore a lot because I think it gives
anyway develops a flexibility within us
to then also change the way we present
when we're surrounded or kind of
inviting politicians and different kind
of government agencies to the table
right and how do you kind of push them
away from their comfort zone and one of
the things that was like really
interesting that annoy stir table
basically instead of we invited like
different kind of people from the
environmental agency from the local
governors etc and kind of the fact that
they had to kind of put on their boots
you know cross a little stream they sit
and they or barefoot sit there in the
water you know completely pulled them
away from and brought them into space
that it was a completely different
conversation if we would be sitting in
their office and like talking about the
effects of salmon farm on sky and I
think this is like really moments that
allow kind of to shift something and
this is like and I think this is also
like a pedagogical approach that we
really we encourage a lot our students
to experiment with because it's it
allows you kind of to dismantle the way
kind of someone engages with your own
but he thinks about it and how you can
constantly be kind of you know shifting
the envelope and trying to take your
audience to where you want them to be
rather than they coming into the space
with like all of their pre assumptions
and you know knowledge etc etc it was in
some of these workshops when some of
these decision makers came it was the
first time I'm in this particular place
which you can walk twice a day when the
tides out but there's an I always
thought it was a very filthy place la
well precisely and that's right so that
very moment it starts opening the whole
conversation about why we are there and
what are we doing here it's a and the
other thing is how do you because they
have million meetings a day in their
office how do you wrap that system how
do you bring them to the ground to
discuss some things and now for instance
we we were there this weekend now they
one of the counselors he was interested
in as presenting out to the council
right but as a second move it makes more
sense that starting from the more
conventional meeting I think open pink
tones and like how are we going to come
into their office you know like what
kind of tone are we going to wear which
is for me it's super interesting and
relevant question you know it's like
because it's like these kind of moments
of like it's these are triggers they
give you this I think a lot of power to
start kind of making different choices
conversations etc and then another point
which is also one of the lessons from
this summer with another project but
basically is the the idea that we no
longer have to manage nature nature can
take care of itself what we need to
manage his humans how as part of that
human management how do you reinvent
special tools to deal with those humans
so I've got one question
is more about the practice that you guys
do and I was just wondering because I
love the works especially in their kind
of all projects there's a certain
element of speculation in the outcome I
was just wondering how when you're
designing the events or that the product
half forward or how much future to
recast because of course you have to
like likely to set just I know you
explained there are follow-ups there are
meeting with the council and they invite
you to do more things yeah well I guess
my project my my question is how far do
you cast forward in planning or when
you're designing these things well it is
all of these the producers we are
interested could be lifelong project for
more lives beyond us
but I think the also from a practical
perspective like how do you we think a
lot about we question ourselves a lot
about how do you start doing short steps
taking short steps to build up towards
something how do you start subdividing
to what is feasible for the next year or
for the next five years over the next 20
years and from there it evolves it's not
it's very hard to say like when
answerable is more to pace it out into
almost like subtasks about what you can
do like little by little and then let
the project also grow and there will be
a lot of errors and mistakes and Susan
well you know I think like with all of
us in our hearts and minds we're
projecting like many many years forwards
then it's like what you share with who
and how this kind of moments of sharing
this information are kind of again tools
to kind of advance different agendas
within the project would you say that's
sort of your main tool - it's one of
them I mean there's a lot of like but
then there's a lot of trial and error
and also there's like the reality of
like how you make these projects happen
right so you are kind of at the end we
are working on like the scale at which
we are working is quite small and it's
not that anyone is kind of you know
someone is inviting you like here you
know 10 million like pounds where they
go and work for the next 10 years
so there's also you know these things
have to be built and you have to kind of
but I think for us it's it's again it's
like how do you start developing
mechanisms for for to think of resources
invested in process rather than kind of
object outcomes right and it's like how
processes are what we are kind of coming
around which it's a very kind of I think
we can expend quite a lot of time
talking about kind of what does mean and
how does it kind of unfold which i think
is also very interesting like when
you're thinking of yourself is like
someone that kind of will graduate and
like how do you start kind of doing
these kind of processes right rather
than like waiting for you know like the
first commission or how do you build
like an independent practice which is
trial and error
of course have we made many mistakes
that we learn some things but along the
way you realize that some of these
processes you can start approaching
people if you I will really like to do
this but maybe you know the to achieve
that maybe I talk to this person this
institution this other person and this
little thing from there it keeps growing
yeah so friends like fundraising for a
project is also an inherent part of it
and that's also from our side but also
from different partners how do you
engage with people that are willing to
go with you in that adventure I was
really interested in the thing that you
said about it's not about managing
nature it's about managing humans no and
I was wondering because what we see here
is a revealing kind of industrial
process through some what and then how
we're kind of shaping climates as a
result but I'm wondering you are you
interested in kind of looking at how the
demand for certain products is
institutionalized like if you look at
like dairy check off like gluten-free
check off and like revealing are you
interested in revealing the kind of like
propaganda system that surrounds our
food culture
I mean you've
somewhat a little bit with this branding
of the salmon but then there's also this
whole entire capitalist system driving
the production and this desire for food
as well huge part of the work I think it
comes out in different ways like we
published a book a few months ago that I
think touches quite a lot on those
questions and again these questions
around imaginaries and how it kind of
desires are kind of compiled like I made
for different things I mean kind of the
history of like imperialism and
colonialism in Britain in relation to
food and how it was building these kind
of set of like infrastructures to
provide or kind of to build the needs to
produce that so there's I mean if to
give an example there's like in a recipe
where we were fertile which is called
the Empire Christmas pudding which is
basically was invented in 1928 by the
chef of the king at that time and
basically it's a recipe that was made
for for a well-known english paradox so
it's the most unengaged of this she's
made so the most English of dishes made
out of the most unengaged of ingredients
right so it had 17 different ingredients
from 17 different origins and so it's
like you know sultanas from South
African raisins from the Australia and
basically the recipe it for us it's like
more than the recipe it's a map and how
do you start kind of reading and
understanding how this whole
orchestration of like logistics and an
infrastructure to provide all of these
things to people here on this island
happen yeah sorry I just completely
unfamiliar of your work by the way thank
you we didn't send out three essays one
more question shift from seasonal to
Union and it seems to be like a trend
cultural practices seem to follow so
what is the new kind of what what is so
well basically the idea is we've been
working on it we'll continue developing
but the idea would be first understand
what kind of citizens are we
experiencing for instance in California
they've been going through periods of
drought for seven years that might
happen again or not or my never ends or
might be fluctuating but how do you
start shifting the landscape already for
that instead of keeping consuming water
water water wood so it's it has to do
more with the flexibility to adapt to
certain condition and then if there is
very little water and you can anticipate
that for the next year maybe they have
to ban all the crops that are using a
lot in the same way that they started
banning lawn like a green lawn in front
of your house right so maybe for that
period of time you need for the next
five years to eat drought resistant
crops until we see that there's a
recovery of the watershed in that since
I think the idea of like tradition comes
in I think something that we've all
experienced in relation to food and kind
of cultural heritage became very
important during the 20th century that
like we are like really you know close
hold very close to our heart like our
grandmother's recipe and the thing that
we're kind of making things in the same
way that they were done like fifty and a
hundred years ago and I think in Europe
it's something that has grown into like
a huge industry right with like the idea
of like protected designation of origin
with like cheese's and wines and I think
what is very interesting for us that
it's kind of really perpetuated
something that we are like even though
the whole environment is in complete
flux and it's just going to accelerate
as like time passes we are still kind of
living in this mode of operation where
we can continue doing the things
they used to be done where of course
things have been changing and wine today
it's not the same wine people were
drinking like 50 years ago and
definitely not wine but people were
drinking like 150 years ago that's very
interesting steak this idea of like
season or they disagree of a tradition
or a cultural heritage with an
expiration date right like how do we
start really harnessing this idea that
change is happening and like we adapt
our kind of our responses or the way we
kind of grow eat etcetera etcetera and
shift the things that are non cyclical
right so in the case of sky like we are
talking about like polluted oceans and
this might last now for a decade - maybe
like hundreds of years
I don't know but perhaps and how will
you adapt to that and perhaps then in a
few some years like it connects to other
pretty we're doing in in France about
the collapse of wine and cheese in the
way that metals are competitively and
vineyards are completely different and
the what we were trying to develop is a
new lexicon to talk about products that
makes you understand the landscapes
where they are produced so instead of
saying that the wine tastes like
gunpowder tobacco and berries the wine
might taste like a hot July and the
cheese might taste like a flower leis
Prairie and if you started pushing that
language it's like how do you start
connecting the two and basically to
understand lack or presence of purple
flowers in this meadow in the Alps or
not four years of just understanding
those transitions or transformations and
going back to the idea of cultural
heritage with expiration dates which
we've been thinking a lot about it in
the context of the Caribbean for
instance which would be another season
that connects to the appearance of
lionfish taking over many at the water
life of many of the island nations and
in the case of the Cayman Islands they
came to such an
dream that lionfish was eating or has
been eaten all kinds of fish that is
smaller than him so the diving industry
was about to collapse because people
want to see thousand kinds of fish and
not one kind especially if you fly all
the way there
so the Minister of the Environment came
up with the and very interesting
initiative some years back to basically
start promoting the fishing of lionfish
to rebalance the numbers and create
tournaments and awards about that for
the most amount of fish lionfish fish in
a day because you can only do it by hand
with a harpoon you cannot do it with
nets or any other thing and at the same
time collaborating with the network of
restaurants on the island to serve it
right and that has been going on for you
some years but it might come to a point
where actually the numbers are balanced
and stable and you don't need to eat it
any more or even more extreme that it
becomes endangered and then that kind of
cultural tradition that you invent it
for a number of years has to come to an
end because all of a sudden is too very
scarce right so Indian how you become a
flexible to say like no from now on
something that was representing our
culture for ten years
that's it I think that is it all I know
that sometimes one always expect when
one is carrying a silver glove people as
them what it is but I think everyone in
this lecture hall knows that when you
open oysters and if you're a
right-handed person you have to protect
your left but we need to protect a lot
of the things that are in the left and
and and what I think is very interesting
about your performance and also behind
how many layers of expectation one is
sitting no as an audience because it's
not only that what you say is they kind
of horizon that you open and the
possibilities and the next slide you
know that if southern is might be able
to bring you just yet another space of
decision-making or this or design and so
what is actually I think also very
powerful is that talking about new words
nor a new lexicon
you could say we're a political group we
are a sustainable environmental office
we are like all those cliches that
somehow we have not been able to
overcome you just with the total kind of
with a total elegance and virtuosity
take them all with you and you carry
them but you're just like flying as if
insects pollinating each one of these
lemon trees would do sorry about the bad
poetry at the end with that said I wanna
I wanna just thank you I think you said
it very well it's it's a real privilege
to have your ideas coming into this
school where I think they actually do
feel like home so we hope to see a lot
more of you thank you
you
