everyone this is theaters propolis and
the director of the architectural
associations design research lab and I'm
joined today with three students as part
of our open live session hi I'm Athena
I'm a current face - hi I'm sorry yeah
hi I'm Olga now my phase one as well
we've sort of prepared a little bit of a
presentation to kind of give a little
bit of an overview about what the DRL is
about and how that is really situating
itself relative to the AAA
so the PowerPoint presentation to kind
of understand what the DRL is about I
think it's really important to
understand a little bit about the ethos
about what the architectural Association
is which for us in particular it's
really about a continuing experiment so
a lot of the work that we do is really
motivated by asking informed questions
about how architecture can really
participate how we could develop a
community of people that are exploring
and I kind of informed the way what
architecture could be the way that we
sort of approach that is really about
opening up these questions and dialogue
and discourse in a way that's really
shared and collective and we are very
fortunate to have a group of students
that are coming to us from pretty much
everywhere in the world over 35
different countries 40 students each
year to sort of work with a staff that's
also very international and practice
based to really sort of discover what
architecture is the a a spirited way has
always been a place where
experimentation was always for grounded
as a way of actually trying to
interrogate architecture
as a way of thinking to explore that in
a way that is progressive to try to be
inventive and innovative and actually to
try to understand how the contemporary
way of thinking about architecture is
really evolving a discourse that's
always been about sort of asking more
the DRL to be honest this year's 20th
anniversary and part of that I think is
an ongoing kind of community that's been
developing that's really part of a much
larger network of people within the AAA
outside of the AAA and a big part of
that I think is really to be very active
in terms of developing this kind of idea
of architecture some of the things that
are very particular to the program have
actually really been questioning the
role of technology and also the way that
architecture is toughts the
methodologies that we sort of use the
idea of practice and a lot of those
things are kind of evolving from a
period of the 60s and 70s where the
computer kind of come into our world and
the way that we sort of work on that is
really about sort of using the a a and
the idea of our space the city of London
as a prototype and sort of exploring
that in a way where we really consider
this idea that almost everything could
be considered architectural our basic
premise is that space is an interface
space is the kind of guiding principle
that allows us to sort of look at
architecture and in a very kind of open
and exploratory way and it takes its
cues I think to a kind of experimental
idea of architecture that resonates
maybe it was something that Hans whole
line once said that he said a true
architecture of our time will have to
redefine itself and expand it means many
areas outside of the traditional
building will enter the realm of
architecture and architecture and
architects will enter new fields
everything is architecture at the a a I
think it's always been about community
about people working together I think
this week is a good example of a
graduate school trying to communicate
itself relative to some of the things
that we're doing the way that that's
done I think is really much about sort
of using the school as a space where a
lot
this work is actually open to the
general public and we invite people to
come and actually see what we do
January 11th and 12th of 2018 will be
actually a presentation like the one
that you're seeing right now
which we invite the whole series of
international guests some from London
some from abroad really share and to
discuss I think a lot of the research
agendas that were sort of developing the
a is always had a of that people coming
together in a kind of very horizontal
manner where we could discuss a lot of
the work and sort of problematize how
architecture can sort of evolve a kind
of agenda beyond this our current
research agenda is something that we're
calling constructing agency and our
studio really is an experiment in itself
we work in teams we really believe in
sort of collaboration and an
interdisciplinary sort of approach to
things as much of communicating
ourselves and what teachers kind of
offer it's also students actually
feeling a responsibility and
accountability to actually teach and to
share their knowledge with each other
that extends to a community abroad here
for example ray Cappy which is a
director of CyArk with our studio trips
that basically also extend I think the
studio environment at the teaching
environment at a domain of actually
outside collaborators and innovators and
their own rights sometimes it's also
having conversations with ourselves and
the things that we sort of design it
could be machines they could be robots
it could be prototypes but it's actually
looking through making and making as a
way of forming an understanding about
things and asking about the potential
and the possibilities about what
architecture could be instead of trying
to define what it should be we explore
computation and try to make that the way
that we can communicate in a in a more
kind of expressive way in an accessible
way how some of these ideas are very
time-based and behavioural how things
evolve over time and the
a lot of the challenges that we have in
a contemporary world is to really see
how architecture could actively
participate beyond building it's about
trying to think about how architecture
as a way of approaching things and as a
way of sort of communicating in between
things offers the possibility for us to
be involved in in many different things
and that's part of the the nature of the
course is actually to create
possibilities to work in architectural
practices that are very leading and
cutting edge to create their own
practices but also to be educators to be
professionals in every manner of
speaking from technologists to
architects and Urbanists we have a very
active making culture we see it as a way
of sort of developing proof of concepts
and part of that is also to demonstrate
prototypes and making things accessible
and shared to communities that are not
necessarily always architectural a lot
of the work that we sort of develop is
really about trying to explore
materiality to sort of use opportunities
to sort of develop live projects so for
example in our tenth anniversary we held
a competition for all of our graduates
basically to design pavilion using fiber
concrete and we built this as a
proof-of-concept kind of site project
that we did outside of the AAA as a way
of also testing some assumptions and to
make that as part of the kind of larger
culture of actually what it means to
create and make space the history of the
DRL and prototyping has continued from
the very beginning and I think that's
part of the sensibility this is a
project you could see mark forms here
which is one of our graduates you could
fast forward 12 15 years now and you
could see a project that he just
recently opened large scale pavilion he
set up his own practice called the very
many in New York we have a student like
Malika Alton istic who graduated with us
ten years ago now actually being a
project architect of her own office
largest commission to design the largest
tower in Turkey at the moment a lot of
the things that we sort of developed
really not about a certain tool set or a
certain kind of idea of what
architecture style is but it's really
about the culture of actually thinking
and making and trying to find the
possibilities of how to do that if you
want to make an airborne architecture we
believe that it could be possible there
is no idea that actually we feel is not
something worth developing as long as
there's a culture and a kind of
accountability to sort of work through
some of those problems recently we've
been challenging ideas and notions of
robotics our students don't come with a
background in a lot of these things
we're not computer scientists were not
robotics engineers but we actually work
through a way of actually thinking and
making that gives us sensibility and the
community and opportunity to sort of
actually see how these things could
actually be attainable through a kind of
learning and educational model which is
really about sharing and developing that
stuff continuously sort of finds its
form in different ways and I think a lot
of the ideas could actually be thought
about this really simple ideas that kind
of build up complexity this complexity
kind of evolves over time and a lot of
these projects by the nature of them
being so collaborative and being
developed in team-based sort of
formations evolve as something that
actually is something that's outside of
any one particular author it's really
about the group of people coming
together and responding to much larger
challenges this project in particular
looking at what a self organizational
model could be for rethinking a strategy
for a space architecture we took this
project something that was very serious
this isn't something about
representation or modeling this was
something about thinking about an
architecture that is dynamic that's
continuously challenging evolving very
time-based that also dealing with very
real-world constraints so for example
limitation of materials and the costs
that it takes to actually put things out
into space looking at challenges like
space dust and all of these other things
but already becoming real
issues within that environment but aside
from our own speculations we traveled to
California we met with a jet propulsion
lab we met with space architects a lot
of our assumptions are founded on the
fact that a lot of the kind of
accessible material experimentation is
there but we make it part of our
methodology to really reach out to the
community and to share sort of our
design thinking and research and at the
same time actually open that up I think
to the challenges we very much feel that
the architecture is anticipatory and
participatory by its nature and by doing
that I think it affords us a way to
actually really reach out to the general
public as a whole computation is
something that's very important but
actually this isn't a course about
technology for technology's sake we just
feel that technology today enables us to
really push further I think a lot of the
radical ideas that were set as a
continuing kind of expand our students
are very actively using the tools of
today to sort of be able to continue
some of that legacy so I'm just gonna
wrap up by basically saying Cedric price
was one of our key figures that have
come out of the a a used to say that
technology is the answer he followed
that up by actually what was a question
and I think that sort of sets up a
little bit how we actually think about
the DRL it's about trying to ask more
informed ways of asking questions
so with that I'm gonna pass this to
Arianna and she could speak a little bit
about some of the work that they've been
doing actually right now was there time
and build space
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
in which our project much more because
we were able to converse about the
things that are happening at the TRL
with people that have no idea of who we
are but are interested in in our work
and I think that the things that
happened while we were there like we're
amazing I think that we all come closer
together in this video trip but also we
have time to really just have fun with
what we're doing and I think that sees
this is what the program is about it's
sixteen months of free freedom for
creation and research and in the best
way possible
just making and creation which I think
it makes the TRL a very special place
not we don't have that luxury anywhere
but here
so in that way I think that's what sets
us apart you guys want to talk a little
bit about your your experience cuz you
guys just came here right so Briana it's
basically in her last five weeks with us
which is a 16 month course and I think
one of the things that makes the course
very interesting is to have this kind of
overlap where the thesis students are
finishing and at the same time we have a
new cohort of students kind of coming in
and maybe I think it would be nice for
you guys just to basically share a
little bit some of your thinking and
some of the things that maybe have
brought you here and I think actually a
little bit probably a lot of the
questions that you had
prior to coming here which I'm not sure
that those have been answered yet but I
think as part of the process I think it
would be great for people I think to to
get your perspective I would like to say
that um I came last year for the
presentation of phase 2 and that's a
great opportunity to speak with these
guys and figure out what we're gonna do
and see the projects they make so I
would say if you're interesting this
program just visit this presentation
it's amazing we'll be all around you
will talk with people and that's great
for me it was really helpful and that
was the point that I say I would like to
join this program and secondly this
overlapping with a face to at the
beginning it was a little bit weird they
told us we have to help this hey guys
and but to be honest the first
presentation or so from you guys I was
like a bit afraid
I saw all this stuff and was like oh my
god am I gonna do this things but after
starting helping you it was much more
easier and yesterday I was sitting there
and so the presentation was pretty sure
that I'm gonna do all the stuff so yeah
reasons why you want to come here but I
can share my experience after I came
here because I had some questions in my
mind that we are actually doing in
teamwork and actually this is like the
the main part of the program actually
because you learn to communicate with
people and I think that was I mean tio
was talking about that small school as a
community and you get to know people
from all around the world and you get to
you know communicate you know in
architectural you know projects and
stuff and also the overlapping was super
helpful that you can dive into the
projects over the phase twos and you
you know technical details programming
you can ever critique about their
projects and you can see what you're
gonna do in the future as well yeah yeah
I think for me it was it's a lot about
this accumulation of knowledge which is
super important in the course because I
think the overlap between faces gives
you guys a lot of security it gave me a
lot of security when I started helping
the face juice you see that you have a
lot of backup like it's it's a big
community and there's a lot of knowledge
that you build up from it's not that you
are starting from scratch or it's
expected that you come with all this
knowledge when programming and coding
it's really a lot that's there it's a
really big foundation and I think that's
important yeah I mean I think just
generally speaking the things that are
really important to me in really
assessing I think how how we sort of
deliver in the education that we're
trying to do is really to try to
maintain the DRL is really a platform
that there's really an open framework to
kind of allow students particularly to
come to the course to really bring
themselves in a very kind of open minded
way to really explore I think some of
the challenges of what we're dealing
with today in contemporary society and
the approach that we have I think is
speaks about community because it's a
way to actually deeply understand and
not only the kind of social issues that
are thought about but actually the
nature of how we work on those problems
and actually the way that we produce and
think about architecture and I think
sometimes you know for me particularly
you use the word kind of to be comforted
in some sense the fact that students are
coming with a lot of enthusiasm and
energy I think motivates the staff in a
way that to be honest is kind of almost
an obsession or a way of really trying
to also kind of in a very deeply
personal way from my perspective remind
myself why I came here as well
and maybe as being the longest standing
member of the DRL in some sense it's a
place that actually on a year-to-year
basis kind of reinvigorates me to
actually really engage with a lot of the
discussions and working with young
people actually is an amazingly enabling
way of thinking about how we could
actually really make a meaningful
influence on things so for me like it's
always like really important to actually
be able to discuss these things and our
staff is also I think very important to
recognize that there are practitioners
they believe in design we're kind of
unapologetic about that stuff we we
really feel that design actually makes a
difference and a lot of the things that
actually are brought to the table are
also very much based on the fact that
our community is so international that
though they may be scared or curious if
they're able to do these things that
they can develop this kind of
technological kind of approach to stuff
fundamentally they're all architects
actually really coming with their own
knowledge and I think as they get more
confident in terms of actually feeling
that they are capable of exploring some
of these things and I think that's what
really makes an empowering kind of
community is actually understanding how
these things actually come together and
they think the projects reflect that
because they are kind of co-authored and
shared and this knowledge is something
that this actually maintains through I
think the dynamism of conversation and
the real confidence in the fact that
architecture is actually a very
important participant today more so now
that maybe ever so I think like we have
some questions that people are sending
in and some of them have to do with
software that's pretty fair question if
I'm honest so we don't have any mandate
that you actually have to know digital
tools prior to coming so generally
speaking are also our approach to
software isn't tied to a particular way
of thinking about computation so
basically any piece of software
that you think would be useful we'll
teach you and honestly the way that we
structure everything is that you develop
workshops that help you to develop I
think more complex ideas of how to use
computation the software platforms we
teach pretty much all of them in
software tutorials that students are
working with some very good staff
teaching some of these things but beyond
skill sets and so forth it's really
about trying to think in a more
conceptual way about how to use some of
these platforms as a way to actually
develop things we do a lot of scripting
we developed descriptive geometries we
work with tangible media we try to
develop strategies for sensing we think
about robotics and how to communicate
with machines I can sound a little bit
overwhelming but realistically we don't
do this in isolation we're working on
these things together and because the
students work together with the staff to
develop this the learning curve of that
is quite quick so if you have a lot of
reservations about software and it's not
a software finishing school but we will
teach you how to do some stuff the other
questions here where do most graduates
work after completing this degree which
I guess this is to me because these guys
are still here I don't really have a
magic ball with me right now for them
but I mean our students actually do a
lot of things over the 20 years I think
they have set up some very successful
practices in their own right
some of them like office and Slovenia or
Yosuke hi Jana who was a partner of Ma D
and China mark forms in New York we have
a lot of I think distinguished graduates
which is always very humbling to me but
beyond that you know a lot of them
continue in education in terms of
continuing PhD or researchers others
actually move into actually becoming
educators their own rights some are here
in the school
down the street that the Bartlett and
the B Pro program is an example there
are a lot of people that are think very
actively participating in the community
and I think they see themselves as
people that actually want to actually
really participate and to work with
other people and I think that that
spirit I think is something that's very
important they also work in a lot of
offices so in London in places like
Thomas Heather workers our deeds office
Norman Foster's there are a lot of
offices that have a lot of our graduates
in there and honestly I think that's
part of that extended network of this
community that has been working in this
field for 20 years and I can say has
been working in a way which continuously
tries to question itself and to sort of
reconsider actually the nature of what
that practice actually means so we are I
think in many ways looking forward to
kind of continue that and if you have an
interest in some of the things that we
talked about then please you should feel
free to kind of reach out and to speak
to us about that I don't know if there's
more questions that are coming in at the
moment okay questions about why we chose
the arrow like I could answer this even
myself I'm not going to yeah okay
[Laughter]
so I'm also a graduate of the DRL I can
say if anything I came full circle and
maybe that lends itself to the previous
question too because I didn't I didn't
actually come to the AAA with any real
expectation or did I know what the DRL
was at the time there wasn't even a
website but I know after I finished that
I had felt like I achieved something
like almost like surviving something
which was kind of the AAA ethos I went
back to New York and I and I moved back
a year later to start to teach in a
place where not too long ago I had
actually just thought that I would never
be a
to come and study to fast forward 15
years and I'm sitting here speaking to
you guys inviting people who would like
to come and study here in a similar way
that I did I don't think that there is
any other place that would allow this
kind of thing like a kid of 24 years old
becoming a teacher and been directing
this thing for 10 years and
realistically speaking still feel quite
humbled by that whole thing so my path I
think is not anything that's my own I
think it's part of the place actually
creating opportunities for young people
and I think being part of the community
even if I was a very kind of solitude
kind of arty type sitting by myself just
exposed me to such a different way of
working and the power of actually
working and collaborating with people
together which basically changed my life
and made this place my own for the last
17 years that's my story but I'm sure
yours is more interesting ah no actually
my name is very similar to yours in the
sense that I came to the deal without
any expectations I sort of dived in and
I would say that it was a very pleasant
surprise in that way I don't think you
always need to build up expectations I
think that is also nice to just jump in
and how spin it's like jumping in a
bucket of cold water you sort of like
get shocked at the beginning but then
slowly you get used to it and like you
get used to the rhythm but also this
collaboration and this team
collaboration which i think is like
pretty new to a lot of us sorts of sort
of helps you get there like it talking
about the the problems that you need to
solve not only with your teammates but
with everyone else like the stuff around
you and the face ones and sometimes we
even get like a face for like people
that graduated four years ago dropping
by and saying hello to see what's
happening and then you get to talk to
them about what you're doing and
similar issue at their time so I think
that as you go and ask that you begin to
understand a bit more of this community
sense the the bucket starts feeling a
bit less cold and you start to warm up
so in that sense I think that it doesn't
matter what the expectations are this
place will sort of change all of that up
depending on what you also want to get
out of it actually I had a lot of
expectations before coming here but I
mean all these things that you're
talking about I'm working with other
people other cultures and all the stuff
you don't know that before coming here
and when you have to start and it's very
intensive from the first day and you
just have to come if you think if you
feel like you're interesting with this
stuff I mean this is the best place
we're doing this so that's why I came
and I just want to see what you guys are
doing here it's not about working with
other people I mean after that you will
realize that this is the most important
thing because even all this stuff that
you're scared about the software's what
we are working with I mean three weeks
ago I couldn't imagine that I'm gonna
write in codes and I'm doing this and
because of all of you I mean I could ask
everyone and the tutors are amazing they
we have every Saturday software classes
it was really weekend we were always
here we're working all together and this
is why we can go through this and one
and a half year and we know six months
is a short time to learn all the stuff
and I don't know but don't you think
that it's because like everyone is so
excited about it that you want to be
here no yes of course yes for me for me
that was the greatest thing like seeing
the tutors coming on a Saturday or a
Sunday and then you realize like this is
really exciting like I also want to be
there this as exciting as London is to
be for sure like it's so exciting to be
in London but
reason it's also more exciting to be in
studio thank God we had the website
[Laughter]
[Music]
schools and stuff the outcome is kinda
different than the other ones is more
radical and some of the stuff that you I
mean I was talking with my dad too
planning to come here and he visited the
website and he said like okay there are
some robots and stuff were you gonna
study I said master architecture and I
mean after I came my I mean things that
are so it was all over my I mean it was
much more than I expected basically
after I came here I mean you have the
space and facilities and all that stuff
that you can do crazy stuff like this I
mean that's exactly that people don't
come with the software backgrounds but
after a year and half people do amazing
stuff here yeah see the website and
choose that a master I mean that's
really difficult you have to come and
see what that means and what is it
different because you can see this you
can see something else you don't really
understand what's different that I mean
yeah if you are not if you not familiar
with things like that I came from a
school we okay and I don't know about
this thing so I'm not able to say if
that's good what they what they are
doing or not so I mean the beginning is
very difficult to see just the website
and understand if that's something that
you want to do yeah that's true but at
least for me it was like more than I
expected I guess that's it this is a
place that you can do some no there's a
possibilities are considered seriously
mmm-hmm
I think I mean that that's probably one
of the things that students say most is
like they don't really know what we do
maybe I'm not
does that sort of communicating it but
they think the experience of actually
really sort of working and exploring the
stuff and seeing the studio and meeting
with people I think we could only kind
of encourage people if they have an
interest in things to to come and to
explore that I think one of the aspects
about a place like the AAA that I think
distinguishes it from many things it's
not a university it is a place actually
where it is almost like a completely
open door policy to walk in to discover
and to see the things that we're doing
to see those things that other programs
are doing and to really be able to come
to your own conclusions about actually
what this could be and I think the
direct access to things I think is very
important and the conversations are
actually very necessary and we
understand that architecture is a pretty
complicated thing I'm getting signaled
that it's time to wrap up so with that I
think I could only sort of really
encourage people we have the phase to
final reviews which I showed some
pictures of on the 11th and 12th of
January I think it's a really
interesting time because it's part of
graduate school open week and invite you
all to come to participate in the juries
and to see the kinds of conversations
the latest work a discussion that this
course and I think just to understand
what it means to actually come to the
school like the architectural
Association so with that we'd like to
say thank you for giving us a little bit
of time and hopefully this has been
useful to you guys and if you have
questions please kind of reach out to us
or to reach out to admissions and we'll
do the best that we can to sort of
communicate to everybody and try to
answer what we can but with that thank
you very much thanks a lot
