and I'm delighted to introduce tonight's
lecture the ocean as a space by choose
Martinez this talk is the final
installment for this academic year in
our series new canonical histories what
we've invited architects artists and
theorists who are rewriting the art and
architectural canon or retelling history
from a new perspective to give us new
tools to not only reimagine our past but
also our future
tonight speaker has been doing exactly
that through her work within and across
the art institutions choose Martinez as
head of the Art Institute at the F H and
W Academy of Arts and Design in Basel
Switzerland where she's currently
leading a research project supported by
museums touch on the role of education
enhancing women's equality in the arts
she's also an expedition leader of the
current a project initiated by TBA 21
Academy the current is concerned with
the state of the ocean and the discourse
around him seeking to provide a platform
for the cultivation of interdisciplinary
thought the exchange of ideas and new
knowledge production organized in three
years cycles the current champions the
notion of the journey as a goal in
itself with expedition leaders and
fellows traversing the ocean as well as
land-based convenings to Purdue Purdue
provide a singular arena in which social
political economic and environmental
factors converge with the spirit of
exploration in light of this tonight
shoes will discuss how public
collections and museums are undergoing a
radical shift or rebirth due to their
historical dependence on social
structure and citizenship and we'll use
our growing interest in engagement with
nature as a suggestion for the next
institutional turn it's probably an
approximation of what she's actually
going to talk about so I'll let her tell
you exactly what she is going to talk
about but please join me in welcoming
choose to the a
[Music]
well she managed to summarize the
lecture so good that we can go and have
a drink so I am you catch me like in the
middle of two things one is trying to
write a book which is the first time
that I tried to write something a bit
longer than 20 pages and second try to
reflect upon something that I did
without really knowing what I was doing
which is to ratify the curricula of an
art school posting three big questions
at its core which is the question of
nature the question of gender and the
question of race and I probably did it
so because of yeah things that I did as
a curator and on the other hand every
time like you know it's very hard for me
to think that I am as a I'm a curator so
I would never say that but somehow the
last year I wanted to come to terms with
my own denial of trying to be frame as a
curator work as a curator or think as a
curator and I've been always kind of
very disengaged into any of the topics
and the subjects of how creators think
or what are the kind of subjects and
concerns and problems that they attach
to this kind of practice a practice that
actually is a very short one when you
look at it in an independent way and it
it is a long one but the very different
one that the activity that you would
imagine if you attach it to an
institution or to a museum with a
collection so I was actually thinking
why I am so allergic or I don't want to
think about the things that I should
think in my practice as creator and then
try to think about other things that I
think that they are important for the
discursive 'ti and the shaping of
certain ideas and also experiences and
sensitivities that affect the way that
we understand the role of artistic
production in our society why is that
then not curatorial or who I am kind of
been discriminative towards this kind of
practice separating some sort of
intellectual life or discursive life
from the very simple act of producing
arranging exhibitions so when I was you
know I was the co-creator of documented
13 together with Carolyn Christopher car
keys and then when we met for the first
time Carolyn said that she wanted to do
a first documentary for the dogs and
then I said oh fantastic really like a
first art exhibition for the animals and
the dogs it looks good but actually I
don't think that beyond the statement we
need to take that very seriously as a
practice or if we do how are we gonna do
it without making a joke out of
ourselves and then she said okay listen
if you really don't want Documenta for
the dogs then we better do that for the
strawberries and then I saw where she
was going and then I kind of stopped
kind of trying to superimpose my
structures that actually I documented an
art exhibition should be about really
not only storica material and
experiences that historical material and
introducing and reintroducing all the
time through exhibitions but also the
question of citizenship so this woman
was talking about entities like dogs and
strawberries that normally are not the
ones that decided upon our always in
redefinition democracy so what is she
saying I think if she is actually trying
I'm claiming that we could do all this
kind of cultural work we can do all this
effort and then at the end of the day we
are doing it for subjects they are but
they are not actually defining our
political project in the same way as we
do humans is it actually a way of escape
in politics and responsibility is a way
of avoiding that kind of a subject or
what what are we saying or another
possibility
she actually saying something in a very
intuitive way that actually is going to
define the whole future of what we
understand under politics and we
actually are afraid to face the kind of
metamorphosis that we need to undergo in
order to understand that actually like
embracing the subjects like
animals and nature as political ones as
in the same kind of level and
decision-making power in our democracy
would actually be our rescue towards the
for the future of this project and it's
so difficult to think even about it that
we are kind of trying to escape it or
just approaching it into a metaphorical
way but never in a direct way and this
kind of question remain with me so when
I when I was like you know when I
finished the comment and I went to the
art school as a director not been an
artisan being a curator the first thing
that I asked myself was how can we
actually position this kind of debates
and questions in a way inside the
artistic practice as the artistic
practice is doing in itself in other
words I was kind of meeting more and
more artists that they came with the
subjects the subjects of life the
question of taking life as an
intelligent entity that is making
decisions that may not be rational or
may not be linguistic but our decisions
are affecting and are molding the way
that we are moving and we are forming an
idea of space and that this idea of
space was not only poetic or
metaphorical but wasn't a space that was
political but was political define some
of the ideas of the left also right but
mostly the left that was kind of very
progressive in trying to understand the
idea of inclusion the idea that if we
reform our projects and we start to be
inclusive including elements into the
project then our democracy would kind of
expand in a way that it would grow and
encompass other realities but I was
saying that it was at least three
realities that through this kind of
reform of the left ideas of the reform
of democracy was not entering or not
entering
in the way that I thought they should so
the first one was undeniable the
question of gender so in the discussions
about citizenship and the kind of
expansion of the Democratic project I
thought that the question of equality
was never taken seriously or not as
serious so that it would kind of reform
the imagination that we have about
freedom and the question of
participation and representativity
because how can we actually believe in
representativity if we are not
addressing first the Equality of those
that get represented so how is that
possible how is that then possible that
we make decisions for entities which are
outside the human outside even our very
kind of you know patriarchal ideas of
culture and even the oven and the space
what these decisions are made and how
can we actually not take that into
account and see how the decisions that
are non-human non rational perhaps non
linguistic but our decisions anyhow are
affecting our own decisions how these
two groups of decision-making processes
are not interacting or at least how come
them we don't even have a language to
talk about this you know difficulty in
its interaction so let's call it nature
and the first group goes of course the
question of racism and race and the
question of identity and essentialism so
could we actually post these three
things at the core of an art school and
if we do so what does it mean what does
it mean to do so in relation with
historical material should we eliminate
our history and then my answer was just
probably we need to eliminate anything
that is torus Isis or that creates a
memory of culture in ways that we that
would not allow us to go faster to the
embrace of something that is coming up
and is coming up in such a difficult and
different way that we need to think
about it outside the framework of the of
the historical mind so yes let's get out
of art history and
apart from that let's get in into the
unknown so I was looking for ways of
thinking about that thinking that
perhaps there is also a possibility in
nature in the ocean in the question of
gender to think about art not only as a
question of materiality the production
of objects and also the production of
objects and materiality in relationship
to a class or to a taste or to a
privilege or to the relationality that
an art object creates towards its
circumstances socially with those that
are relating to the art or even to the
institutions that articulate the object
and actually position the object and
related you know in its relation of
power with the collections with the
colonial with the colonial process and
so on and so forth so what has actually
for example a substance like the ocean
or nature has to offer when we want to
renew or renovate the way that we are
thinking about art this is one question
and the second question would be what
actually does art has to offer if it's
not situated in a class and in a taste
and then I was thinking that it would be
interesting to think about art not as an
object but as an organ to actually do
the same kind of activity or let's let's
call it like to project upon art the
possibility of being an organ that has
an incredible memory this memory is
historical but is not historical in the
same way as the human memory is but an
organ that remembers all the experiences
that they have been in touch with
materials and have been touched with
entities that are completely different
from culture on the other hand and
completely cultural on the other so in
other words I was kind of thinking that
if there is a substance that would help
us to understand the challenges of the
idea of how to approach the question of
nature in the next centuries neh
in relation to gender nature in relation
to artificial intelligence that is not
only with the intelligence that is
possessed by nature in itself but it's
also artificially created and then goes
into that interaction it would be really
interesting to take art as this kind of
organ that possess somehow like a bank
this kind of information and that in
possessing it is kind of you know giving
it to us in a really strange manner but
modifying the way that we experience
certain things so this is a little bit
freaky because my way of thinking is a
little bit freaky but in other words if
we would summarize the question would be
simple as such the other day a friend of
mine put it in a very clear way if we
think for example that the question of
climate emergency is a technical
question every time that we approach the
technical question we would come with a
new type of behavior that would reform
the old behavior so don't drink from a
plastic bottle don't wash the clothes
several times and pollute the ocean
don't do this don't do that like every
time we are entering into a process of
reforming a behavior that on the other
hand in doing so with the hope that if
you if you reformed it totally would
produce a complete different
relationship with the ocean on the other
in reforming we are expressing an
incredible trust that something remains
so that even if we completely reformed
then something also completely stays but
the question is that nobody is actually
problematizing what is sustained is it
us
is it us as we are is this just a
question of performing and to what
extent can we reform and then becoming
totally different without becoming
totally different so if we start being
and acting and behaving in a complete
different way not only towards the
oceans or towards nature towards
equality towards our body towards our
agenda towards equality towards the
social towards Polly
how can we then at the other hand think
that this that something of us is going
to stay and what is the substance that
is helping us to come to terms what
would what is this metamorphosis so what
is exactly getting transformed and what
is getting transformed is then the
individual is asked that we are getting
transformed is getting transformed the
human in relationship for example with
the ocean but then the ocean stays or we
are transforming ourselves transforming
the ocean transforming the relationship
and if we transform the three elements
of this kind of relationship then what
is coming after what are the images that
are helping us to understand the
experience that we can create after it
in other words the question for example
of climate emergency is definitely a
question of culture it's a question of
culture trying to think about nature but
needing urgently to think about what is
culture today and what are the elements
that we are and we are continuously
transforming and still we can call
culture I think we are coming out of
that kind of divide in between culture
and what is totally different from it
but if we really want to think about it
as a one thing and still not been a
mystical or not being an animist and
kind of keep an animal like an element
of secularism what is this thing so I've
been thinking a lot about that and it's
a very difficult topic because how can
we actually think about a culture that
would encompass these differences
without knowing or knowing very little
about them and then having
looking for elements that are in front
of our face that we know that they have
been actually talking about the
possibility of relating to the unknown
so how is it possible to relate to
completely unknowns and for example if
you revise the text of Glee sound when
she was talking about opacity that's
kind of in the first lines of his text
what he's asking is not for complete
transparency or not for a complete
understanding of the other not for a
complete exploration of the ocean not
for a complete rendering of what is
there but for a complete possibility of
relating without understanding anything
given the right to the other thing to
remain a pact that means to remain in
its own terms
or in other words how can we think not
only that we are the rescuers or that we
are the agents that we need to reform
our behavior but we can transform in a
way that actually we are given the right
of agency to all the elements that enter
into this interaction so can the ocean
thing by itself if the ocean can't thing
by itself it may be a complete opacity
operation because we don't know how the
ocean things by itself we don't even
know what we are saying when we are
saying that but on the other hand it is
interesting to think about the
possibility of something that is also
having this kind of agency so and if we
understand this agency can this agency
affect our own agency I think we have
been through process of modernity and
illustration and the other hand we have
been also moving away for many of its
premises so if we move away on the one
hand can we think that the ocean may go
and the process of liberation and a
process even of emancipation in itself
thinking in itself differently about the
actions that we need we need to take and
I'm saying that because on the one hand
is completely freaky to think so to
think that the ocean may think or that
they the entities that we need to rescue
are actually and rescue
on the other hand if you think about
colonialism you would agree that we
cannot just go in the colonies and not
give them the right to decide by
themselves and that actually we have
been learning that through power but we
are superimposing this power into all
these entities again and again thinking
that it's a question of rendering all
the systems that are coexisting in life
transparent so I thought it was very
interesting to think about the
possibility of allowing for something to
keep as it is and yet serve as a
substance to affect completely the way
that we think about politics and I I
call that culture and I think that for
the first time I was thinking about how
is not to think in curatorial terms in
other words on the one hand in a very
pragmatic way we have been proposing
exhibitions in when we propose
exhibitions we are dealing with space
when we are dealing with the space we
deal with social space we are dealing
with with breathability with the
possibility of interpreting and
reinterpreting historical material
giving it a new present but also giving
us the possibilities through this
material to get new ideas about the
space that we are in the limits of this
space and the possibilities of this
space and then yet we have in front of
us the most immense space ever which is
for example the space of the atmosphere
or the space of the ocean
so is it thinkable that actually in
every practice of exhibition making we
are not addressing all the subjects not
only as a subject that is adding to the
many other subjects and then we keep the
DNA of art as an historical DNA so that
the only thing that institution should
do is to order the historical
relationships that the production in
several times establishes with its own
time and with the past and with the
future can we imagine for example that
is affecting us in such a way that we
are gonna
create some sort of oceanic creating can
we actually think about a practice that
totally takes upon itself the philosophy
of this coexistence of Life Budda then
affect the way that we collect Buddha
then affect the way that we understand
you know storages that we understand
exhibition making or even the language
of this material would would be also a
way of taking into account relations
which are not only political by agency
and willingness so we think that one of
the things that defines the political
subject is the fact that there is an
intentionality but art like nature don't
share the same kind of human
intentionality as we understand it so
the intentions or the idea of being
synchronised with the time is not the
same in nature but it's also not the
same in art in other words for example
you go to an exhibition and you are in
front of an art object and you think
that you are a contemporary to that art
object you think that this art object is
talking to you that there is actually a
synchronicity that you are actually in
front of that object and that this
material may defy your taste it may defy
the way that you can read it it may defy
even the knowledge that you have versus
that object and it is because of this
idea of synchronizing that sometimes we
feel uneasy we feel really bad we think
that we don't understand but what if for
example there is not such a thing as
synchronicity what if the time and the
moment that you are meeting this object
is kind of your present but has nothing
to do with the present of this object so
this object is in a complete different
time or actually is in a complete
different substance a substance that
affects intelligence in ways that defies
your idea of being synchronic and is the
same if you are in front of a mountain
and it's the same if you are in the
ocean so if you are in the ocean is here
and now for you
but definitely is not here now for the
ocean towards you so there is as well
some sort of
quantum effect of the way that we
transpose experiences in certain
substances that we are kind of learning
through nature and many many many
artists are incredibly sensitive to the
way that time is perceived and his work
and is actually understood in life and
how our institutions that they are
pretty young and dealing with ideas of
storage and ideas of presentation in
linearity can of course not deal with it
at all but it would be interesting if in
the future we could imagine that through
this kind of exchange our own
institutions or the way that we allocate
and the way that we are presenting
really respects or responds to this
complete another way of understanding
life and I know that this you know on
the one hand is completely abstract and
strange it's even strange to myself but
on the other hand how are we gonna
imagine the museums and the art spaces
and the exhibitions of the future and we
just imagining them being responding to
the trends of the time so now we have
the trend of the clouds and and climate
emergency and the animal and the
technology and then new trends are gonna
be adding to this old trends or some
trends but go and some others would come
I think our imagination of the
institutional life can remain in the
same kind of DNA that we have in
structure in it and then at the other
hand we are talking about restitution we
are talking about the process of the
colonizing the institution when the
institution is completely colonia the
institution is the colonial DNA /
excellence it has been there to remember
to remember power it has not been that
created to give power back to be in
equality terms with those that they were
possessing so the very sense of a
collection is a colonial sense or is a
DNA
dated to an idea of possessing a
timeline and those that possess the
timeline are those that are writing
these narratives and create these kind
of panels so how do we think that we can
go on with the museum's of the future if
we actually just give back part of the
collections but under a sustained or
then we act like all woman when they
just are about to die or just die so
that the program seemed a little bit
more equal or do you just introduce a
little bit of new technology to the
programs that they look that they are
responding to these kind of questions I
think do we imagine that we can keep on
like that or are we imagining something
much more radical in the sense of this
total coexistence so if we take this new
experience of the relationship that we
establish with nature with gender and
with Ray's super radically serious how
can the all institutions all the whole
structures stay and who is gonna imagine
all the structures for that but I think
that's why I thought that it would be
really useful to think of the ocean not
only as a space which is an explorer or
is just ready to explore or it's just
like being rescued from the bad behavior
of the human or actually being a
resource for the future new technologies
and then being in the need of a
regulation for it but think about it
also as some as an art space as a real
like kind of an exercise of the mind
what if we are thinking that the new
encyclopedic museums start in the in the
water what if we think that then there
is an information that is gonna tell us
how to articulate the production of
culture and the production of
relationship towards that in a complete
different way would that include
indigenous cultures coastal cultures but
it also would include those that have at
all any relationship with the ocean in
their life and I'm saying the
Oshin not only as an entity or as a
reality but also the ocean as a
philosophy as an idea of potentiality
towards a complete different you know
substance that may help us to understand
political agency differently so very
complex and I was thinking so because it
has been several at times of reform and
for example if you look at the last
twenty years of art spaces you would
have several families of art spaces but
it's very interesting to think about the
relationship that we establish toward
art spaces and the idea of
self-organization as an idea of gaining
autonomy towards the institutions like
the big institutions like the museum's
and on the other hand all the
self-organization and these more
grassroot ideas of running spaces or
self-organizing spaces are completely
linked to the promotion of cultural
politics and the European Union I think
I'm only talking here but the European
space but it's very interesting how
Europe thinking that they were kind of
lacking the economic dynamics that other
regions of the world were having was
recognizing that again one of the few
things that they had was their own
cultural heritage and that they needed
to kind of articulated or dynamize their
cultural heritage in a really
speculative way given the role of
self-organization and a smaller space
the role of the mediator versus
questions of migration questions of
welfare state you know political
environments that they would kind of
softened the potential tensions that
would appear in the big cities of Europe
and
same time without us noticing very fast
they were also allocating in the big
institutions like the museums the role
of attracting through their collections
again the major number of visitors and
tourism and then tourism was some sort
of strange exercise because we on the
one hand can think about tourism as the
others like like if you are from Spain
and you see that there is like three
comma eight million people coming to our
salon every year you can see that these
people are others but on the other hand
in the kind of political and
organizational space of the European
Union there is no such a thing as the
others the museum's
started to reorganize this and like the
sensibility and experience of European
culture for the Europeans like trying to
reconnect with an idea of heritage and
the past without us noticing because
nobody is going to the museum for that
purpose but not going for a purpose does
not mean that it's not happening while
the small spaces and the kind of other
institutional models whether for
recreate in the idea of possibility
jungle and upcoming artists so to
recreate the possibility of hope the
possibility of dynamics which is
actually not happening in economics like
the question of gender to recreate the
idea of equality and to kind of brain
souffle the fiction that we are living
in a more and more free society where
these goals are is like they are slow
but they are coming little by little and
the question of course of reunion or a
possibility of incorporation of those
that are not of a European background in
the European project and so on and so
forth so all this kind of effort was
kind of running in parallel with these
big big structures that were getting
bigger and bigger and actually
reinforcing the idea of the collections
on the one hand while they were also
reintroducing the idea of the temporary
exhibitions as a black bust
in order to connect with this kind of
you know to speed up the idea and the
values of the collection in and now to
synchronize you even better with the
question of the now but then what
happened is that somehow it was clear
that all these efforts in the small
spaces and in this kind of artists run
self-organize and all these energies
they kind of lost energy or they kind of
disappear as you know the funding was
disappeared but the funding disappear
because they thought that the prong was
so big
that actually this kind of projects
would absolutely make no impact in this
kind of communities and then when these
kind of communities lost these kind of
spaces at the same time we more and more
started to talk about the question of
the community so the language was kind
of imposing itself into the situation
but the situation was dramatically
changing and these spaces disappear to
the point that it's very very difficult
now to talk about a network of spaces
that that they have enough funding to be
independent or or to act in such a way
in small communities and neighborhoods
upon the cities of Europe and then the
question of nature kind of grow up and
then you can think oh the question of
nature or the question of the ocean or
the question of climate emergency has
also a beer some relation with the
question of you know the impoverishment
of the cities the fact that these spaces
are not unless unless so the places
where artists are producing they cannot
afford this to do space it's very
actually difficult to produce in such
environments but also the institutions
that they respond to it that they are
open to certain more speculative
projects are disappearing there's almost
no speculation left in the public
institutions and private institutions
that we have mostly art galleries and
some other initiatives that we still
don't know exactly how to deal with them
and it is in this kind of panorama that
the other question became more
or you know present and at the same time
social movements are starting to be also
very kind of present in our life the
question of gender is not only a
question of theory or a question of
feminism or a question of a relationship
towards the situation of power certain
gender but also it's a question of a
social movement that is kind of
reactivating again the possibility of a
different politics inside our cities and
then again the question of the
sustainable life and the question of
equality they come in some sort of a
strange symmetry where I so many times
get the impression that people are put
into the space of a choice that you are
again into the old divide where you are
asked if you would engage in questions
of climate emergency or if you would
prefer to actually engage in questions
of social action in the kind of
synchronicity of your time so we are
constantly asked do you want to act in
your time and make differences in your
time or you are actually going for a
long term project that is different from
your time but you can make a difference
in your time but the question is that
there is no such choice meaning it is
impossible to think about climate
emergency without thinking about the
quality is the same question that I was
saying at the beginning we cannot think
about democracy without thinking about
full equality we can actually not think
about democracy without thinking about
the full rights of everyone but the full
rights of everyone would then include
everyone or as I was saying at the
beginning if everyone is non rational
and non linguistically articulated is
this everyone and everyone so what areas
are and everyone is war than everyone of
the fishes and everyone so and if these
can be thinkable then how are we then
gonna ask them how are you gonna post
the questions that we had on impose the
questions on them how are these answers
gonna come and the question of how are
these answers gonna come is probably the
most difficult one because I do think
that they come
culture and
