okay hi everyone um thank you so much
for joining us this evening to debate
the role of cultural institutions in the
environmental emergency we're delighted
to have such a great range of speakers
here and we'll introduce them shortly
but first to contextualize this event at
the AAA
I am Jessica Reynolds this is Lilly
Jenks and we teach a unit together here
called experimental 13 some like it hot
exhibiting in a warming climate in our
unit we are investigating the critical
role that cultural institutions play in
helping us to understand and act in the
climate crisis here are some on screen
here are some of our unit projects
investigating themes such as the
importance of collaboration and sharing
knowledge between institutions knowing
that the climate crisis crosses all
disciplinary and institutional
boundaries ways of breaking down the
solid walls of institutions making them
more accessible and porous it's more
diverse accessible to more diverse
audiences because social sustainability
is environmental sustainability
celebrating the possible or inspiring
features of cloning future geologies
future wildness and how to build empathy
across the natural world exploring
interspecies communication so overall we
are asking how can we redefine what a
museum is today in this crisis and
hopefully the conversations tonight will
discuss some of these issues furthermore
as practicing architects ourselves Lilly
and I often work with cultural
institutions and we're intimately tied
up with the contradictions and
complexities of delivering projects from
art exhibitions to art spaces that have
direct environmental impacts on waste
and energy consumption and more so to
emphasize the urgency of the problem
here on screen you can see bruno latour
diagram published in down to earth which
is a really useful reminder of the needs
of the environmental emergency are not
simply a question
adding a green light into the next
agenda or taking a tech box approach
though instead demands a total
reorientation of politics ethics
aesthetics economies and so on so he's
arguing we need to shift our current I
use the pointer our current access
access of politics which is so the two
polls and between the local and the
global and he's arguing to shift it 90
degrees towards the terrestrial which
kind of indicates the kind of huge
reorientation that is required so the
enormity of the shift where everything
is understood as part of a larger
earthly framework what every decision
has real consequences it requires us to
act both practically and conceptually
and so it can't be one without the other
so why are we focusing on cultural
institutions in the climate emergency in
this Roundtable
well because cultural institutions can
inform the conversation from these two
equally important angles the practical
and the conceptual so the first the
practical so museums owner states there
are questions of land ownership and
finances museums have ever-growing
collections requiring more display space
more storage space so how can
architectural refurbishments or
extensions or new buildings act
positively if in the environment from an
operational point of view museums and
cultural institutions are typically
energy intensive so they're very climate
controlled spaces and often they host
fast paced blockbuster shows which
require transporting large cultural
institutions around the world as well as
staff around the world while exhibition
designs often discarded after their
three-month show so the second issue is
the conceptual cultural institutions
have a critical role to play in making
sense of this necessary world shift
through their curatorial programming
which has the ability to construct new
cultural discourse and catalyze us into
so how these museums engage with their
audiences create new audiences and
educate communicate through the visitor
experience is vital to addressing this
crisis so responding to the enormity and
gravity of bruno latour demand from
radical new alignment towards the
terrestrial what organization is better
correct the tackle these difficult
uncomfortable questions than cultural
institution so it's a terrifying
situation but we can engage with it
creatively and positively and we're so
pleased to welcome all speakers to the
school who lily will introduce now
since May 2018 the point of in Museum
few don't knows in Forest Hill and South
London and it's incredible Museum that
brings together our nature all I'm going
to equal footing it's the only place
where you see art and culture together
indoors and outdoors where the oldest
nature trails London is given equal for
singers and beautiful cultural badly
artifacts in july 2019 the Horniman
declared a new climate and environmental
emergency and this january they launched
a manifesto outlining a plan for action
nick has been massively involved in
public outreach building new audiences
around gender he stated am literally the
Horniman connects us with all the global
cultures and natural environments
encouraging us to shape a positive
future for the world we all share as a
much loved and trusted institution with
a close to a million businesses each
year the Horniman has a moral imperative
to act now Catherine in present second
today she's Baku curator at the DNA East
project at the Victoria and Albert
Museum this project is part of the
expansion outreach by the VNA to engage
with different communities and audiences
who are under service around London the
VNA East will open in 2023 as part of
East Bank a major new cultural and
education district plan for the Queen
Elizabeth Olympic Park it will include
the paternal to me designed Museum
research in collection center by disk
video through the extension of the DNA
raises many relevant questions about how
to grow while taking into account the
responsibilities of social and
environmental sustainability
before governance was at the Barbican
and rated their excellent exhibitions
such as the math of childbearing and the
Bauhaus both of which I personally felt
while visiting them that they would have
been pushing the idea of the designer as
an activist and I think that Catherine
herself kind of seems to push this quite
seeing how a curator as well as a
designer can actively engage in the
creation of new culture as well as
archiving the past joins us from the
Natural History Museum an institution
which has taken on the mantle of being a
global scientific and cultural leader in
the environmental emergency and that
focus to Museum declare the Travis
emergency on the 20th of January 2020
interestingly the same day the Horniman
Museum presented their manifesto 20 the
Natural History Museum claims it will
become the first in the world to set a
science-based carbon reduction targets
in line with the goal of climate change
particularly as Anthropocene Engagement
Manager
[Music]
this is a conversation to be okay Thank
You chef it's five minutes or ten
minutes
I think well try and keep it okay
Frankie yeah well hello sorry I've got
sort of I'm turning my shoulder to two
half of you great to be here I'm going
to rattle through what we've been doing
at the Horniman since I arrived just
slightly less than two years ago because
I came in and I'll tell you actually
first we'll show you what though the
Horniman is so the Horniman as Lily said
is a museum and Gardens actually which
occupies this site in Forest Hill in the
borough of lewisham and it's
in fact I'll just go back one to say um
it's got the museum buildings here and
the gardens here and then a half mile
long Nature Trail London's oldest Nature
Trail on a former railway line there and
it's a it's an interesting hybrid
organization because it's got classic
museum collections of worldwide
anthropology and Natural History and one
of the world's best collections of
musical instruments but it's also got 16
and a half acres of gardens plus the
nature trail and an aquarium that's been
there since 1904 and live animals a sort
of a collection of domestic animals
which are too small to be called the zoo
and butterfly house as well so it's
there when I arrived I said to be
bouquet what is the Horniman and this is
old it's a list of things and the
mission was really about promoting an
appreciation of world cultures and
natural environments through our
collections and I felt that was very
weak in the situation we'd been in
because that mission was dated back to
1989 so looking back to the founding
impulse of Frederick Horniman who was a
tea merchant and raised a Quaker with a
strong sense of social justice and
bringing the world to Forest Hill as he
said to promote understanding between
cultures rather than showing the
triumphs of Western civilization did a
lot of work with staff to rien capsulate
the mission of the Horniman as we
realized it was london's only museum
where nature and culture can be seen
side-by-side at the global level so we
felt that put us in a fantastic position
to actually address some of the issues
around the climate and ecology emergency
and related issues social issues such as
global migration so cutting to the chase
we developed fairly rapidly a new
mission which was about connecting us
with global cultures and natural
environments encouraging us to shape a
positive future for the world we all
share because we were very aware that
it's a lot of doom and gloom about
around environment and
and we know it's a majority family
audience with small children coming to
the Horniman
and we know from visitor research the
parents and grandparents and carers are
really worried about the future these
quite small children are going to be
growing up in an often thing feel quite
overwhelmed and powerless in it so we
wanted very much to look at positive
actions and our underlying goal I
suppose in all of the work we're doing
with the public and we have nearly a
million visits a year is to create
active citizens who are active consumers
and citizens in the sense of exercising
their choices about lobbying
corporations and governments for change
so we're not only doing stuff in our
galleries but it's a very strong engaged
positive engagement remit that we have
so quickly moving on some of the things
flowing from that mission are are as
follows
as I said all of the primates and
biodiversity waste and pollution that
material becomes central like many
organizations and museums we've had a
sustainability working group which has
been full of very keen people doing
stuff at the margins of their existing
jobs with difficulty making progress
we've now said this is absolutely
central as is our equality and diversity
work partly to deal with the large
numbers of visitors were embarking on a
capital project or two capital projects
over the next 10 years but the main one
here is called nature and love and it's
consists of a refurbishment of our
natural history gallery which hasn't
been touched for about 60 years and a
bit of our aquarium because actually as
a side note with the first aquarium in
the world two captive Lee breed coral in
our tanks in Forest Hill and we're
accelerating evolution six-fold by
breeding coral which is more tolerant of
warmer waters and therefore with the aim
of repopulating bleached reefs in the
long term we're calling it nature and
love because the word love is the one
that comes up most frequently in
relation to the Horniman people say oh I
love the Horniman I really love the
Horniman
and we remind people that Frederic
Horniman as a philanthropist
philanthropy means love of people and in
thinking about how you can harness that
we can go on a positivity about the
challenges we face there's quite a lot
of work gone on now
so the Tyndall center for climate change
research does as much work on behavioral
psychology now about why people change
or don't change as it does on the
science because the science is pretty
undisputed now it's why people aren't
doing anything and one way of actually
getting people to become active in their
own lives is to be able to they're not
oh what can I do about the glaciers or
their rainforest but what can I do
personally to create a better future for
my children or grandchildren or whatever
it may be so it's the love of the next
generation as a motivating force for
personal action so the nature and love
project has a number of different
components we're also at one of those is
- we have a membership of eight and a
half thousand men family memberships
about thirty-five thousand people were
going to co-opt
some of those we hope a few hundred in
an environmental champion scheme to be
supported with tips resources a
coordinator badges and so on for
children to undertake their own waste
and carbon reduction program with the
club providing support and benchmarking
the people can motivate for people to
motivate themselves and the idea is to
try and prove a concept which we might
then persuade other membership
organizations to roll out other national
and other museums the National Trust
Pat's with its many millions of members
we've renamed her sustainability working
group to a climates in ecology Action
Group to make it active and just about
to a point our first first full-time
coordinator here's an example of some of
it so that's all about creating active
citizens through engagement with what we
do and about getting our own house in
order in terms of our own
in order Cafe is now plastic free
entirely only uses sustainable Fairtrade
free range it's and local suppliers 30%
of the menu is now vegan and vegetarian
last year as I say we replaced 26 items
of single-use plastic with veg ware
which is a compostable plant-based
alternative which meant in the first six
months a hundred thousand individual
pieces of single-use plastic were
removed from circulation we now provide
free water tap water refills in a cafe
and on-site and 90 percent of water the
visitors and staff use on site is now
from free sources and there is still a
demand for packaged to water because
some people don't like that won't have
tap water we now have sell water in cans
and that's again that led to 24,000
single-use plastic water bottles per
year not being sold but we're also doing
programming around climates in ecology
action we had a big program on plastic
pollution as I say not only just not
only in a shop and cafe last year for
two months we in our aquarium we dumped
a load of plastic rubbish so you can see
a frog there with a load of plastic crap
around it and there's another frog there
poison dart frog the animals I hasten
Rob were not harmed during this because
the plastic was there just for a brief
period in our jellyfish tank we took all
the jellyfish which are usually swirling
around out into tanks to back-of-house
and replace them with plastic bags
swirling around with quite in your face
labeling and people were really shocked
because one thing they don't expect to
see in museum cases or aquarium tanks is
a load of rubbish there's an assumption
that it'll be nice looking and so people
got quite upset but it prompted action
so one small child was so upset and then
angry she went home and did a 20 page
booklet on plastic pollution which in
her mum then sent to our local MP so
great that's the kind of active
citizenship we want to include we
actually have a turtle along
term loan from the Natural History
Museum we can't say very well we then
displayed with a load of plastic netting
and so on we do a lot of work with
artists this is still there Claire
Morgan installation in our entrance hall
of plastic waste recovered from beaches
and made into spheres and then a bespoke
taxidermy for four species that are
found on that site Fox crow etc spewing
out plastic waste waste in a kind of
revolting kind of way and we did in the
autumn a show with project pressure an
artist based on artists collective
showing artists photographs of melting
glaciers around the world this one for
example in fire shows the former earlier
20th century limit of the glacier and as
Lily said we declared an emergency in
July 29 and launched a manifesto last
month it's available online it's a
punchy two pager but we say for example
that we're going to reach greenhouse gas
neutrality in 2040 recycle 90% of our
organic food reused 200,000 litres of
aquarium water a year etc etc what we're
doing now is working out in practice
what it actually means to retrofit an
early 20th century building which is
reliant on gas heating for a sustainable
probably renewable electric and solar
and earth pump or air source heat pump
future which is a big topic ok thank you
Catherine would you like to switch
places why did you come there yeah why
don't we clean rather than the sort of
practicalities and operational aspect of
the museum which I think we can talk
about when we talk around some of these
issues and wanted to start first of all
with the principle of collecting we're
you know for those of you don't know the
V&A we have two sites here in London
that the museum in South Kensington and
the Museum of childhood in Bethnal Green
we're at a National Museum with
collections across art design
architecture graphic art graphic design
photography painting sculpture ceramics
glass textiles fashion furniture and
objects from significant portions of of
the world including significant holdings
from East Asia South Asia the Islamic
world so if you haven't been please do
come and visit South Kensington but
we're also actively acquiring all the
time and one of the collections that I
wanted to draw your attention to is our
rapid response collecting initiative
which started a few years ago and was
about sort of trying to collect design
and creativity that has a very specific
sort of social purpose or social
dimension or commentary or as signifying
the ways in which design is shaping
society and so this sort of duality of
work but it's also rapid in that we are
following news and following situations
and seeking to bring objects into the
museum in a very quick way which sounds
like it's like should be simple
acquiring things it's quite a slow
process of acquisition and signing it
off and what are we collecting and this
process sort of cuts out a lot of some
of the sort of bureaucracies that exist
in a museum rightly so but it allows us
to be very very very responsive and
reactive to what's going on in the world
and we have a suite of galleries which
are currently closed actually and will
reopen in the summer as part of our new
20th century and contemporary design
galleries in which rapid-response will
be embedded and it means that the team
who collect and make and process those
acquisitions can get them straight out
into the museum almost immediately
sometimes at the same day depending on
what it is and one of the things that
we've been focused on in the past year
is the activity of extinction rebellion
we wanted to we've been watching and
looking at what was happening with this
group and we felt it was particularly
pertinent pertinent to you know the sort
of activism that was happening in London
and the use of design to further their
story their agenda but grassroots groups
are often very skeptical of
establishment institutions such as the
V&A and it's took a long time and
careful conversations a very sort of
rooted work with key figures in the
movement including the designer of the
identity and fix things from rebellion
if you like and we were able to agree a
suite of objects from wood blocks that
are used for printing through to what
you just saw in the previous slide
examples of the imagery and
that they carry through banners through
posters through different different
media and this is a very sort of
important sort of part of our work in
bringing forward issues to the museum
and and contrasting socio-political
context with a typical sort of focus on
a lens of art design history which
doesn't always acknowledge the
conditions of making or reaction that
leads to some of the you know things we
hold in our collection we've had quite
significant backlash on this acquisition
from an it's divided opinion our core
sort of regular audiences finding it
difficult that we would collect such
things they don't recognize necessarily
the inherent sort of creative value of
that but also feel that this group is
unnecessarily disruptive so this is an
interesting debate that the museum is
sort of squarely in the middle of but
it's also important for other audiences
that we have who feel that we should the
museum should have a position that
should have a point of view and should
be a platform for for discussion in this
way and Karina Gardner who is the
curator who leads our rapid response
collecting has a brilliant job but also
has the job of answering every single
one of the letters that she gets to
explain why we collect such things so
our exhibitions program is also enormous
and voraciously consumes energy those
sorts of different ways and there are
questions around you know the the notion
of the temporary exhibition and how you
recycle how it tours objects traveling
to and from different institutions and
these are very live inquiries within the
museum sector I think it's fair to say
and there are lots of different
initiatives that the museum is part of
where cases display materials used to
recycle repurpose for different ends but
what I wanted to sort of foreground here
were a few recent shows that we've
age that have brought to the fore sort
of contemporary lens and contemporary
practice with provocations about how we
tackle the future and these exhibitions
feel quite markedly different from the
typical sort of exhibition program of
the VNA and signals are sort of shift in
our commitment to platforming
contemporary practice but also taking a
kind of thematic ideas led approach to
what's going on in the world today and
what art design creativity is doing to
shape our society and address
particularly the sort of environmental
issues the future starts here was staged
in in 2018 it was curated by Rory Hyde
who's our curator of architecture and
urbanism and Marianne of Astana whose
was a curator bought into the museum
specifically to work on this project
who's now back in Lisbon doing lots of
freelance things but also about to
curate the Istanbul design Biennale
later on this year with a subject of
empathy about how we can change our sort
of view to the world in our relationship
with nature through the sort of idea of
empathy which has its roots in sort of
early 20th century philosophy and it's
very exciting project that she's
building so these working with curators
who come into the museum for a period of
time and inflect and change what we do
and challenge the institutional thinking
to push in different directions is also
a very critical dimension of the
ambition that we have as an institution
I wanted also flag food which was bigger
than the plate which was a stage last
year curated by Katherine flood who
typically looks after our prints and
20th century through poster art
collections that has stage this is a
second of her major gallery shows the
first big was disobedient objects which
was also very interesting exhibition
looking at
amateur design practices for the
purposes of activism people who
collectivise to make to further their
sort of political point of view and the
different way of understanding our kind
of contemporary vision and material
culture and food was a was a great
exhibition that took kind of the the the
roots of the foundational collections of
the South Kensington museums which came
together formed largely out of the Great
Exhibition in in 1851 and before the
natural you know the Science Museum VNA
were founded they were there were one
institution then we sort of split in art
design terms and craft terms and science
and technology in another way but we
have this all weird waste food
collection which nobody really knows
what to do with them sort of sits in
store and everybody sort of I don't know
how to cope with this so this project
was really kind of looking back at the
history of the museum and sort of
industrialization of food food
production and bring there right up
today including sort of experimental
projects which look at which we brought
into the gallery and living entities in
the gallery with Greg mushrooms and
other projects so you it was an amazing
opportunity to sort of use the the long
history of the museum's collections to
inflect and think about how
practitioners are addressing ways of
living and sustainable development today
is a great catalog if you're
particularly interested in this subject
and it was an opportunity to foreground
some of the initiatives that are
happening in in the part of London where
I'm working on the VNA East project
where artists like Katrina Boehm are
experimenting with practice as as social
enterprise and and food production she
started her own drinks company is
recovering sort of practices of hot
picking in that part of London and you
know founded her own sort of ethical
company and as an artist project which
is super interesting and it was great to
see that presented in the gallery
and then another significant project for
us just to emphasize the point of the
ways in which the historic collections
can catalyze lots of exciting fertile
sort of territory for researchers for
industry we presented fashion from
nature in 2018 which looked at fashions
preoccupation with the natural world
through representation through literal
use of animal skin or birds feathers and
and natural products to today's world of
you know agitation by the likes of
Vivienne Westwood about the fashion
industry people like Katherine Hamnett
who've been critical in looking at water
consumption and the production of of
cotton textiles particularly but this
interest in how historic collections can
catalyze sort of current researches is
another dimension of our work that I
wanted to talk about today it's not just
exhibition making it goes away so
underpinned by lots of longer-term
research projects where we back we have
conservation material scientists in the
museum who are looking at preserving and
conserving our collections through
material understanding but then also
collaborating with different partners on
devising new materials devising new
products new techniques ways of
answering some of the world's challenges
and it's quite interesting when you see
this on the on the left-hand side here
is a new materials made by pineapple
leaf fiber it's part of a kind of big
research program funded by the HRC that
the VNA is one partner in looking at
fashion textiles technology innovation
we are looking at the historic
collections as a method of confirm you
know sparking forth new material
production and then you look back to the
19th century and there's a dress under
on the right from the Bose Museum as a
loan to us but it's partly made by a
pineapple leaf and silk fiber that was
produced in the nineteen
so there's lots to suggest that it's not
just about sort of jettisoning in the
past but it's coming towards and
thinking in new ways about the meaning
relevance and potential inspiration and
ideas that can can can flourish from
from a collection such as the V&A I'm
going to speed up sorry I realize I'm
quite a lot to cover so the new projects
in in East London as Lily said as a part
of the kind of new quarter in the
Olympic Park that's delivering on the
kind of legacy plan of the Olympic Games
it's been through a long process and we
have arrived at this position for the
V&A we're building a new museum design
bodhrÃ¡n and to me and a collection
Research Center and this I'll spare you
all of the convoluted history of what it
takes to capital projects like this but
this motivation is in part because the
VNA in 2015 was informed by the
Department of Culture that we needed to
move out of the building where we house
a lot of our collection that's not on
display we have about two and a half
million objects in them in the museum
and around the thousand archives most of
our three-dimensional holdings are not
in South Kensington they're in a place
called Blythe house in West West
Kensington where we've been housed with
a British Museum and a science museum
for 35 years and we were told we're
selling the building it's gonna become
flats you gotta find somewhere else to
go so we had to I'm sure that was more
conversation than that but that wasn't
that's the clevis notes for you so we
had this sort of you know opportunity to
think about what we do with our
collection this is our entire collection
of textiles fashion furniture Asian
objects architectural fragments
sculpture some metalwork ceramics
Islamic objects big rooms that we don't
put on display in the museum because we
don't have any space so we did we
going through a sort of second round of
master planning decided to really go for
it and create a sort of new typology of
sensor that is neither store nor museum
sort of somewhere in between opening up
the collections for public enjoyment
public discovery but also critically for
us creating new spaces for research
teaching study of objects and what
you're seeing here is the sort of early
conceptual design for that project by
Diller Scofidio but together vienna is
and then a museum will have collection
galleries a major exhibition space in a
project space together what we really
want to do is sort of reposition our
collections for for today's world to be
a collaborative partner working with
other partners on the park working with
the constellation of arts organizations
schools businesses individual
practitioners in and around East London
connecting globally and really using it
as a platform for or for thinking
through today's world and making sense
of the world and this you know the
museum as a site of discussion of
provocation of a space for thinking
through these challenges is is you know
an important aspect of what we do one of
the small elements we share with you
today all of this is in in evolution in
making at the moment but one of the
galleries at the waterfront Museum will
be a project that we will Co curate with
the Smithsonian Institution for the
first two years of Vienna East Life and
it's looking at the sort of the question
of the Anthropocene and humanity's sort
of effect of a relationship with the
planet the collaboration with the
Smithsonian and allows us to bring
collections of art design and
performance together with Natural
History science technology visual art
contemporary art like Agnes Dennis and
we're looking at projects like this
which you know in the 80s were were
fantastic sort of you know interventions
into the city questioning inquiring you
know special moments and she
she's in her 80s now she's only just had
her first retrospective which was on at
the shed last year it's time to sort of
recover practitioners but also rethink
of relationship to the natural world and
that's one of the sort of purposes of
the of the exhibition or the program
that we are devising is that thinking
about adopting a sort of whole earth
thinking if you like this is the
original blue marble photograph taken by
NASA pilots on Apollo 17 which has
become the most sort of reproduced
imaged in the work in the world we hold
one in our collection this is the
original NASA photograph but it's about
sort of shifting people's thinking and
it's shifting through understanding and
exploring practical solutions but also
your behavior and recalibrating our
relationship with the natural world and
the program will include objects and
experiences that you encounter in the
gallery but we're also at the moment
testing the ways in which we can embed
live research as action and an active
research but also as forms of public
engagement how can we bring local
initiatives into the gallery where we've
got citizens scientists or local
organizations who might be trying to
encourage use of the the Lee Valley and
the waterways that are around the
Olympic Park so where we're testing how
we can make the gallery space a site of
action of inquiry of discussion and
particularly interesting to us too is
that how do we problematize the objects
in our collection that's a nice mahogany
clothespress from the 18th century but
it also is a product of the the the
intense logging out of the Caribbean at
this time how do we bring post-colonial
narratives through the sort of
environmental lens to our collections
and look at them in different ways and
not just as examples of craftsmanship
and decorative objects but as moments in
time that had devastating wide-reaching
effects and I'm gonna end
and the the last thing that we're also
thinking about and hopefully I'll be
joining a panel at Westminster in the
summer looking at the idea of
environmental racism which is a
territory of inquiry that our colleagues
at the Smithsonian Museum of
african-american history and culture are
particularly interested in preoccupied
with with their with their collections
with their programs and and their
research and we you know we have
acquired a section of Robin Hood gardens
at the point of demolition which is
quite typical for the museum who
collects architectural fragments we have
typically done that throughout them our
inception this is a controversial move
for the VNA we will be putting Robin
Hood gardens into the collection center
at V&A tease them for me as I grew up in
this part of London it's very
significant potent object an example of
you know innovative public housing we
can talk about it in architectural terms
but we must also talk about it
in terms of who benefits from urban
development how do we communicate lived
experience what are the pros and cons of
both the effects on the environment but
also people who live in those
environments and we're looking at
objects in the Smithsonian's collections
like this mile marker from the Dakota
pipeline protest which is a different
form of environmental racism and could
be contextualized and explored in a lot
of ways so this sort of local stories
that allow us to you know stretch to
global relevance and resonance or some
of the things that we are exploring at
Vienna East and I'll just leave you with
buckminster feluccas it's always nice to
look at Bucky fuller this is another
print from our collection there we are
so hopefully a flavour of some of the
ways programmatically that we will be
exploring the exact is
yeah it's quite nice check your slides
[Music]
I stole your your picture therefore they
try to enslave they're quite small okay
so I planned for ten minutes as well
which for me usually means about 1213
minutes so I'll try and speak quickly
okay so so hi my name's Camila I work at
the National Museum in London and and I
am an obscene Engagement Manager and in
the next few minutes I'm just gonna whip
you through a few things so a little bit
about my role and the museum's give you
a bit of context a few words about our
new strategy which was launched a month
ago today a little bit about our kind of
approach to sustainability it should
quickly caveat that by saying that's not
my area of expertise but I pulled
together a little bit of information
because I felt that relevant for today
and then I'll say a bit more about our
approach to public engagement and in
particular off the back of the launch
for our new strategy so while I tell you
a bit about my post I'm just gonna show
you what is arguably my favourite
gallery in the museum this is the
minerals gallery if you haven't seen it
before I definitely recommend you go
it's probably one of the only galleries
in the museum that's remained pretty
much unchanged since it since it opened
in 1881 and so I put the museum for a
bit under six years for the majority of
that time I've worked in science
communication so I've worked in the team
led the team and that's been principally
about working with a museum scientists
to raise public awareness of the
collections how they're used and the
scientific research that's conducted at
the museum with this new post it was
created by the museum in July August
last years it's only been a few months
but in very broad strokes the key things
I'm I'm kind of scoping out are how
should the Natural History Museum be
thinking about talking about engaging
our audiences with Anthropocene related
concepts so things like a climate crisis
biodiversity loss land use change
species extinction all that kind of
messy stuff how should we go about doing
that
I'm also considering well how might we
reinterpret our collections how can we
look at our collections and start to
tell slightly different stories that
really connect with people and who are
the other organisations around the world
who are committed to the same kinds of
visions and missions how could we work
with them how much
share best practice so that we're not
working completely in isolation and we
could be working as a joined up network
to have broader reach so here's the
museum I should say I know nothing
literally nothing about architecture
embarrassingly but I'm fairly confident
in saying that I think this is one of
the most beautiful buildings certainly
in London and it was designed by an
architect with Alfred Waterhouse and it
was founded by a guy called Richard Owen
who is the person who coined the term
dinosaur and when the museum opened its
doors on the 18th of April 1881 Owen
very much wanted it to feel like a
cathedral to nature was the phrase that
he used and I like to think he pretty
much they pretty much achieved that so
there's a museum today and that's our
blue whale skeleton hope hanging from
the ceiling there I say today the museum
houses a little bit over 18 million
specimens we have 300 scientists who
work there and last year we we welcomed
5.4 million visitors through our doors
and how lucky we are to have that kind
of incredible reach it's a few words
about our strategy as I mentioned it was
it was launched a month ago today and
the most prominent thing about it of
course is that we declared a planetary
emergency it's readily available on our
website if you'd like to check it out
but in that stressor you'll see that we
say in no uncertain terms that we're
living in an unprecedented time with
respects to human impact on the natural
systems that we depend upon and we need
an unprecedented response if we have any
hope of having any kind of positive
future it also lays out our vision and
mission so our vision is of the future
our people and planet thrive and we have
a mission to create advocates for the
planet so there's lots of different
stuff in there in terms of focus areas
strategic priorities one tiny nugget I
wanted to pull out because again it said
felt sort of relevant for this
discussion is we talked a bit about how
knowledge and understanding that's born
out of scientific research or discovery
is crucial for us address some of these
issues but it's not sufficient on its
own and of absolute equal importance
it's appropriate engagement whether
that's with policy makers decision
makers our public audiences who are
obviously also decision makers
that's a little bit about about our
strategy with respect to our kind of
approach to sustainability so when we
launch new strategy we had a few changes
on site as well and some of that was
around the visible kind of text and
branding that we had for our visitors on
our digital screens as well as as you
can see on the doors to our shops if you
think this is the most text-heavy slide
that I have so so don't panic so just a
few things with respect to
sustainability and the first point was
was mentioned in the introduction and
like everywhere else we're looking at
ways we can reduce our carbon emissions
from heat pumps our energy center to
installing solar panels so our system
museum so we also have an a traditional
museum entry and I believe that's
happening right now the solar panels are
being installed with the hope being but
the ornithology building can then
essentially power itself so LED lighting
installed a standard setting low carbon
high energy efficiency standards for
building projects so right from day zero
right from that planning stage that
intent is absolutely sort of planned in
there and recycling set work's those
seating walls other kinds of exhibition
materials wherever possible where it's
not possible I believe there's sort of a
free cycle scheme that exists between
situations so if we can't use it you
know maybe the VNA can use it that sort
of thing and importantly working with
key suppliers so I believe it's sort of
predominantly our our top 30 suppliers
to kind of nudge them to improving their
approach to environmental sustainability
so that might mean you know a catering
supplier if their environmental
standards aren't what we think they
should be it might be kata saying that
okay well you have a year to improve
your situation otherwise well we'll move
on and just to give you an example of
some of this sort of text that went out
in our catering spaces and our shops
this is really kind of I guess about a
couple of things so making it clear to
our visitors that this is on our minds
and that we're not perfect by any means
of course these things can't change
overnight
but making it very clear that we're
mindful of this and these are some of
the steps that we're taking small
changes and also I kind of think about
well when a visitor comes to the museum
they see this they think okay cool then
actually Naturalist museum is thinking
about these things but also when they
leave when they then go and do
food shopping or clothes ripping maybe
they'll just be more mindful of that
kind of stuff once they see this more
and more in places like a museum and
when you also wanted to publish some key
actions that you can kind of do as an
individual and many of these will be
very familiar to you when we're not
unique in in putting these out there but
but it was kind of it was about time
that we we did put some of these things
out there so these are on our web site
as well and they were all our digital
screens for the week of our strategy
launch and they I think they're eight or
nine actions and they sort of range from
thinking about how you travel and if you
need to travel in that way through to
thinking about your waste trying to eat
sustainably and I've included a
screenshot of this one because I think
it's arguably the most important one so
really using your voice and making your
voice heard whether that's with your
friends of a family or your local
councillor your local MP and so just a
few words about our approach to public
engagement so our audience research
information currently sort of
predominantly tells us that we tend to
be seen as a place for educational
learning for families and schools which
is great and we would never want to lose
that it's it's so crucial but given the
time that we're living in now we're
starting to think about okay well how
might we actually go further and use our
us.please to drive change so when I say
us fees I principally mean our
world-renowned collections our pool of
scientific expertise and and I'll reach
that we're lucky enough to have
physically and digitally online and I
was saying this earlier were at the bar
but I think the element of trust really
can't be taken for granted at the moment
at a time of extreme complexity
fragmented trees and disinformation it's
it's generally chosen in audience
research data that museums are still
relatively trusted spaces that feel
unbiased and and that's really important
and I think we just can't take that for
granted we're very lucky to have that I
think so the way when people come to our
museum that's my niece by the way like
like a lot of small children she's
fairly obsessed with Dinosaurs so so
when people come to our museums quite a
few of them kind of come for some of
those quite sort of charismatic
specimens so the
dinosaurs the polar bears the giraffes
the beautiful insects those are moths by
the way people tend to be there
butterflies that all of them I think buy
one a month and that kind of that point
of all and inspiration and that wow
factor again is really crucial for
hooking people in and connecting them
with the natural world but as I was
alluding to before now we want to think
about how can we kind of nudge people
further so perhaps going from wow that's
called a walking off so wow that's cool
I want to know more and then from ok I
want to know more too now I know more I
care about it and then on to now I know
more and invest that I care about it how
can I use my voice what can I do how can
I take action how can I speak up for
nature which is essentially how we
define an advocate for the planet at the
Museum so but this is just summarizing
what I was just saying very broadly
speaking we want to inspire inform and
empowered but these things can't happen
overnight of course so I just want to
say something very briefly about our
permanent gallery spaces some of these
are old they've looked the way that they
look for a pretty long time and the pace
at which things are changing now
sometimes that doesn't feel that doesn't
feel ideal but permanent galleries can
take a really they can take years to
transform and to do it well and so
currently when you walk through a museum
when we consider and throb seem related
concepts so take the climate crisis for
example we don't really have a very
prominent strong story teller driven
narrative about the climate crisis we
have some stuff so this is a picture of
a couple of a couple of panels in a
gallery cool from the beginning and
there's nothing wrong with these panels
there's nothing erroneous about them
there's nothing factually incorrect but
you can see when you look at the
language that it doesn't feel
contemporary it doesn't feel like
there's a call to action it doesn't
really match what we're the kind of
social places and so you know if you
look at the panel on the Left what we
talked about chlorofluorocarbons I mean
CSCS is a discussion about and the
debate that's come and gone the language
on the right changing climate question
mark that's just not something that we
would do now that we know the climate is
changing there's no question about that
and you know thanks all the same things
like as a temperature increases there
will will be an increase and the number
of certain that that's already happened
we've already seen that we're living in
that time at the moment and so there's
nothing drastically wrong with it but as
a state in Australia we will be looking
to transform some of our some of our
public spaces so we highlight things
like interconnectivity and humans being
part of a bigger system and weaving in
storytelling and narratives that really
do motivate change rather than focusing
too much on just preventive preventive
presenting facts the facts are important
but as I mentioned earlier they're not
enough so they're just the last couple
of minutes I just wanted to say that
where we can be a bit more agile is
through some of our public engagement
programming and our our public events so
I'll give you one very brief example
which is our latest program so like a
lot of other museum suite we have a
likes program we stay up until 10:00
p.m. the last Friday of every month and
every lace has a theme and these two
pictures are from lates that we
delivered just over a year ago so in
November 2018 we partnered with the
Natural Environment Research Council so
they're all about environmental science
and we commissioned a theater maker
company called Coney and a few different
elements were involved in the night so
you can see the most obvious one here
that giant earth it's not always there
sadly so that is an artistic
installation by the artist called Luke
Jerram and that's basically a seven
meter in diameter globe with detailed
and NASA imagery on the surface and it's
illuminated from the inside and that
being there for the night was very much
I don't if you learn if you have heard
of the overview effect but it's what a
lot of astronauts reports to sort of
feel when they glance back at our planet
and they see our home as being this kind
of fragile isolated only place that we
can call home and so it was really
beautiful I think quite kind of
provocative in terms of how our audience
is engaged with with looking at it we
also had pop-up science stations with
specimens from our collections and
scientists engaging with people we had
interactive talks throughout the night
where people could reflect on their
concerns ask their questions to our
experts and these topics range from
things like melting ice in Antarctica to
micro plastics to palm oil to coral reef
and the whole night was about talking
about the environmental crisis that we
live in but also championing at
positivity too so looking at the cutting
edge environmental science that is very
much out there but maybe get slightly
less talked about compared to the kind
of scape the scary stories but what I
thought was quite exciting about sly and
was slightly different was what Kenny
did for us so that the theater make a
company so a couple of examples they
made a card game for our visitors to
engage with it was called let's talk
about climate change very niche sounds a
bit boring but especially great and why
I love the car game is when you play it
it kind of it sort of forces you to
participate to use your voice to share
your views your opinions and your
attitudes which i think is social
science tells us is so important and how
we address the climate crisis and
similarly they delivered a performance
called how we save the world and it was
really straightforward it was just two
actors on stage and I elected theater
and they basically they acted out
different scenarios and they invited the
audience to participate and steer and
direct their conversation and responses
to one another in that scenario and
these scenarios ranged from a house
party in East London to you're you're a
small holder farmers in Indonesia and it
did I I think it did a great job of
really highlighting the nuanced
complexities that we have to think about
and address with things like the
environmental emergency that things are
very rarely black-and-white there are
trade-offs and priorities that you have
to think about and I love what that
performance did because again it
encouraged people to use their voice
participate see the consequences of
actions that that sort of thing and we
saw some really great engagement from
people that's the card game those orange
cards there and we had the black boards
out there because we wanted people to
just reflect and and tell us how they
were feeling about the night and the
issues that were raised so that was so
that was an example of something where I
I think you know it's the kind of
direction we could go in a bit more a
bit more playful a bit more
participatory and understanding the
nuances along the way so my last slide
is just to say here are some thoughts
amongst many others that I'm thinking
about in terms of the future of our
approach to public engagement how can we
use our collections to tell more
provocative stories and narratives that
really connect with people and who do we
mean
people over about 60% of our visitors
tourists and they may never come again
how come you highlight the humans a part
of nature and part of the bigger systems
this kind of systems thinking approach
which is very I think it's a very
difficult nut to crack
how can we encourage care for an action
to protect natural systems we interact
with and depend on for all of our
futures and when I say all of ours I
obviously don't just mean humans and how
can we bring people together to reflect
on and discuss these complexities and
hopefully generate solutions for a more
positive future
well one of the thing one of the things
that I set up was about six months ago I
realized that all the museum's I knew
were doing this kind of work or
beginning to think about it and perhaps
not quite knowing what to do and we're
all making the same mistakes and all
duplicating effort and not learning from
each other or finding shortcuts so I'm
the the Horniman is nationally funded
and we're part of a group called the
national museum directors Council which
actually also includes all of the Arts
Council funded regional museums the npos
so it's quite a big group about 40 odd
significant museums and I said we should
set up
advertise next week precisely because
there wasn't enough thinking and
collaboration going on I'm also setting
up at the moment a a touring exhibitions
network from use for regional museums
and the Horniman to try and develop a
more sustainable model of exhibitions
because again there are touring
exhibitions but not many most museums do
their own exhibitions and then they
throw at the stuff away so it's trying
to develop a sustainable model for
touring for a certain size smaller than
these national museum lots of money
well actually pool resources yeah yeah
no I'm just thinking from my perspective
and maybe I shouldn't say this you know
there's the it's because it's becomes a
monetized you know not necessarily
always for smaller institutions but it's
you know things do cost money to
transport them as often inherent cost
but it's also that sort of we need an
attitudinal shift I think in a museum
sector about sharing knowledge and
collections and not not necessarily
using it as kind of grand profiteering
in that way but we all have holes in the
budget to fill so it's very tricky sorry
Nick
we used to have a radical department in
the in the museum sort of between the
50s and the 70s
it's got disbanded by with some sort of
spurious excuse about government policy
was called the circulation department
and it collected the contemporary
because the museum had started to become
quite sort of Konnor serial and not
really collecting anything that was
you know less than 50 years old and so
this department by stealth just
collected loads of amazing you know it's
like Hoover up what's going on in art
schools or European kind of industrial
product design at that time you know in
the fifties and sixties was hugely
exciting and then they would send these
packaged shows off around around the
country to working men's clubs to
schools to regional museums and we've
been thinking about you know what would
it mean to recirculate in in different
ways in new ways and we're having some
of these conversations with with
partners around the country but also
what's interesting is how how could I
maybe it's slightly off topic for today
but we're distributing the museum and
museums work in in different ways that
collections don't necessarily have to
travel but there are other ways of
sharing ideas and it's just found that
that departments so inspiring as a you
know both you know being very serious
about contemporary practice but also
wanting to reach a much broader audience
so these kind of kinds of places and I
think one thing I've noticed so it's
really encouraging to see but pretty
much all of these places have the same
appetite about having these
conversations and engaging their
audiences with these sorts of concepts
everyone's waking up to the time that
we're living in which is really really
great so that's also definitely become
evident is and so the NHO is the only
museum I've ever worked in and it's kind
of become apparent that there isn't
really a lot of from what I can see
there hasn't been a huge amount of
sharing with specific so one example
might be we have we have an audience
research
the museum so which which is great so
that we can fully understand well how
did the public responds to our
exhibitions and our galleries and that
kind of thing and what is the public
space and awareness like in terms if you
don't have they feel about climate
change and that's all thing but not not
every museum being small museums may not
have that and say for example sharing
that audience insight information does
that happen
why my why would it not happen is I
think it's a fair enough question
because actually you know I personally
feel that audience inside information is
a really crucial starting point you need
to know who you're communicating with
and where they sit attitudinally or or
whatever it might be so why why aren't
doing that and you know when them so the
Carnegie Museum in Pittsburgh they had
an exhibition I can't remember what's
called no but had I drop scene in the
title and it was maybe two years ago or
so and we tend to be asked would you be
happy to share your summative
evaluations so we could just see how did
yeah that's fine but that isn't so when
we try at our Museum when I'm trying to
establish this clamp network well maybe
that's something that should just be
much more fluid so we can just learn
from each other much more seamlessly and
as a colleague in the NH m in Berlin
said to me we're never gonna steal
visitors from each other we exist a very
different space so why not try and know
from each other and I think just on the
on the concept of collaborating I'm
quite from what I can see of the museum
but we haven't worked together with
artists and and designers of that much
here in there but it's always the
situation where you know if we have a
performer or an artist at one of our
lates it seems to double the amount of
work and so there's an immediate area
that because we're not used to doing it
and so you know it's more as a loss to
know what we're gonna function
differently in that space all of that
and that's a shame because there are
some concepts I think could be really
powerful but we struggled to do with our
objects alone and so actually
collaborating with bringing new
experience yeah I mean I we have a lates
program too we had Anthropocene late
recently and and it's a it's a tried and
tested sort of method format for the VNA
and it started about 15 or so years ago
when I first worked to the museum and
and you know it takes a long time to
embed those sorts of direct
interventions especially into museums of
that scale and now everybody's quite
used to five to six thousand people
turning up for three hours on a Friday
night and kind of transgressing all over
the place but what happens sometimes
with certain subjects we we as part of
this or piloting and testing of
collaborations that we wanted to do with
around VNA East which so speaks to the
attitude that we're trying to build
about the institution we worked with a
young collective before they went
stratospheric called gal dem to program
a night about women of color across the
museum and with with that Layton with
others subsequently where the subjects
are very specific might be addressing
climate change the the the frustration
becomes one of well this is great but
it's just for a Friday night like where
is where is the rest of it why is it not
in being imbued in programs in displays
and it is this slow you know move
towards you know changing things that
you were describing committer especially
for for museums of the scale of
of South Caroline with a lifespan of 25
years which is a very long time such a
challenge going forward is the rate of
change that we're going to have to there
is new information about the climate
coming out all the time 1.5 degrees
degrees what does that mean it's
everybody's spoken a little bit about
the need to be agile and how some of
them seem a little bit almost like very
different way than it's used to and the
larger institutions that's a certain
project I don't know if you have
anything particularly how you can work
with we are yes but not at the rate of
the Natural History Museum but yes but I
mean as an aside I'll answer your
question in looking at the long term for
the Horning because music museums have
one thing which is that they are
institutions of the long term so I've
always said it's actually part of their
moral and ethical imperative to call out
some of these issues that short-term the
funding and politics are not dealing
with because we can go back to the you
know God Natural History Museum has got
objects older than the earth meteorites
and things and we should be we are
supposed to be in for posterity whatever
that means
so there's that long term view is really
important but that does meant that the
museum culture is very slow and
particularly gallery you know it's quite
clunky
doing a temporary exhibition you're
booked up you plan three to five years
in advance sometimes at some other
college because you can't even
rapid-response collecting is not that
rapid you know so but so I think the
same is is for every every museum really
the structures are not there so there
doesn't need to be a new working culture
brought in as an additional layer and
for me that's that's very much around
people because actually a museum label
it's just a substitute to speaking to
somebody and if you ideally you know
everybody would be conducted around one
by one by an informed guide it would be
able to modulate their interpretation to
the audience there so labels are just a
shortcut for that so I don't have the
answer but you can have even the horn
inman's Natural History gallery or
anyone's at the nhm which are really old
the the collections have these infinite
number of stories that can be brought
out and it's actually having a means
other than refurbishing the whole
gallery or redoing the labels and that's
got to be around performance possibly AR
and things people carry in their self
guiding technologies certainly in
smaller museums having visitor hosts who
are not primarily security but are there
to engage people and have iPads with you
know with additional information that's
that's one way of going forward using
museum volunteers trying to get that
human contact almost impossible at
half-term in the Natural History Museum
at the V&A is this sheer number so this
there's a lot of practicalities but
there's no doubt that we're going to
fail to deal with the climate and
planetary emergency unless museums learn
to work differently
it doesn't mean stopping and changing
everything we do but it means adding
that additional urgent layer of practice
yeah and I think what you've
demonstrated with yours of turning of
the the mission of the Horniman and
reappraising everything you're doing
you've got to put all of these policies
at the center of things I mean we have
you know we're in the middle of
not me the director and the executive in
the middle of finalizing our new
strategic plan for the next five years
and it's you know and that has changed
markedly in terms of the priorities that
are being put forward and that was
important to then you know because since
it's got to be top down in some ways to
make sure that that's at the center of
things and these questions are driving
decisions but but the rate of change I
don't know how to deal with that it's in
sorry I meant to say something earlier
when I got distracted one of the things
looking about the long term we were
modeling at the horn and said what
museums have a really unsustainable
model because it's about constant growth
not just a growth of collections but
also growth of buildings growth of
exhibitions and so on what if we had a
model for the future of each institution
which was smaller I mean people's brains
practically explode when you say that oh
god how do we do that
you know people we have to make them
redundant you know but actually that's
it's an at least not being any bigger is
the only logical option and possibly
being smaller is more sustainable but
nobody's thinking about that at all it's
still I'm afraid it's about building new
buildings yeah no for sure but then it's
an interesting one isn't it because then
you come back to this question of where
where is where does where do people find
trusted sources and I think that's not
an argument for massive growth and I'm
still reconciling myself to the
expansion project in many ways and you
know and I think there's a lot of
benefit that comes with with that
trade-off but I think how do you protect
whether it's smaller and and more
definitely not smaller and fewer these
spaces for for for debate for for
trusted knowledge and expertise for
action and I think they were becoming
increasingly important in our society as
you you know as everything else is sort
of eroding and you find in you know
in our we are doing a lot of active
audience research in many different ways
but it are kind of just like you know
face to face discussions my team having
with future users and audiences across
the Olympic boroughs in East London with
with young people with school teachers
with Fe College tutors with creative
practitioners arts organizations you
know it's it's it's really imperative
parent that one of the benefits is the
space of the museum or the constellation
of cultural organizations that will be
going to the Olympic Park because they
will start to replace or could replace
or provide the resources that local
authorities are finding increasingly
harder to to keep going within their
within their burrows so we're working
with borough level Meryl level to sort
of you know address some of those things
- and these are all so it's they're
important spaces but yes maybe there
needs to be some trimming of the fast
yeah it's a store in its temperature
climate control it's got a lot of plant
to keep everything in perfect condition
in that sense but yeah it is it is quite
efficient I think in that sense in its
it will be rationalizing space and
problematic architecture across two
sites but also operational efficiencies
will be made by just completely Rican
seeing of how we how we access retrieve
work with collections and just cutting
down a number of steps in a process is
automatically going to help but then
that leaves us room to do more so then
that's not you know providing the
how many store stores do you have I'm
not the best Katherine still rooms we do
have a big of a storage site in South
London and we are looking we are having
to address the same problem we have our
facilities are old they're not all fit
for purpose anymore and so our museum is
having to address the same issue of
leaving a significant proportion of our
collections and it's a very laborious
complicated process which I happily
don't have to get involved with but what
was that saying yeah well I think about
things like I wonder if just some more
thoughtful provocative programming and
interventions could actually really kind
of go along the way and actually one
example so I went to the scene lates and
I bet there was at the VNA last
September and I intended to just check
out as much as possible obviously my
post was so useful workshop with five
other women and and I move for like an
hour and 20 minutes and it honestly was
the most unbelievably were just chatting
back and forth about sort of climate
justice and I my name means an expert
I've read a few articles I heard a book
it was such an interesting and very well
led discussion and that was probably the
most meaningful late experience I've
ever had and I didn't see a single
object it was just it was very people
driven because this is a very human
to make it sound to you anthropocentric
but we do need to be open and discussing
these things if we're going to get
anywhere and I think it's an interesting
balance between so if you look at our
and we have a gallery which is off our
Birds gallery and it's it gets so
clogged it's just a constant bottom
because people love which is great so
people love the bird so they'll just
stop and be like wow but it's very much
their specimens and then the amount of
interpretation there I think I think
there was a short panel on one end but
that's very much about there's nothing
about ecosystems and biodiversity
anything like that I'm trying to think
of it but it's more sort of about the
anatomy of a bird and how does this and
that sort of thing and the information
that you get with the specimens is the
scientific name of the common pain who's
gonna remember that scientific name and
it's really particularly interested and
so I part of me is kind of like is that
making people is that kind of driving
them in the right direction but then the
other part of me is like people love it
people still stop there they're really
wowed by these specimens so it's this
interesting balance if we don't want to
lose that that kind of like I was saying
we also want to take that and be doing
more there's some interesting things
that I mean probably no Bristol Museum
did a very simple thing was just put
shrouds over all the extinct and
endangered animals which is a lot of you
know surprising interventions and
actually sometimes upsetting people I
think it's entirely legitimate because
we all should be pretty upset by you
know about in a way like actually I
think everyone has talked about how to
instigate
and not in the responses maybe anger
against I think what we're finding with
the you know audience research that
we're doing is it's a really fine
balance to you know there's education
inspiration and galvanizing to act but
people are people also go to museums for
to switch off for pleasure for a
different kind of joy and and sometimes
with these subjects they feel battered
over the head and they don't want to
they don't want to come into an
environment which feels like they're
watching the news and so it's really
quite tricky in that sense to distract
the right tone and these sort of very
human centric kind of points of view
that's where you can spark empathy I
think is a really good starting point
for introducing and inspiring and and
and working your way around the terror
and but also just not turning people off
because then that's
you know apathy and and that's yeah
that's that's tricky but it's it's hard
because a lot of people you know have a
lot of stuff to deal with in their daily
lives in lots of different ways and they
don't want to be preached you have to
understand the context you operate again
Horniman is very different from the
South Kensington music you're right 10%
of our visitors are tourists and a lot
of those are actually visiting friends
and family in the area of themselves 70%
of our audience are local the local
boroughs and nearby and Surrey and Kent
and they come again and again I often
meet people who say we come 50 tons a
year
yeah we come once a week with the kids
and as I said we don't got a lot of
research and there is you know there's
of course in both spectrum of people who
just want to come for a nice time but at
the same time there's a growing partly
because of this anxiety there's a
growing desire say what can I do
positively for my kids are not panic and
you know think well they're their
futures ruined I can't I can't admit
that as a parent I want to be positive
we want rigorously informed
scientifically backed information and
some practical actions but not hit over
the head so our plans for our new
galleries are to highlight some of the
things that are going on and we've got
an Environmental Action zone rather
separate for people who want to take it
further which will do things like say
well here is information about local
groups you can join or here are some
actions you can undertake
and isn't practical stuff you don't have
to do feel guilty but it's very subtle
and I don't think any of us have
actually got got it right Bobby never
will but there is a demand I think out
there certainly from the local yeah yeah
and I think that's that will be what
will be interesting for viene East in
you know trying to sort of strike a
different tone and I kind of you know
set of local relationships and how can
we make it a place that people go to
regularly and build a conversation with
your with your visitors and and so it's
they can see change over time and there
are reasons to come back because it's
you know it's it's a living breathing
institution not a not a dead one one of
the worries we have incidentally is that
we we are like all museums trying to
diversify our audience and we're worried
that all this stuff is seen as quite a
middle class white pursuit yeah and so
we're trying to find ways in which we
can harness the ambitions around the
planetary emergency with an audience
diversification agenda because those two
things have to go together we can't have
this as just another middle class well
good do-gooders pursuit so for example
we're working with climate refugees who
have moved to lewisham or locally
because of climate related migration
resources to try and get that that voice
but it's again that's a little worried
and also with a with a collection of
world world cultural artifacts you're
able to have very different
conversations about yeah about
relationships with the natural world
you know processes of agriculture
cultural production and all sorts of you
know I think we it's easy to fall into
the trap and this is what we're looking
at at the moment how do we get ourselves
out of our kind of you know Western
Western point of view or bias in our
thinking
when you said maybe there's something to
be said just for highlighting that you
acknowledge that there is really
significant unjust disparity in terms of
who's most responsible who's most
effective and but by giving a platform
to that very fact if you're at least
acknowledging that you see this then
it's not a just situation we need to be
addressing it well you're actually right
so the conclusion we've come to is that
we can't tackle environmental justice
without also linking it to social
justice yeah and what you said about and
I think your photos climate terror which
is chilling but yeah we and I think maps
as well in terms of it I think often
week we sort of perceive a bit of the
binary in terms of oh this individual
change and there's systemic change and
it's almost like oh why why bother with
the formula and actually we just think
the latter when in reality were human
beings and perhaps we need both because
systemic change it can feel like such an
impenetrable saying how am i as
individual gonna be driving this kind of
unbelievably entrenched change the
systems that we've been used to for
however many years those individual
actions could be a very subtle thing of
feeling empowered for yourself as an
individual so we basically need both I
would argue and so for one kind of camp
if you like to sort of shame the other
and say that's pointless it's so
counterproductive
well we decide having declared the
emergency which is really easy let's
just do it you know what does that
actually mean we need to set out what
we're actually going to do to address
this and in a way we set ourselves a
series of targets as a way of forcing us
to do them by making a public
declaration we've got to be held to do
them and actually that's that's a really
good galvanizing because you know it's
always otherwise it's called manana you
know well kind of we'll get there
eventually so it was to force it was
really essentially just to make say
we're going to do it and then we're
gonna work out how to do it
I never thought about I don't know
whether there's anything special about
living as opposed to heritage
collections or once a dead collections
engagement with the authentic is really
important however we define that I think
there is something important about
engaging with the outdoors and with the
living things outdoors because there's a
different quality of experience outdoors
and from indoors but the the sort of
indoor heritage experience in the
outdoor Nate quasar nature experience
can be equally beneficial but I think
there's some quite good risk when
there's good research now about cultural
and well-being and cultural engagement
there I think outside is particularly
good for wider audiences and actually we
are doing things like in introducing
sustainable gardening as one of our
things so we've got you know it's just a
different quality of experience I don't
think they're necessarily one is
superior to the other but if you've got
those opportunities fantastic
yeah it means we very relatively godless
it's it's relatively small but we have
over 500 species of visit that garden
which is quite extraordinary urban space
and your if you have lookin strategy we
we talk about the urban nature project
so we do have project to to really kind
of heard a lot of focus on on an outdoor
space and so through that space we'll be
talking about deep time history or time
and looking at human human presence in
that kind of timeline as well but I
think I don't know I think connecting so
I guess whether it's through an outdoor
space or not I think what you initially
asked about in terms of our connection
to nature and the way in which we talk
about it I mean I can't help doing it
but we are absolutely part of nature but
the way that we've evolved as a species
in the way we exist now that's just not
how we go about our day to day life
that's not how we need it feels like us
and nature and stuff we know in this
room that's not how it is but you know I
don't I can go to future when you're not
even have to question what I'm buying
where it's come from or any of that I
can just go buy it and not even think
about it but I want to and I think yeah
obviously a tradition easy yes
connections with all of the natural
world is really really crucial for us
and sometimes I think about it in such
even
terms such as if you look at the BBC
landmark series for example all the blue
planet's frozen part of her to you know
hundreds of millions of viewers although
because people are inspired by the
natural world there's something that is
breathtaking for us and there are our
collections aren't quite as showy is
what the BBC is able to kind of
spotlight on that's what I'm kind of
keen to do is kind of touch on that
point of inspiration and fascination
even if it's just raising awareness of
how trees communicate through their
route and microphon D system underground
how they share nutrients with their kin
and that's something we didn't know
about trees until about 20-30 years ago
you know and it's millions of years and
so this the very beginning but I just
wanted I think you're all public
institutions whether the government
declaration of a climate emergency has
had any actual demands by government on
you as public institutions and whether
there's a conversation between you and
government and just what I have no
microphone so on to say a few other
things before you get to respond to that
I also wondered if you have switched as
institutions to renewable energy because
that's one of the simplest simplest
things that any institution can do
I'm from the film industry and I'm doing
the initiative within film and at the
moment we're trying to lobby all the
studios to switch to renewable because
this thing of resistance to change
well that's literally a signing of a
contract and it's the easiest thing the
other thing is that I'm really
encouraged to hear about your point
about collaboration within the industry
because I think
you know none of us can give 100% of our
time to this because we all have jobs
and what I'm finding with what I am
doing is that there are a lot of people
within my industry and we're all we're
trying to connect to each other as early
as possible because the danger is
doubling each other's work and what we
actually should be doing is learning
from each other and progressing and sort
of developing and then the everything
was just a point about lighting and LED
that there are some things that we still
don't know so I was on our climate panel
last weekend and I asked the gaffer on
James Bond what's more sustainable a old
tungsten light on renewable source mains
or a new LED on battery power that's
been charged by a renewable source and
he doesn't know so even the experts
don't know because LED have their own
issues with fabrication and disposal and
yes so just there's the danger of the
Emperor's clothes of like in terms of
the practical things that the latest
best thing to do but yeah if you could
respond to the the government question
because my industry doesn't have that at
all because we're a commercial industry
so we can't relate to that but I think
we sat on service because of all the
political mess we've been in actually
there's been no follow-up and I think it
was Parliament the declared a climate
emergency not the government so it's not
government policy to deal with the
climate emergency and DCMS main funder
have been very pleased that we're doing
these things but they're not demanding
it Arts Council who also fund the
Horniman have a much more proactive in
their 10 year strategy one of the big
investment principles is around
Environment and they want all of their
funded bodies now to say what they're
doing about this so this and they employ
duties bicycle as a way of sort of
gathering information and supporting
people so Arts Council are very honoured
government not I'm hoping
26 happening in Glasgow in November that
will result in the government and all
the government departments really waking
up and driving this and it's only
through government taking a lead that
will have the infrastructure we need in
terms of renewables and to go on to real
renewable things yes all DCMS funded
organizations so that's the ones here
have their energy by supplied by crown
commercial services who get bulk
discounts because they've got a lot of
clients and they do offer a renewable
tariff which we are in the process of
switching to it's easy enough but it's
renewable in name only because it's you
purchase Rago certificates which are
renewable energy certificates and
there's a lot of criticism really or
really just entering into a certificate
trading system and you can't show that
the energy the USB guess is from
renewable sources so one of the aims of
this group that I've convened is to
actually get enough people to go back to
the supplier and say we want properties
not just a traded certificate but we
want properly renewable from some
guaranteed hundred percent renewable
resources like I think Scottish power
and how it is that an eco tricity and a
few of the others but as you say it's
very complicated
I bought a hybrid car and mainly go on
the electric battery the electric
batteries are you know ruining the
African and Australian landscape through
opencast mining for cobalt and so on so
yeah well you go into them this is why
we need to share so much yeah exactly
and this you use the word complexities
in your presentation this is the
challenge of these subjects in in terms
of public discourse around them is this
that it you you do something over here
and then it opens up ten are the
challenges that way and how do you
communicate the the interlocking of
everything and you know mobile phone
mineral mining at great expense you know
it's it's all so entangled it's a tricky
one I don't know if we use a renewable
energy I'm sorry
I have to confess but I know what we're
doing at the moment is a massive estates
audit of our entire you know portfolio
to assess what needs to be done or what
we need to continue to do and what we
need to change but I do know that our
heating comes from the Natural History
Museum and so we when they turn it off
it gets turned off at the Museum because
it's al Fotopoulos and all connected in
this kind of mad and antiquated way and
probably like tunnel under my building
and under the road and pop up in your
office or something
oh did you want to just touch the
government the first question my
understanding so I'm possibly not the
best person to ask from the museum but
my my understanding and awareness is
very similar to next I don't think
there's been much driving that in that
direction that that's what my
understanding is - I'm possibly not
I think and you mention cop cop 26 this
year I think the museum the VNA is the
official design partner for that and we
are tuning all of our London design
facility this year to to cop 26 and your
21st of April for your event at Tate
Modern is Earth Day yeah so they'll be
like galvanizing around that and we've
been speaking with the face of convener
at the Smithsonian about doing things in
the long term and I think these sort of
moments of public consciousness are
important actually and simple strategies
for raising these issues on and quite a
large scale level
so I have a kind of a question related
to the idea of the complexity of the
situation this idea of trust the global
nature of all of your collections and
how they were acquired and also the next
point about its being a social issue as
well as an environmental issue how how
are your Museum is kind of thinking
about the disproportionality of climate
change in relation to your also the
different places your collections come
from and those communities and working
with climate refugees etc well one thing
the Horniman we've revamped the good
thing about coming in fairly new East
change things so we didn't have one
before
and as a part of that most of it was
research so unlike a lot of museums have
been chasing opportunities in the Gulf
and in China because that's where the
money is for exhibitions and the
Horniman can't really compete in those
markets so we've decided that our
international strategy should be based
around former colonial countries from
which our collections were derived and
it's as a an example of that we've had
got some government funding
interestingly to do a project called
rethinking relationships and building
trust around African collections which
is instead of saying looking at
restitution looking at future
relationships in which case we hope by
engaging with colleagues in in this
instance first of all in Nigeria and
Kenya documenting more thoroughly the
circumstances in which our collections
were acquired and in many cases it is
through unequal power relations booty
modeling and talking with those
colleagues in those countries and also
diaspora communities in
about the future of those where those
collections how those collections might
be best cared for and where and our
trustees are going to look at the report
in the autumn and that's not directly to
do with climate and environment but it's
to do with the broad growth global
sweeps that have led to the situation we
have now and as I said we beginning to
look at climate refugees as well so it's
all part of a sort of as I said the horn
Inman was founded by Quakers in the late
19th and early 20th centuries interested
in global issues around intercultural
understanding and justice and we're
reviving that hundred years or so later
and say what does that mean now what is
an ethical curatorship at the global
level for the 21st century and we don't
know yet
but we're trying to find out by doing
and by asking yeah I guess my answer
would be would be similar to it's a sort
of constant inquiry into understanding
our collections in in different ways and
in new ways and production of knowledge
I was just reminded me going back to the
Hagen II kind of story
we had a we have a we have a very active
big research department at the V&A it
was one of them I think it was the first
museum in the world to establish an
academic research department working
independently or research that is coming
from you know exhibitions making and
things like that and we have lots of
different fellows who come in and outs
for purposes of public engagement or
scholarship around a particular subject
but we had a fellow called Hannah young
a few years ago as a young social
historian who came up through UCL sort
of colonial histories and divisions and
she spent the sort of 18 months looking
into our collections to try and track
objects that were purchased by or owned
by slave owners
and the way in which those objects are
constructions of tastes in the 19th
century particularly so especially sort
of more middle-class kind of merchant
class people who were trying to sort of
create an identity for themselves
through through art design and craft and
what that you know what those objects
mean where they've come from how they've
come into the museum and the complexity
of those kind of networks in that in
that could Empire sort of colonial
moment and again not not so closely
related to climate although you can
track and kind of make connections but
these these opportunities to really dive
deep and work with different scholars
with people directly from the
communities that we're trying to explore
we did a project with around those of
very sort of bleak moment in British
history around the McDonough raids in
Ethiopia we hold objects from those
raids the the son of the Emperor was
brought to England to be looked after by
Queen Victoria and it deeply troubling
sort of moment in in British history but
we worked with Ethiopian scholars and
diaspora communities here in the UK
members of staff who Ethiopian to look
at what meaning residents histories
making more problematizing the objects
in the collection trying to tell a kind
of true account of of fats of events and
then giving many different perspectives
on what these objects mean how they
should be seen where they should be seen
and how we hold them and these are
ongoing
you know institutional questions at
every museum with these kind of
collections of faces and I think there's
often a view that everything comes from
Empire raiding and that's that's not
true so it's it's about trying to look
at the multiple ways that things enter
into the collection and that's one of
the sort of dimensions of our research
and exploration for the collection
center actually is just
opening up collecting histories because
it's also it's about problematic you
know moments in our passive it's also
about the taste of an individual for a
very long time which can swerve your
collections in in very different
directions so it's it's quite
fascinating in that sense I don't think
I've answered your question that Hannah
young great great young you can look on
our website and read about how aspects
of our collections are quite in tune
with the slave trade there's lots of
work to be done but on your point of you
asked about how we might approach the
kind of social social injustice around
these issues and I think for us we're
definitely still trying to figure out
what we I feel like up until this point
there's been a tendency to us to really
focus on what can we be a possible
authority on what's our kind of key
strengths and we'll focus on that and
that would be the way forwards and to do
degree Ione do agree that what we can't
talk about things like the environments
and not open the doors all these other
conversations which are really deeply
entangled with the areas on which we
feel we are in authority so even if it's
not a case of our museum saying let's
talk about this subject and it has to
align with what we believe is a museum
it may well be just opening up a space
so that people feel they can come to our
museum have those discussions and
debates can I just say something else I
was I was going to as part of the rapid
response collecting going to show an
object that we collected recently a
little couple years ago now but it's
essentially a big phone that looks like
a really awful phone it's made in China
but it's designed specifically for by
West Africa market where there's lots of
different power shortages and
electricity sort of issues throughout
the course of using your phone so it's
big because it's got big battery and you
can charge other phones from this phone
or other things from this phone and so
these sort of moments of it's one object
but it holds a lot of sort of power and
stories that you can tell around
different environments around the world
and how design is reacting to that and
creating new products that serve a
particular need in a particular place
and I think those ways of illuminating
through through the object out is also
very sort of rich and powerful way to
communicate the complexities and their
and the diversity
I find that it's been really interesting
to hear about yeah you all sort of like
visions of the future but I just
I've been sitting through and I just
can't get out of my mind the the reason
like over the last couple of years like
funding in the arts and I mean Sackler
Foundation at the VNA and arms sort of
dealing links to things like gallery and
BP at the British Museum and it just
feels like that is kind of it
museums are sort of sort of obviously
have these very almost it's like a kind
of utopian idea and like wanting to be a
kind of ethical and moral leader in a
way I think I guess I imagine these
conversations must be kind of going on
behind the scenes but like it sort of
just seems like it should be part of
this discussion in a way yep yes we we
don't have the opportunity to turn down
BP sponsorship because we're not at that
level but to be honest and we would and
we thought about this because we are
about to embark on a fundraising
campaign for this project I was
mentioning and we do have an ethical
approach and it has if you're a values
driven organization you have to live
those values in every aspect and museums
of all kinds had particularly art
galleries dealing in the international
art market are quite compromised and
need to think through I think and it's
not only sponsorship but also its
research funding for some of the larger
museums because often sometimes funding
is from extractive industry
for example and I think you've got to so
BP is a good one or the other oil
companies because some people say well
actually these fossil fuel companies
they know they've got to get out of it
and they've got to invest in renewable
technologies and that's true and they
say that but they're only investing 1%
in it at the moment while continuing to
explore fossil new fossil fuel new oil
fields and even kind of more less saying
well if the ice sheets and permafrost
melts then opens up new resources for us
so that doesn't fit well if you're
saying well we're dealing with the
climate and ecological emergency so I
think you it's always a case-by-case
basis both for the individual potential
funder and to the individual
organization but I note that quite a lot
of arts organizations are now going away
from association with fossil fuels and
others the problem is we don't have lots
of alternatives at the moment so in
theory what you'd like to do is imagine
that museums will get sponsorship from a
host of new green industrial companies
but they're not really there yet but
that's what we have to hope and
encourage because otherwise we're going
to be impoverished further and maybe
that's one thing the bullet we have to
fight saying well actually we will
forego this money and just reduce our
programming commensurately I know Tate
has just said no to BP and I think it's
finding money from elsewhere because
it's taped but you know it's it's an
active decision you have to take as an
organization and to me the values must
come first
it's difficult to find clean money
degrees yeah that would be mine
contributions that stop it's fair to say
there's probably there's yeah divisions
of opinion as to how that rolls out in
reality and it's very very prominently
supported by BP and so and I feel like
at the moment we just can't be you
walking away with that big health
scrutiny now but I have to say like I I
do totally agree it can come down to a
case-by-case basis and I appreciate that
everyone it's very difficult to find
totally pure clean money
thank you for staying so long it feels
like the the objects that are being
currently displayed at the Horniman
they're really fun really creative and
playful and actually the architecture of
the museum's like currently being built
at Vienna East I kind of with the
thinking as we were 10 years ago and I
just wonder how much this kind of
curatorial approach is impacting what
you're building now as museum
institutions whether there's been any
crossover and how I suppose the closest
we got to it in this discussion was
talking about a new typology of storage
/ visitor space and perhaps shrinking
the back of house to make the front of
house more efficient somehow but how is
the how is this kind of curatorial
program hopefully going to impact like
the the architecture of the museums in
the future incentives yeah I think well
with our buildings you know it's a
malossi with the architects on the on
the public spaces that we want to create
and the feeling of those and the
encounter that we want people to have in
the spaces but it doesn't stop with the
architecture of the building it will be
the next phase of design working with
designers on the gallery environments
and overlaying on the kind of shell of
the of the architecture I think which is
where you'll start to see I think if we
brief from work together where the right
practices a different a different type
of for the V&A anyway a different type
of kind of encounter and that comes
through through space through atmosphere
through display through
what what museums want in terms of the
relationships with visitors you know and
it's like it's it's it's hard four
million people come through your door
every day no one goes up to the ceramics
galleries if you're ever needing quiet
time come up and spend time with the
surroundings galleries but actually with
a with a smaller Museum you want it to
if not have a domestic field be inviting
and welcoming in a place like that you
want to return to all the time and you
can you know the design and the sort of
spatial moves that you make and their
gestures in choice of materials of
furniture of a you know invitation to
dwell if you like is going to be
critical in the store against the
collection center is is different again
and and that image shows a bit of it and
not the kind of front door and the
common room and kind of entry territory
where you know they'll be spaces for for
study and workshops for doing things and
places to hang out and be a bit more
like a kind of Civic sort of library
space I suppose so and yeah
so no I mean I guess I'm interested in
your view that you think it's like ten
years out of date already but then I
guess some things are aren't there sort
of so slow they can't keep up with
itself
yeah
it's still coming to terms of that is an
industry in a big way
[Music]
[Applause]
