thanks everybody for coming of what has
been I think a pretty good start I think
for a conversation on what is basically
our 20th anniversary as a program called
the design research lab my name is Cyrus
propolis and I've been teaching in this
place for 16 years and I've had my share
of introductions and if I'm honest with
you I think this one is probably the
most meaningful to me and I probably
alluded to it before I think Patrick and
I may share this explicitly when we say
that sergej is one of our own it's not
because he's a member of our program but
I think in in many ways such a embraces
and embodies a lot of the things that we
think are important and it starts off I
think first and foremost with the idea
of trying to discover something and
maybe because I was his tutor and maybe
I started teaching at the DRL my first
studio in sergei's year was a colleague
Vasily Strom Packo's we were probably
also quite surprised that we had people
that signed up when we had famous people
like Patrick and others teaching studios
and misfits like Sanjay and others who
actually applied to study at the a a not
that the D realm not actually to study
history and theory and then discovered I
think a community and a group of people
here and then actually reassessed his
own assumptions about what he wanted in
his own education and that wasn't with a
blueprint or a master plan but that was
I think really in a spirited way about
discovering things aside from the fact
that he was a talented student he
continued that not just in education
somehow compartmentalized within an
understanding of being in a school so
that's what you do but thinking about
how design research actually pervades
almost all aspects of what I can
as being somebody who's seen him evolve
and I and I second I would agree I think
Patrick would agree as well is someone
that was actually embodied all of this
throughout the process he was also
someone that assisted my studio for
about six years and many of those years
actually not even compensated and I say
that let's call it out of love not so
much out of love in terms of the fact
that I think that that's a meaningful
thing as an exercise of things but
there's a way that he really wanted to
help and I think one of the things is I
think people are finally starting to
understand what Sanjay actually is which
she's a rock star and I say that because
with great humility he never really
talks about very much he embraces I
think everything he helps everyone and I
think that that has actually continued
and he's had his own students and we get
to see him running his own studio which
a last project was really a part of and
you may say I'm biased and and I am very
transparent about it I am but I think
today is lecture on the ten years of
research that he's done I think we'll
try to convince you otherwise so we're
really tight with time because there's
another lecture here so I'm not gonna
kind of cry or do any of that stuff that
but sensually could have happened
tonight if any night but with that I
would really ask everybody to warmly
welcome Sarge a for a long overdue first
lecture at the architectural Association
so thank you
[Applause]
yeah yeah thank you to you and thanks
everyone for sticking around after a
long day yeah so the the the talk is
mostly about like a kind of accumulative
collaborative effort like that spans
like institutions that have had the good
fortune to be part of including the a
and then that these architects and then
collaborators and colleagues stemming
from that so it's it's mostly a kind of
personal account of like continued
research and practice that that kind of
started from from the time I study that
they a which somehow I have been
associated for across the school like
Media Studies etc for about 12 years now
and then at the architects for about a
decade having started the computation
and design research group or practice
based research group with Patrick in
2007 and then also like stemming from
that like extended collaborations in
other Applied Science kind of
institutions like particularly the block
research group that Philippe presented
here yesterday the a to me was is a
particularly important aspect of my life
in London in a way because for the first
time like I it was the institution that
can I expose the idea that like to be
avant-garde you don't need to be a
one-off hero but like it's actually like
cumulative and collaborative and it's
more immediate and it's pragmatic that
you you as a student could actually be
part of like cutting edge or the state
of the art without and kind of
contribute to the progress of the
discipline which which was coming from
like a kind of a different mode of
Education like or a cultural context
like this was like very revealing for me
and that kind of kind of extended also
in like seeing the work that like my
colleagues and like prior predecessors
were kind of doing in Jogja when I
joined in 2007 like you know generations
of people would dedicate their life and
kind of develop a lot of practice based
research and like leading to build like
seminal buildings like the Moxie and
like then I could also see my own
colleagues classmates contributing to
the design and development of like like
the next wave of like state-of-the-art
design research and also manifestations
physically and similarly with like the
ETH and like it's what like that
institution kind of gave me was a kind
of more extended applied science logic
that like somehow connected like blender
monkeys with like historic
chapels so that so these three
institutions to me like kinda mark I
mean not equally obviously but because
of the time spent but like they kind of
marked three different poles and
influences through through through and
and leading to a lot of colleagues from
each of these places so and it's also a
personal account because as Theo
mentioned like I didn't even want to be
an architect like when I joined
architecture and then when I joined a I
didn't want to study at the DRL I
applied for histories and theory and
looking at the website of the DRL I
thought like this is like it would have
been a stupid idea to do histories and
theories when like you can literally be
part of making of history so and I was
see his first student first wave of
students and Patrick obviously provides
the kind of personal gateway into like
understanding like the body of work that
the architects have prolifically
produced
and likewise it's a kind of personal
affiliation so these are not kind of
institutions on their own for me they
mean a whole lot more personally as well
and so and and kind of in in terms of
this course like the idea of techne
comes somewhat from like my initial
association or my influence from Theo
has been that that kind of attitude of a
material basis and a technological basis
for understanding at least parts of
aspects of architecture and likewise
with Patrick like particularly off later
in particular like that kind of
analytical rational ways to think about
things that we might do intuitively or
seminal artists like architects like
would have done intuitively so so this
kind of idea that like you know
philosophy is not something like that is
unattainable like kind of comes that
like somehow Patrick was able to like
open a window for me to see that like
you know people like Daniel Dennett
philosophers like then it are easily as
easily accessible as like someone like
Claude Shannon like to me that's more
familiar terra-tory like information
theory and like or more mathematical
basis but so increasingly I also have a
kind of interest in philosophy and and
like at the ETH like people like Auguste
Sorkin like who kind of like may make a
lot of complicated mathematics like fun
to learn and like and like see direct
practical applicability and bridging the
the disciplines of computer graphics
computer science with with architecture
and and digital design and fabrication
so lastly I might constantly say we and
by we I would generally mean all the
people who are in these institutions
including Alicia who's like the partner
of the studio that we run together lots
of students of the DRL world current and
past
colleagues and collaborators as a code
and the [ __ ] tags and colleagues and
collaborators a block research group and
eth so briefly I would situate like the
terms of the title of of of my
presentation or lecture let's say what
do I mean by disruptive particularly in
the concept of architecture or in the
context of how architecture is produced
and consumed perhaps and what I mean by
accumulative and collaborative and I
will do that briefly and then the rest
of the presentation is mostly about a
ten year progression of ideas starting
from my time here at the DRL and like
extended through all the work of our
colleagues and peers and others so it
will mostly focus on the physical
production aspects but like increasingly
we are also interested in applying
similar logics to understanding the
consumption social aspects of
architecture so so so that's what and I
took recently termed this this body of
work like several people have
contributed to like not only in in in
this institution but across the world as
Aztec to nism and and I will talk a
little bit about that and lastly and how
we we want to like motivate the next
phase of this through applied applying
it in architectural context such as
housing or or works in REO etc so so
that's the general structure of the the
lecture and just to briefly situate that
the terms of the title what I mean by
disruptive is that it's not only
revolutionary but also has the potential
to like become mainstream like so in
many ways like kind of starting with
like the idea of avant-garde but like
after a period of time like you know
subjecting it or asking it the questions
to be at least attempting to be
mainstream so for example a classic
example of this disruptive innovation
he's like the Ford Model A versus Ford
model-t in 1903 like the horse-drawn
looking car was revolutionary because it
was the first produce industry produced
car and sold about 2,000 and Model T in
a way kind of five years later came
about and sold 15 million of them so
it's so again not to say one is better
than the other but like that lineage
that like a lot of revolutionary
progress needs to be followed by kind of
sustained attempts to at least try and
push it to mainstream or ask it like
more broader questions and this would
also include like not only looking at
the production aspects of the car but
like they were also looking at like
repair and like or the social aspects of
like how it might be consumed like not
only advertising but also like how do
you make it acceptable for in various
social contexts so it's not seen as only
a luxury item or like an eccentric item
but also like part of a kind of
mainstream everyday life that that was
part large part of the success of Model
T is attributed to this this aspect as
well like not only the the legendary
streamlining of the production process
but also looking at the social aspects
of how it is consumed and by cumulative
and collaborative I don't mean to be
kind of politely inclusive like I do
mean it in a kind of cumulative cultural
evolution way particularly focusing on
like technological complexity that
evolves iteratively and and and also the
evolution of large-scale cooperation
among
cultural cultural cooperation like to do
larger more complex things so and this
is again like the the lineage of it is
like in the idea of like anthropology
like lots of people have been talking
about it for a while how do you apply a
kind of biological evolutionary model to
do cultural evolution and hipster
hipster historians like you all Harare
have kind of made it more bestseller and
more popular in recent times so that's
that's the kind of general context in
which I mean cumulative and
collaborative so quick quickly moving on
to like that kind of how that those
ideas kind of translate to the kind of
work that like I've had the privilege to
be part of so in those 11 years have
seen classmates and close colleagues
kind of literally take over the world
like this is Malika worked and for like
six seven years and like she's now like
having a kind of burgeoning practice in
Turkey likewise another classmate like
has like doing very interesting
innovative things in China and like
other classmates doing similar things
taking over India and and others kind of
like looking at like at other
disciplines as well like contributing to
professions like fashion and some of
them are not classmates I see ela here
like kind of like providing kind of
entrepreneurship like in technological
sense like and the use of robots
early on in an architectural sense or
architectural production and like my own
teammate like looking at like 3d
printing of titanium and like other
other people looking at 3d printing of
glass etc and lastly some of our
colleagues at or ex colleagues by now
and
also entering out into the startup world
in the meantime I've also kind of
dedicated some amount of effort and time
to look at like literature and like
build up scholarship in in other
disciplines such as like the usual
suspects like product design and but
also and and how it translates to like
the architecture that these product
designers produce like but also look
back in history and connect back to some
of the historic geometric methods
perhaps in the 18th and 19th century but
interestingly in this process it also
reveals a certain amount of like gossip
let's say that so the geometry
originally was this was perhaps the
earliest feud between geometers and like
technicians so Carrabba made such a
violent attack on on the preference for
theory on that like he gerard de Sarju
decided to turn to a career in
architecture so which is which is a kind
of interesting sordid tale early early
on but like it also reveals a certain
amount of like an ecosystem of like
designed to production and like the
things the kind of knowledge
infrastructure that existed and craft
infrastructure that existed around
people like Gaudi and
a 19th century 18th century 19th century
France and stone architecture of that
time it's a kind of machine epistemology
- - architectural production also looked
at like some some of the the kind of
ongoing prolific production aspects that
happened in the short interim period in
Bauhaus and lastly also like looking at
the methodological and careers of like
Ray and Charles Eames like how they not
only invested in like buying patents
from the US Army but also like early
early adopters of software technologies
so in in that sense like the research
has been like a kind of specific strand
of cumulative collaborative design
research in digital design and
fabrication which Patrick last year kind
of termed it as Tecton ISM and like
briefly to highlight that it it's a
motivator it's motivated by try trying
to stylistically highlight and kind of
engineering and fabrication related
processes as the last project of the
students was trying to do or did a much
better job of illustrating that then
then I could so in simplistic terms like
it is about making visible in shape and
in geometry the structural and
fabrication and other process parameters
letting so to - to me it's been like a
kind of continuing it's hard for me to
draw a separation between the work and
research that students do here in the
DRL and things that we do here at the
office and also like with our extended
collaborators in the Applied Science
kind of fields so the main aspects are
about architectural geometry but I will
try and like speak about like
accumulative and collaborative aspects
of that how over time like our expertise
really builds up again in the
technological complexity sense and in
the dense network of collaborations
so I'm gonna we have developed several
research strands in the last 11 years
like and I'm gonna only speak about
three of them which are like shells and
like origami and like things related to
curve folding and developable surfaces
and 3d printing so in general so that's
what I'm I'm gonna try and talk about
like these three topics structure aware
geometry in this in the sense of shells
fabrication over geometry in the sense
of curved origami and also again
fabrication over geometry in the sense
of 3d printing again like and and with
like a kind of brief description of what
we think internally as a kind of interim
result which is anterior projects at the
architectural scale which is a gallery
for mathematic in the Science Museum in
London and like also like kind of end
off with like trying to motivate like
the next phase of this research with
like thing applied context like housing
and and and work and etc so starting
with shell structures again you
mentioned like I was assisting him for
several years and this was this this was
what was happening at that time like
kind of fabric casting of plaster etc
and like so we also kind of took took
that up and try to scale it up like with
using fabric as formwork in a slightly
different sense for concrete and this
was like in 2010 we did with like four
or five collaborators and over a
two-week period in India hardly any
drawings were made that was that was a
really interesting aspect that even for
the rebar there was no drawings made
like it was just like based on like
taking the steepest path down once the
fabric was in place a lot of things kind
of progress quickly
we tried similar things in in Mexico we
also try to recuperate some of the
knowledge like more technical knowledge
from looking at like just across the
across the square
buildings like the British Museum and
also Kings Kings cross train station
technically like what this has also
meant that like we have encountered like
really complex engineering papers from
1965 and like I know like running to
people like race William to try and
explain some of that complex things so
that's so that's the kind of research
practice like at least in terms of shell
structures and again like that has
continued with our collaboration with
the block research group who can kind of
try and explain things of how structural
behavior in geometric terms and also in
physical model terms so trying to
correlate these two aspects so we have
done a fair number of joint studies like
this was again last year trying to look
at like how do you in to build an
intuition of a form and structure or
geometry and structure and like through
and also correlating that with like
these kind of physical models which
which eventually it did stand up one I
don't have a video of that so there was
there was no glue and then also like
these kind of models with like the
tension tie excetera like these also
kind of contribute to like more design
based studies of formal explorations and
also procedural studies and like ideas
of like different variations possible
parametric variations of the same ideas
and how we could extend and kind of
combine like this aesthetic and tectonic
ambitions with like like form and
structure and like fabrication ambitions
so so these are kind of ongoing studies
in but like we hope to somehow
physically see them realize reasonably
in the reasonable future so the second
topic like again which shows this kind
of continuum between the
and like elsewhere is the topic of
curved origami and developable surfaces
again the history of it like starts like
we maybe in like the 15th century but
like the real design history kind of
starts in in in Bauhaus like there were
they used to be manuals and this used to
be actually taught like as a course and
also lately been picked up by like
mathematicians and artists in MIT and
elsewhere so what's really interesting
about this topic is that you know it
equally captivates like mathematicians
like David Huffman and also artists like
Ron Resch and then increasingly also
captivating a lot of computational
researchers like trying to recreate this
digitally at the DRL we like like as you
have seen like the prolific amount of
physical models like is a way of
exploring shape and understanding it in
a way like a material computation let's
say and and so like so we did this like
workshop like a five week workshop for
two to two years and a lot of folding
techniques and like folds and their
structural relationships were beginning
to be intuitively understood and like
lots of surprising things like this like
this entire thing comes from one sheet
of plastic and and the fact that it if
you can make one it also reasonably
scales up and it and and the Falls also
add strength for example like so all of
these are kind of beginning to be
understood like in parallel like through
material and an intuitive computation
like whilst like other aspects are
pursued by other researchers in in other
places so this this aspect of design
research and looking at shape and
understanding it geometrically in terms
of curvature
and intuitively it's like a very
important aspect for us and and also
like it's it's so simple that you just
scored some paper and like you bend it
and you get curvature for free and like
you also get design variation for free
so if you can make one like you pretty
pretty much quickly can make quite a few
variations and so we at code then like
kinda try to make scale this up like a
few years ago like again with students
like over for five hour period just with
the laser cutter we were able to
assemble both both these eggs let's say
and it kind of motivated me to try and
look at like more digital aspects of
this like where I did my em feel at the
University about on the topic of how you
can recreate some of this intuitive
folding like digitally considering how
simple it is like physically it's like
not turned out not so simple like
digitally and or to capture that
intuitively let's say but along the way
like we've kind of managed to have a
digital workflow to augment our digital
physical discovery process and that's
been aided also by like these kind of
like brave sponsorship efforts like by
aheh at that time and I and Patrick like
you know this was completely untested
like and they were willing to put in you
know they're on their own word and like
Finance is behind this and so we kind of
discovered like a lot of things like
computational processes that we had to
assemble these kind of tool chains to
get deliver the result on the on the
right so so it was a kind of hackathon
experience let's say over three months
15 hour days it's about a millimeter and
a half thick
six and a half thousand bolts and about
five five and a half meters tall and in
perimeter is about 25 meters parameter
not radius and and and and the Falls
really give it like the kind of
structural strength and with which which
which also like I know has this other
property that like all careful that
things are also developable so once we
understood that like it kind of bleeds
into like other related fields of curve
cutting and like in a developable
folding let's say again this was in the
RL a few years ago and then like a
couple of years ago we found actual
fabricator willing to who's been doing
this for a while for shigeru bond and
and and and others in germany and then
we develop again like a tool chain
assembled a tool chain to deliver these
these kind of pavilion projects in a
short amount of time like like designed
to finishing like in in three three
months and like we were also then able
to do version two even even quicker
because because of this kind of
accumulated tool complexity and a large
network of collaborators so like the
knowledge is existing in in multiple
places or nonetheless it you can really
see that like things are speeding up
like like this one was produced even
even quicker than than the first one and
much neater details etc and and another
one in the similar vein is like this
project like we're currently well this
interior kind of pavilion ish like bar
Delian ater we're doing in my in china
like what's really stunning about this
is that like all of that knowledge was
easily transferred to to like
fabricators with hardly any real
communication like you know we didn't
have to be on site etc alike so that was
that to me it represents like a kind of
benefits of accumulative
and collaborate a way of like
progressing progressing research and the
last topic where this is kind of like I
will talk about where it's being
manifested increasingly in is 3d
printing and large-scale 3d printing for
example Phillipe is here and an x3 and
etc so you can imagine like this was the
state of our robotic knowledge arse
meaning as I said like DRL jaha cetera
five years ago and over time like we
have kind of gotten to to to a state
where we can not only make our own
software to control large robots like we
figure out like how to make those
extruders etc alike and and and and and
in to a state that students at the DRL
like similar to the curt folding
workshop like in clay printing workshop
over for a four week period they were
not only able to make the entire
extruder themselves three sets of them
but also begin to look at the more
expressive aspects of the of the
technology like these kind of pause
points that you can put and so on and so
forth so material mixing etc so so that
that again like to me kind of represents
the real benefits and then also the
enjoyable aspects of like kind of
accumulative and collaborative way of
like researching and developing not only
a production research but also design
research so yeah so this was one of the
teams but there were three teams and you
know each of the teams were able to do
this in a very short amount of time
which which i think is a remarkable
achievement for for a course that is
always strapped for resources we had
code have been trying to kind of augment
this kind of physical the ways of
learning with like
kind of digital tools trying to predict
when things might collapse using some
rigid body physics and also like as far
as my PhD at block research group trying
to extend this incorporate all of these
knowledge tacit knowledge into like more
mathematical ways to represent that and
capture that in more at a physical
science way in any case like the the
main intuition comes from like design
research I think like the the the idea
was to take everything that has been
done in unreinforced masonry design
techniques and production techniques
from unreinforced masonry and try and
apply to 3d printing like by like
literally scaling down rigid body
physics to like micro block physics but
and adding a few material properties but
the design intuition is indeed about
balancing rigid body balancing bricks
like Jenga let's say so with this is
very early let's say outcomes of like
that research like we just started my
PhD la last year even though I've been
associated with the group for six six
years or so so and then these are like
some of the early prints that were there
they're coming out as a consequence so
in general that the the point I would
like to make here is that like across
all these researchers or illustration
examples like the status quo or the
knowledge is currently is is that this
scale like lots of lots of pavilions
even increased sophistications and and
beginning to become or inching closer
towards having like real architectural
application in the sense of like people
in the sense that it is permanent and in
the sense that people occupy it
and in the sense that it is consumed
so we're I do feel that like there is
reason to believe and like to be
optimistic that like the the next phase
is indeed like it is turning the corner
considering that like not only in Europe
but also in in Asia and and in the US
there's increased amounts of funding and
research in these topics of production
topics and so in if that is the status
quo in research and in research
institutions like and we think that
architecture Lee speaking this is this
is the status quo in in terms of our
current state of affairs in terms of
actual application in practice this a
thousand square meter gallery in the
heart of London which has to be
permanent for in the sense that it has
the last twenty five years and I will
talk about three aspects which kind of
reflect this cumulative practice mode of
practice first one is the fabric
structure themselves which again a lot
has been studied about minimal surfaces
both mathematically and as physical
basis for but for me it was like a kind
of internal like reference to DRL my
colleagues I don't know if a leaf is
here it was her my classmates it was her
project and her team's project like to
look at these surfaces early on ten
years ago how to model them like I know
using Mathematica etc and in the same
year they were like other classmates of
mine like trying to recreate those
geometries in a more manually modelled
we're using subdivision surfaces and
mesh modeling techniques let's say and
so by the time we kind of came to do do
the project in 2016 for the mass gallery
like we had accumulated in the network
like all of this knowledge like both
mathematical physical ways to make
fabric things
and manual ways to articulate shapes so
these were literally all the design
iterations that we went through like
they were about 25 of those shapes
considered before like considering
further rationalizing or adding further
expression to like the same layouts and
and how the boundaries might be curved
and so on and so forth and what spatial
effect it might have etc we were also as
i was saying like there was that
knowledge of seaming and tailoring or in
in the network of people both that code
and held outside so in the sense that
like it never felt like it felt
challenging but like never like a kind
of an attainable thing right like and it
was not not ominous let's say like so it
felt natural to be able to do that
including small-scale prototypes and big
larger prototypes that we were able to
contribute working directly with the
fabricator one interesting anecdote here
like all of the static knowledge and
like explicit knowledge built up allowed
us to have conversations with
professional tailors let's say or
scenesters so the image in the bottom
like this is what they said that we
would have to live with but all our
prior experience did tell us that at
least we can get something like that and
and the final result was something in
between but nonetheless like so that
level of negotiation at that kind of
tectonic expression like I think is one
of the outcomes of this kind of
collaborative way of doing things and
where the knowledge is dispersed across
it also allowed us to kind of really
tackle the millimeter precision like
that was needed in a very constrained
small letter sight like and had high
clearance and like hundreds of objects
have to be negotiated like including
important historic objects originals
let's say so and that was
that was all possible because of that
kind of extended period of of research
across several people and another aspect
that reflects this is are these concrete
benches Elysium met like asbjorn like
several years ago like 6-7 years ago by
accident and like since then like we've
we kind of know them and their robots
like more somewhat more intimately and
over time like we have also kind of
imbued like some of the knowledge that
Oracle formwork robotic form works have
internal to their company and like try
to assimilate that in into our design
processes and thinking about these
benches so there were 16 unique benches
it also incorporates some of the
historic stereo knowledge of stereo t'me
and stone cutting etc like so and these
were again quite exquisitely made and
even though their benches are some of
them are 4 meters long and they could
easily be columns in the way they're
made and kind of assembled let's say
it's not monocoque like so it was very
efficient like all of them were
assembled on site like in a matter of
hours prefabricated in Denmark
coordinated with like people contractors
in in the UK etc so yeah so like so
these aspects kind of reflect like oh we
were also able to make these holdings
like one afternoon because of the
parametric ways of like everything being
designed graphics is a natural outcome
but what I would like to say is that
like that's the current status quo of
like this entire collaborative design
research and digital design and
fabrication like for example exemplified
by this effort of ours in 2010 we
decided like just on a whim to say like
can we make formwork out of cable like
making our own circles like stitching
them together and like the intention was
to kind of clad it with concrete
but we never had the time but like it
was like about two and a half thousand
circles assembled over a week of manual
labor but like it was very easy to
stretch it across like large spans like
of this this hall let's say this was in
China
and in 2017 like it is reaching stages
like by again this is a video by bloc
research group where that kind of design
idea has already been kind of flashed
out but like nonetheless a lot of the
engineering aspects have to be take
their own time right like and and this
was like some parts of these shells are
only five five centimeters thick or
maybe three I don't know I'm not very
sure but but this is to me to me very
encouraging to see that in a matter of
six seven years like you know like
random ideas of us as students and like
early professionals like has kind of
within the discipline is seeing maturity
like that it's on the cusp of becoming
deployable in actual projects so they're
gonna remake this prototype so I believe
like therefore this rapid maturation of
research in architectural production
allows us as a discipline and profession
to like try and subject parametric
design and digital design and
fabrication to additional
[Music]
let's say challenges like of trying to
be become more mainstream or and and
therefore and also trying to focus a
little bit more on the consumption
aspects of how architecture might be
perceived how it might be used how it
might be consumed again this is not
something like new like Eames themselves
had like similar ideas like or came to
similar conclusion several decades ago
like idea of case study houses like as
you can see it's not only understanding
with vocabulary of material and
techniques but like a larger ecosystem
of economics and logistics etc so that's
and more closer to home as the last
project kind of tried to indicate like
this is and Manuela suggested 15 years
ago already this was suggested in the
DRL the idea of mass customization and
combining it with like new modes of
production and the idea of community
building etcetera unlike so I I
genuinely believe and I'm excited by the
the possibility that like a promise that
was made 15 years ago is like it's like
could be is on the cost for being
realized or could be realized in the
near future
and so some as as you saw this video
already like I'm gonna quickly skip
through this idea of like ordering your
own house kind of tinder for your tinder
for your house so you can not only build
your community but also order it and
have it delivered it's a kind of
exciting idea and so at code again like
we we we're trying to kind of do our own
bits in contributions to this idea of
housing building like the necessary
tools which which is quite different
from like which involves a lot of data
and
data science and GIS and which is
something quite different for us in
comparison to what we have been doing
for the last decade or so and therefore
also quite exciting to to look at these
new technologies or new aspects for us
at least and then try and combine it
with the idea of like a kind of
customizable chassis / so again these
are early studies like just a list of
all most illustrative trying to combine
it with like some of our curt folding
research or metal folding aspects and
from kind of so this was but these
videos were made as part of the studies
for walkable London and like I believe
there it's still on show just a few few
blocks away at the NLA so if you if
you're passing by please do take a look
yeah so and tomorrow you will probably
see like similar efforts in the DRL
again trying to combine digital means of
production and fabrication and
manufacture with like a kind of the
social aspect or how to build
communities what do people actually want
what kind of spaces can there be so this
particular team is kind of trying to
look at subscription like looking at
housing as a service as opposed to
something that ownership based and
trying to combine that with the these
ideas of developable compressive
skeletons and and woven membranes etc
and likewise and also look at the
tectonic opportunities expressive
aspects of combining these two things
that's that's a real motivation for for
all the projects that you will see from
from our studio and look looking at also
like how to delineate space and express
some of these qualities of like the
specific preferences can it be
manifested physically and visually
and in the spaces like another team is
trying to combine like again the
emerging technology of 3d printing and
in concrete and combining it with like
some of our interest in compressive
compressive geometry or funicular
geometry and address the topic of live
work communities so so with that like I
would I would leave with like that the
to another aspect that I didn't quite
mention and didn't really talk about
that much but perhaps Patrick will in in
greater detail tomorrow is this idea of
parametric semiology and like how how
how do people occupy spaces how do they
navigate them what kind of interactions
happen where and how how we can leverage
some of the data technologies to augment
that kind of theoretical practice by
predicting user density etc so these
aspects like are in the early stages
like Patrick just started his research
in Vienna in last last year so we
believe that somehow this will also
gestate over time and like I know have
increasing things to contribute to to to
the degrees of freedom that we are
discovering on the production side that
we can begin to use it to address some
of these kind of complex aspects of
consumption like tomb so in that sense
like I do believe that like tech this
strand of cumulative collaborative
research can indeed become mainstream
similar to the Model T and and so and
obviously it comes with all the
necessary caveats of like trying to
dedicate like enough resources to try
and understand and operationalize not
only the production side but but also
the consumption aspects of architecture
so that I will leave you with this video
if it plays yeah it does
thank you very much
and I'm happy to take questions it's not
I'm also happy to grab a beer I would
encourage you to ask him a question
[Music]
thank you very much
absolutely fascinating approach and sort
of where the technology is taking
architectural discos in terms of its
application at the moment we see this
very sort of how can you put a very high
end status of architecture what do you
think its value relevance to the
everyday production of architecture I
know the you know there's sort of two
aspects of built environment one is at
the very very costly end where the
experimentation allows for this kind of
fabrication to take place but some of
the images that you yeah you
demonstrated could equally be seen in
kind of more nomadic architecture and
which is a fairly basic form of for
making and the spatial construct is
driven by the limitations of those
technologies of those environmental
conditions how do you think this
methodology that years are proposing
will have impact on our everyday
architecture
yeah I think they're like two aspects to
that one is indeed like if you consider
like the automobile industry and other
others seem like the idea of that there
is an f1 racing precisely to motivate
things in the passenger cars right like
so things that happen in f1 racing like
which used to be like leading bleeding
edge technology 20 years ago is like now
in every if yet let's say like and and
and that's also true in like many other
other disciplines and other professions
like that where production technology is
more initially motivated by like kind of
avant-garde let's say intentions and
like artists and and and someone pushing
the boundaries but like over time it
does like kind of by asking the right
questions it does bleed into like the
mainstream and the other aspect that
which i think is relevant to to like
what we are kind of researching and
practicing is is that it is all the
knowledge is also historic so which
means there can be many ways of
manifesting and physically or many
degrees of sophistication that it can be
as someone pointed out today like that
they're in these careful that things it
has a kind of craft aspect it's hard to
know whether it is like really ancient
techniques or it's like you know
bleeding edge technique so it's amiable
to both in several of these topics let's
say and that's one of the the interests
for us in coming in researching these
kind of topics is like curve folding or
origami or even fabric structures and
also 3d printing in a way like we're
trying to leverage historic knowledge in
a way so that like there'll always be
some immediate means of physically
manifesting it like and you can Daddy
like as much sophistication as you
desire in so there's a broader spectrum
of applicability from mainstream all the
way to like bleeding-edge and like avant
garde applications which i think which
is also added benefit of these kind of
topics
any other questions
sorry
okay thank you for your presentation I
have three questions
there are imprecise they're all related
I think the first one is what do you
think is the current state of of
computation and an overall view and also
in architecture what do you think it
will be the future of it and also what
is your opinion and how architects
should engage with it at what level like
at a mathematical level at the technical
level those are basic yeah I mean I I
can give you a personal answer like as
architects like at like originally I was
more motivated by a very very technical
desire let's say like we wanted to be
able to do everything myself like and
increasingly I don't have that opinion
because because like as I said like in
in places like Stuttgart like people are
dedicating like a lot of resource for
specific questions of the technical kind
and the technological kind and it's
similar for computational aspects as
well like so not to say we shouldn't
study more about the mat or more about
the technology like I think what we
expect out of it should be now different
like like similar to the way we make we
can't say don't make any physical models
anymore there's a there is value to make
physical models but like to incorporate
some of the tacit discovery modes but
like to also acknowledge that like a lot
of the technical difficulties and and
are being already addressed by other
more specialized researchers so to try
and build a more general understanding
of the fundamental principles
and try to accumulate all of that in in
both intuitive ways and in geometric
ways I think is is is is they're more
collaborative form of of studying
computation and like or even other like
robotics for example like you know it's
it's a hundred-year he's his industry
like so there's no way like we can be at
the bleeding edge but we can have like
very in in depth idea of how it
functions what are the critical
parameters that we can so especially
when we are putting together tool chains
right like in to address conceptual
aspects and also geometric aspects and
then like fabrication aspects and
structural aspects and increasingly also
navigation aspects etc like so we need
like a more overall awareness and like
also have a dense collaborative network
really like networker suppliers a
network of consultants and that would be
yeah that would that's what I think
right now is the state like it is like
just in in in the time since that I've
graduated like the field is like rapidly
evolved like to the point that they're
like several research groups across the
world like doing specialist things like
yeah so like so design research is key
like that thing that creatively thinking
about this how to use these technologies
in an architectural sense like in a
spatial sense and as CEO would call it
like generate creative capital that
would be there would be like that's what
I would think we should do
well no I think to pick up
first of all wonderful lecture beautiful
review and overview it makes me feel
good about myself also and about the
whole DRL and the collaborative network
you're talking about very very pertinent
but I think in terms of the the stage we
had and I think we with you we should
now be in the position to pull the
research from the consumption side and
we shifting into what I call emphasizing
social functionality and the like your
phrase of consumption was production
production includes fabrication
engineering and a technical realization
and we are the one the first being we
call in by by the entrance for the
clients by society to deliver and
imagine worlds but of course we can do
that we can pull only have a clue what
can be drawn out what is the capacity
what to put potentials and I think
there's also hip in our all recent in
the last 20 years in particular since
computation has been entering the world
that the engineers wants or is already
that the clients are certainly not yet
ready and many others so we've become
kind of Pro to computational software
engineers skeletons but drawing real
Computer Sciences in in our wake but the
same with the engineering we are pro to
engineers and we have to kind of show in
our dealings of a ways and then start
collaborating but then we I think
they're more and more should of course
and handover to those experts which are
now brought online and can do better and
we are just all catalyzed and pulled and
pull them along I think that's I think
that that dialectic and there's a shift
when you go into a paradigm which
matures and these are cycles of
innovation of whole civilizations in
fact we're living a new civilization
which is agenda by the microelectronic
illusion or the coincidence of of
computation and let's say
telecommunication a new paradigm and I
think we have to think of it in decades
in careers but also in realizing when
the next steps can be made should be
made and not not and and architectural
research universities and schools and
and the disciplines is a very precious
research resource and I see I see these
institutions and places evolving and
precise in the way you've you've you've
done this and and that's the way I think
we had there we are now on the cusp of
but we should have been for a while and
I think we will be bringing a lot of
these things into the mainstream
that's when organization excited
architects are very important that we
have the luxury to to help pulling this
through but also having a manifold of
opportunities to bring this out not an
every project yet but increasingly in
every project and I think that's answers
also the previous question in terms of
the mainstream conditions this in the
end is promising to be much more
economical than anything which goes on
now because in terms of the material
footprint in terms of the ecological
footprint but also in terms of the
benefit side and space utilization
there's an enormous economy there and in
the end all life forms and morphologies
are in the broader sense economically
driven this is the most economical and
at the same time most beautiful way it's
a light footed empowered and free life
we all which we can contribute to and so
that will answer this question
otherwise the the distinction between
having gone mainstream you be privileged
the avant-garde of course that's the
excitement but it is only going to be in
retrospect having been an avant-garde if
it had actually fulfilled its dream into
a mainstream so yeah we should be a see
seeing I like that you know you're the
phrase you bring to us consumption
production so be pulling from the
consumption side and delivering and it's
a good phrase because it it overcomes a
lot of the anti-capitalist Pius V we
also have ice up that's a different
conversation
we're gonna leave it there because
there's a lecture that's been programmed
to be in this space in ten minutes from
now
but with that just to encourage people
if they can more than welcome to join us
tomorrow for round two and concluding
tomorrow I will have to try to follow up
this act so thank you
surging and everybody for joining us
[Applause]
