so I don't really so as Ryan says I'm
Martin Evans
this is me I'm a property developer that
is not a very useful thing to say often
because oftentimes if you stand in a
room and say that the brick appears
aimed at your head
particularly if you are talking to
people on housing estates in North
London as I do quite a lot because
property developers don't have a very
good reputation here we have a
reputation for making people's lives
miserable for putting people out of
their homes for getting rid of beautiful
buildings and putting up horrible ugly
new buildings for regenerating and
gentrifying places and all the horrible
things that people say about property
development so this is what I like to
say about myself is that I am NOT a
property developer and I'm not a
property developer because there's not
an awful lot about property development
that I identify with and it's probably
why Ryan asked me to come stand here and
talk to you today because I feel much
more sympathy with what you guys are
learning how to do right now than what
other people in my end of the world
called property developers do and I'll
explain what that means as I go through
so I've got a particular approach to
life that is not very common in my
business I would say and it's because a
long time ago when I was your age I had
a good teacher and this is her she's
called Anita Roddick she's unfortunately
dead now but she started a company
called the body shop in the late 1970s
and it was a skin care and cosmetics do
you know it it's anybody shop at these
days it's the shadow of the company that
it used to be but in the 1980s when I
started working there it was the coolest
most interesting company in the world
and this woman was amazing and this is
her book on the left is called body and
soul I mean I don't suppose you've got
an awful lot of time to read other than
looks like that great big fat one that I
was just looking at over there but it's
a good book and it's still in print you
can buy it from Amazon
yeah and the first line of this book
says I hate the beauty business and what
she meant
is good but that's the business that she
was in now but I shouldn't really hate
the beauty business she just hated the
way that the beauty business was done by
everybody else and she saw a different
way and she wanted to push her way
through her life it didn't really matter
what business she was in in fact she had
no training or history in the beauty
business she just decided one day she
might have a go at it and she decided
that she wanted to do it differently
because all of the things that
characterized that business she thought
were horrible and mean so a business
that made women feel less than
themselves a women a business that
talked down to people a business that
ripped people off and charged huge
amounts of money for basically emulsions
of water and oil and she thought there
must be a different way and so she built
a multinational global business by doing
the opposite of all of those things by
talking directly and straightforwardly
to people celebrating people's health
and not their outward impression that
they make by talking honestly by
searching the world for ingredients from
the right places to make her products
that were not tested on animals and all
of those things that hit a chord with
people who felt cheated and miserable by
what they were offered and the rest of
the market and lo and behold lots of
people's kento but people came to her
shops and bought her products and made
her an awful lot of money when she died
I think she was worth about 700 million
pounds and so I worked for her for quite
a long time and I learned that it is
okay to make a lot of money and it is
even better to make a lot of money if
you do it by being good and by talking
honestly and directly to people and
asking them to part with their money for
your products if those products are good
and if they don't treat anybody badly in
the making and you can do that and you
can do that in any business in any
service in any sector ever and this
business I now find myself in that you
will join when you qualify it's no
different from her business so I believe
that
if you wake up in the mornings and think
that you're going to put one brick on
top of another and person glass and
steel in between them and make buildings
and sell them for lots of money you're a
bad person
if you wake up in the morning and
imagine that you are going to provide
places for people to live then you can
start to be pleased with yourself
because I think that all of life happens
in or around property in buildings so in
buildings we are born and we grow up and
we learn and we get sick and we get
healed and we love and we have our
children and we eat and we sleep and we
die and all of those things happen in or
around buildings and so we are all in
the business of making those buildings
and making the places where all of life
happens and so I believe firmly in my
soul that that's where you need to start
your work there with people and not
buildings so if I am NOT a property
developer then I don't think you should
be architects or planners or builders or
anybody else to contribute to this
building either I think that we are this
I think that we are all agents of social
and economic can change and if we wake
up in the morning and believe that this
is what we're getting out of bed to do
and that we just happen to do it by
making buildings and places and
landscapes then we're good
and I believe this through a really long
time but as each years passed in my very
long life I believed it more and more
and more because honestly right now we
can not get it wrong it is so important
that we think this because the world is
messed up more than we can ever imagine
I just come from almost a whole day
before talking to you today both
meetings about how we can in our company
be better at what we're calling
sustainability which in five years ago
would have been about carbon and
environmental sustainability now it's
about a whole raft of issues that are
all wrapped up together that includes
environmental sustainability but also
about social impact and social
sustainability and community and the
world needs those things very badly
there are four things that my business
worries about it worries about the
market which has been in the last three
years because it breaks it terrible it's
beginning to move now so we bother about
the market the market is super
interested in this stuff so if you build
office buildings for big companies the
first thing they ask you is about this
stuff they want to know about what this
building will do for the well-being of
the occupants of the building every day
the one I once turned about its
environmental sustainability about its
embedded carbon they want to understand
how you are helping the 4,000 people are
going to work in your building not to
come to work by vehicle how they're
going to come on a bike why are they
gonna walk or use an electric public
transport it's the first questions
people ask we worry about the money
where do we get the money to build our
buildings from money is interested in
this money people big funds big pension
funds are interested in the fact that
unless we think about these things our
buildings won't sell and if they won't
sell they won't make their money back so
they're interested communities are
interested more so than ever before you
only have to look at the spectrum of
extinction rebellion on one end to very
small activist groups who bother about
the fact that their housing estate is
about to be demolished to understand the
the the volume of the voice of
communities in shaping what we do
terrible things like grenfell have a
huge impact on that you know after
Grenville we are never going to not be
able to listen to people again terrible
that that awful thing had to happen for
that for me to be able to say that but
it's true and so the world around us
that enables me to be a property
developer and you to be architects is
being driven more and more every day by
this and unless we get with this we're
nowhere so I started my career in
property as I was telling Ryan before we
started in Brick Lane do you know this
place it's called that the Truman
brewery in the mid-1990s Brick Lane was
a nowhere land it was a street of Indian
restaurants so it was very busy on a
Saturday night people just going out for
a curry and there was one bagel shop at
the top where if you've been out
clubbing until four o'clock in the
morning and you might be a little bit
worse for whatever where you had chosen
that night going to Brick Lane to buy
bagels was the thing that you did but
there was nothing else there
Spitalfields market was a miserable grim
five-a-side football pitch place and so
right next to the most expensive real
estate in the world broad gate was this
sort of slightly miserable in
Spitalfields market and then commercial
streets which was a no cross zone and
then Brick Lane where there was nothing
and the guy who bought to this brewery
which is 11 acres of land and million
square feet of buildings bought it for
about five million pounds which even
then was nothing and he tried to turn it
into a big glass and steel knock
everything down and build towers and
make buildings and nobody would give him
the money to do it because they said the
brick lane was a no-go zone where no one
would go it was too far away from any
other part of London which is Hussein
when it's not far at all
and so I met this guy and I had been
working at the body shop and he said I
done what to do and I said why but you
know you might open some shops and open
a bar and see what happens
so he said abundant so I went to work
there for a month and seven years later
I've left from working that and and from
an empty miserable set of buildings
twenty-one buildings on 11 acres of land
we started to just open doors and make
something happen and we didn't realize
that what we're doing was being property
developers because if you're a property
developer you go to the bank and you
earn lots of money you get lots of money
and you send in the diggers and you're
not buildings down and you hire an
architect to make big glorious new glass
and steel buildings and you put them up
near eminent people but we couldn't
didn't have any money and we didn't have
any capacity or understanding to go and
hire architects to do that so we just
gave a broom to somebody who came along
and said well neva so he said here's a
broom go and clean that space out if you
clean it out and you open your bar we
won't charge you any rent for the first
year and when you start making some
money we'll do a little deal with you
you will just take a cut of your rent
and then as the places grows you can
just give us a bit more rent the more
money you take and we did the same with
shops and so the first thing we did was
open a row of shops that what's now
called drei walk but it was literally an
empty just miserable empty buildings and
I think in those retail units there in
each one there were probably three
companies three retailers who went out
of business before the fourth
I had enough customers to make it work
because nobody knew that this was any
kind of retail place and it's
unfortunate for those retailers who were
the brave early pioneers but that's how
it goes they didn't pay any rent and
they did incredibly cheap shot Fitz
so you know it wasn't too bad but over
time as there was a critical mass of
retailers in that place people started
to come and he started to get a bit busy
on Saturdays and then a little bit
busier on Sundays and week by week by
week they felt like a community and so
together there were about five or six
shots first up this street they started
to do things together so they pulled a
little bit of money and maybe have a
festival with some food on a Saturday
morning and so that kind of
collaborative enterprise between the
landlord and the tenants to all
understand the we're all in the same
boat trying to change a place and that
idea of an early community collaborating
to create change in a place is something
that I now do all the time in my day job
taking empty dead land turning it into
productive economic being socially
productive land and it informs the long
term formal development of all the way
through the process when the money does
arrive and so it's a but it's a model
that is people centric that is small
business centric that's
community-centric unfortunately it takes
a long time and so when quite got to the
point where this development here the
treatment that is now 20 years on 25
years old since I first went there is
now an amazing extraordinarily valuable
piece of real estate but it's taken a
very long time to get there and we have
quite worked out how if you are a
developer that needs to get in and
invest your money and develop and get
out and pay your investors back in a
shorter space of time quite how you do
that but what can I
this is Smithfield market do you all
know where that is just in fact no
fountain
station it's the meat market in London
this is the western end of it looking so
it's looking up towards the Barbican
Smithfield market was has been a market
in London for a thousand years so this
is what it looked like in the 1950s a
set of Victorian buildings that were put
up to hauser
by a wholesale meat and poultry market
but this is what it used to be like and
so for a thousand years there's been a
market and it probably started as a well
with people bringing cars from the
countryside with livestock on the carts
and grain and some vegetables selling
markets to the people of what was then
very small area of London and over the
thousand years it turned from being a
little place of trade to being a
incredibly important public place in
London people were hanged there there
were public executions there was saying
you know chop the head of a cow at one
place and then hang somebody in them in
the next place has been many many things
but what it has always been is a public
place it's always been a place of
gathering to trade and to have fun and
to be entertained and in 2012 the
corporation of London made a plan to
when they realized that this nice quaint
Victorian buildings were not really
suitable for the huge articulated trucks
that have to come in every night
bringing the meat into central London
that what they should do is pull it down
and put inside instead you can see here
so this is the scheme that was done by
architects called John McCaslin it's
nobody connected to that practice isn't
good he used to be my friend and I
explained ways not anymore and into this
so this was a scheme that English
heritage as it was then as now now
historic England supported him because
the architects and the developers and
the City Corporation told the heritage
Lobby that this was the only way that
these buildings were going to be saved
was if they took the guts of the
building out kept the only the facade so
a cosmetic saving of the buildings and
stuck in the middle a great big glass
and steel office building now the market
told them that this is what was wanted a
glass and steel office building because
there's not enough glass and steel
office buildings in the city and it
would be very valuable and it would rent
and so the evidence was that
that was that was what was needed but
not here because I will repeat again a
thousand years that has been a market
and in 2012 some very little people in
the scheme of that thousand years
decided that in that moment they were
going to stop all that thousand years of
history and just make it an office
building and I felt viscerally furious
about that and with some colleagues we
decided to do something about it in fact
the guy that I work for who's an
incredibly generous and lovely man
but it's hand in his pocket and funded a
campaign with the Heritage Lobby to save
these buildings and stop this happening
so an organization called save Britain's
heritage had started a campaign to
challenge the planning consent that had
been granted by the corporation of
London on this site and it got it got
picked up by Secretary of State and it
went to a planning inquiry and so we
help them through the planning inquiry
to challenge this decision so you can
see this is the state of the buildings
in 2012 they were been closed up and
dead and empty so I need to do something
to bring them back into life look I mean
they're absolutely beautiful so all of
this was gonna go so historic England
refused to list these buildings because
of this roof which was put on in the 50s
made a concrete after it was bombed in
the war so a relatively sensitive
restoration after the war was the reason
why historic England would not list the
buildings at any level to this great big
flippin office building and so if
somebody had to say no here is the
scheme so you can see they were just
gonna take the whole guts of the thing
out so the reason that I'm telling you
this in detail is because the most
important thing for me in this whole
story about this place is that this was
a community place this is a public place
a place of pub
gathering and not anymore our office
buildings with security gates on them
this was the extent of the but hostile
wood demolition of the buildings to put
together so we started this campaign so
Smithfield market and what it what we
needed to do was to show to the planning
inspector that if we could show the
indifferent scheme that kept the public
nature of the buildings going was at
least as valuable as the scheme of
putting the office buildings in even if
it was exactly the same value then the
Heritage argument would win and so the
plan the planning authority would be
bound not to give consent to a scheme
that demolished most of the buildings
because the developers will argue that
the only way to say that any part of
those buildings is to tear down the vast
majority of them save the facade and put
a viable scheme inside them and that's
true that was true they're not bad
architects they're not bad developers
they're not bad politicians in the
corporation of London
they just started from the wrong place
they started from a spreadsheet they
started from a spreadsheet not from not
from here
sorry if you start from if you just step
aside and put yourself in a different
position and take a look at this and say
we're not gonna do that we're gonna find
a way to do it some other way so we
gathered a group of architects a group
of agents group of engineers and cost
consultants and we put together a
development team to redesign this scheme
into a public place and we worked out in
a great big fast just that files that
look like that that you could do that
that we could make a scheme that would
pay just as much as in fact here ended
being more you'd be more more profitable
than a glass and steel office building
and we went to the planning inquiry and
we gave evidence and we won in the
meantime we had some fun I hired a
hundred Lady Gaga look-alikes to walk
across Westminster Bridge yelling about
you'd be have to be gege to tear down
Smithfield Avenue got in the papers and
helped in fact what happened then is
that the because the Planning enquiry
went against the developers they threw
the toys out of the pram
and walked away from the scheme and the
city corporation gave them their money
back and and it's that empty for a
couple of years and then they just
completed the process last year to
appoint the architects to redevelop it
to further museums London into the
marketplace now so what's gonna happen
now is a properly public development of
those buildings and it's gonna have a
new life in its thousand-year history as
a continuation of it being a public
place so my point to you is
you mustn't just accept what the
spreadsheet tells you you need to stand
aside from a brief and challenge always
always challenge a brief and say why are
you doing that when you could be better
oh there's good better by doing this
Stanton Williams doing a Nassif can you
hope so there is the lovely concrete so
this painting was painted in 1911 and
it's a very in West London in the place
called Hayes it anybody live anywhere
near that it's way out west of London
past Paddington out towards Slough in
1911 when this picture was painted it
was a farm and it was properly outside
of London it's now in the London borough
of Hillingdon and this factory had been
built in 1905 says any six years old and
already it was that big and it was an
American company that came from
Cleveland Ohio to build type of make
typewriters and gramophones you know
there's old wooden boxes with 78 records
that you wound up with a big trumpet on
that Tom it was called his master's
voice which became HMV eventually these
handsome men and one lady no different
than today by the way in property
development if you like the property
developers now on this site with a spade
it be nine nine men and one woman one
woman this is this in 1905 these people
are all from Cleveland Ohio who came to
Hayes and with that silver Spade which
I've got in my office actually now dug a
hole in the ground and started building
this Factory
and they built the new works of the
gramophone in typewriter Company Limited
and in 20 years in 1930 white provided
it 25 years later to 1931 it looked like
this huge industrial conglomerate place
and here was invented
electronic music playback equipment and
so they changed the name of the company
called it electronic music industries
limited EMI and this was AM eyes global
headquarters because we're stereo was
invented it was a vinyl was invented it
was an absolutely huge global powerhouse
of innovation and industrial development
this is what it looked like in 1930 it
was rooms where they were building
really expensive and beautiful pieces of
furniture with the latest technology in
it though men worked all in one room and
the women all worked in another because
it entrust them to work in the same
rooms they made radios they turned
television into a consumer product
they made lighting and every Beatles
record that was ever pressed in Europe
was pressed to hear the vinyl factory it
was a hundred and fifty acres of factory
22,000 people worked there in 1965 and
in the 1980s when people stopped buying
records and started buying CDs if it
started to fail and so they started to
close the factory down and they started
to sell off the land and and in 2011
when I first went to this site it was
just that red line around a little
triangle they had gone down to about 20
acres from 150 acres of Patrick
it'd been owned by two property
development companies who had understood
there in West London I've got a point
everything on here so having today Xuan
is about their Heathrow Airport is about
there and all of this area around here
is all global age queues of big
industrial businesses like Microsoft
Canon Fuji Honda all those companies
have their big headquarters there so
this part of London very near to
Heathrow very near to the m25 very new
to the m4 is a really popular business
location in West London but this very
particular location here down a pretty
miserable Street from the train station
which is here is horrible and in
architectural terms in property
development terms it didn't matter that
it was in a macro good place because the
micro business of this place was
horrible nobody wanted to be there and
so they tried to turn it into a business
part and it failed and so it just sat
empty for a very long time so my company
bought it and we applied the same
principles to it let's not just take a
spreadsheet and try to work out what's
nearby and what's valuable and just do
more of the same but try to understand
what this down here which is really grim
and failing needs and what it needed was
more places to eat and listen to music
and dance and drinking bars and homes
for people this is going to be a cross
rail station here so pretty it's gonna
change this place quite dramatic it but
the planning policy on this site here
was all industrial was all business
location because King in see in this
town here it's all residential up here
the main transport hub in the south of
the town and then the lighting light
industrial area is all here and the
council were terrified that if they took
the
job-creating office potential
development of this Iowa it would do
damage to the town in that there would
be less opportunity for jobs which the
town needs very badly except nobody was
able to develop it so there were no jobs
anyway so that's the irony if the
planning policies that they stick to
what they think they need and have no
sense that what's not gonna happen in
order to get it we needed to be able to
build homes in order to create value to
make that place viable and so if you
start from the point of saying not just
the market says we need office buildings
but you start from saying what do people
want what do the people of this town
want they want that to be an extended
part of the town center and in a modern
town center there has to be people
living people working and leisure so we
had to persuade the council that half a
cycle could be developed out to
residential they were very anxious about
it and so we said okay we'll show you
how the amount of jobs that you think
you can get on all of the site will get
on half the site and if we do that can
we have the rest to resi and they said
yes and then we went away very happy
from that meeting but then of course we
have to do it that was a whole other
thing you can see that most of the
buildings here are single-story Gordon
but distribution centers low low
employment density DHL or warehouses
Amazon warehouses this country but these
old buildings here are tall five six and
seven storey office buildings which
didn't work so we had to take all of the
experience often nobody wanting to put
their businesses here and try to find a
way of making those buildings work so
that we could let them
this is what it looked like beautiful
but derelict and
21 of the buildings we let some artists
come and paint and so just overnight
I spent 1,500 pounds having somebody go
down and put a sign up and called it the
old one factory had been called London
Gate Business Park before that and just
that putting something upon the wall
that said that made reference to the
fact that he used to be a place with
life and people and love and music and
fun and pictures suddenly make people
sit up and go what's that
so the simplest thing you can do and our
architects today there was one company
based on the site but it stuck it out
and we're in glorious isolation so we
gave them a new cafe and stuck a load of
four seven-inch singles on the wall we
put some bikes in reception so that they
could recycle up to the town which was a
little bit far away we put an exhibition
up took a week and cost virtually no
money we just blew pictures up big put
to tell the story of the place and five
thousand schoolchildren in the first
year from around the town came to see
this exhibition to understand the
history of their town and start to
understand how important it had been and
it was not a [ __ ] and it was not
dead and it was not going to die we
continue to be terrible there was
actually an interesting place this was
the marketing suite when nobody ever
came and so this is what it looked like
when I finished with it and we opened it
up as a community centre so we just left
anybody who wanted to use it use it also
there were yoga classes and old-age
pensioners meetings and school choirs
and then we started making music again
on the site and this was all just really
to create content for web stuff and
start conversations about it so we asked
kids to come and play acoustic sets and
we recorded them when we made a whole
thing on the web and then we invited
people who used to work there to come
for two days and a thousand
came on the first day and they brought
all their old sort of mementos like the
watches that they've been given if
they'd worked there for fifty years and
their old records and stuff and it was
the most wonderful day
and if you imagine that if you just
thought that that town was miserable and
not very nice and challenged and full of
unemployed people you only had to send
out an invitation and a thousand really
happy people would come and you could
realize that you just have to scratch
beneath the surface and you can find
life and passion and interested people
in a community but you have to go
looking for them and you have to give
them an opportunity to come and talk to
you and learn from them I mean honestly
Connie Francis and so this was our
master plan done by a practice called
studio air Great West you can see that
if you can remember the triangle that
was sort of there you can see that on
property terms you know no more dense
than the original 1930s scheme of
buildings that have been not a lot of
which had been knocked out but half of
the buildings here are residential the
rest office buildings this is a carpark
that's a school and then a ground floor
all the way through the site shops and
bars and cafes and restaurants and a
cinema and a live music venue so that
was the density of it when he was in the
1930s and operating as a industrial
factory that was what it was when we
bought it
[Music]
here's what it looks like
we've a dog so what I want to urge you
is when you come to a problem or a
challenge or a project don't just accept
what's in front of you don't just accept
that because you're architects you make
buildings think about what you're doing
and what it's going to do to change the
places where the people who you're going
to affect live and work and play and
have their lives and if you write at the
top of every sheet of paper every day
that you are this you will draw
different things I promise
so my finishing side is saying be this
please
[Laughter]
the role of the council was one that
seemed to have visited the corporation
of London and the women in the one
example and then here thinking that they
wanted to hold on to sort of job
opportunities possibly it's very easy to
[Music]
suggest that people are wrong and the uf
the right answers it's very easy to do
that because it's easy to make an
argument easy to pick a fight on rich
people but both the core City
Corporation and Hillingdon Council who
were the planning authority for the
manufacturing they had very good reason
for setting policy that demanded the
kind of developments that had been
planned on those both of those sites in
City Corporation they see it as their
job to be the guardians of the economic
powerhouse of our country the square
mile of the city that belongs to the
city corporation houses more industry in
financial services companies than
anywhere else in the world and that's
the driving force what they also have is
more tourist attractions in a square
mile than any other part of the country
from supports Cathedral to
[Music]
fingers but they are incredibly
unfocused on bringing those two things
together I lived in the Barbican for a
very long time and in that part of
London on Saturday and Sunday is dead it
very nice bit of there because it was
quiet but there is no sense in which
that part of London is a 24/7 mixed-use
place which seems crazy to me
and so it's not about fighting them or
being furious and angry although we did
get a little bit fierce and angry about
Smithfield it's about understanding what
drives decisions they make and then
finding ways of persuading them that
there is another way and that's very
much more true of the London borough of
Hillingdon they had a planning policy
for that site of the old Vienna factory
for a very good reason because that
towns very short jobs and so they
thought that if they lost land that was
already designated as employment land
they would be losing the opportunity to
create jobs so we just have to show them
that there's another way that you can
develop half that land out for jobs and
half of it out for homes and get twice
as many jobs than half the land as they
thought they could get and find and
explain a way of doing that and for us
that was about making that a more
attractive place to put your company by
making it into a extended part of the
town centre instead of a distribution
warehouse Business Park
do you have examples of places where you
where there was a closer collaboration
with the council yes
so my company has about 30 12 billion
pounds worth of property and development
at the moment and about 3/4 of it is
developments in partnership with public
sector hands so I the central government
or local government or a public body
like the fire brigade or the ambulance
service or the police or the NHS and
that's because public sector and
particularly local authorities are the
very very much the largest landowners in
our country and but they are the least
expert at understanding how to develop
it for the benefit of the communities
who live on and around it and so on our
view is that the only way that can
happen is by fruitful partnership
between public sector and private sector
and so our deals typically are simple
public sector puts the land into a deal
we form a legally technically we form a
joint venture company the local
authority puts the land into the deal we
put the money in to the value of the
land so that there's a 50/50 split of
assets and then we use our development
expertise to develop out that land and
typically the local authority will take
back in return for its land a public
asset so that might be a library or a
letter center or school or something we
will develop out the rest of the land
for speculative private development of
whatever kind and take a profit and then
usually there is what's called a super
profit which means that the profit that
we take is capped to a publicly set out
way it's just typically 17 or 18 percent
on cost if the property if the project
makes more than that that creates what's
called super profit and then that's the
50/50 between the local authority and my
company it's a pretty standard model of
ways that companies work so when you do
that you find yourself in in in this is
absolutely singly true
venture passion so it is a it is a
completely 50/50 in every way 50/50
decision-making 50/50 and money 50/50
and take in terms of profit are to the
end and so no one's in charge there's a
board and on the board half the people
who sit on the border from the local
authority and half people is on the
border from my company and so you cannot
do the job unless you bring everybody
along with you and that means standing
in each other's shoes so it means that
we as private sector developers have to
stand in the shoes of the local
authority and understand their needs and
objectives and they have to understand
that in order to get what they want that
we have a commercial imperative and we
have to make a profit and if both of
those things can be satisfied happy days
this last in this last example yes the
partners of joint venture partnership
was about creating a kind of an
extension of the new town center and
part of the way that you seem to get the
local population engaged was bringing
back the kind of older population of
people who work there but also younger
people who might be interested in music
through a kind of storytelling which is
what we're really talking about before
this and kind of the simple move of just
actually putting up old photos of a
place and actually announcing what it
was showing in a kind of you know
graphically strong way with what used to
be their telling that story that's a
certain kind of engagement and and with
the kind of local population that is
maybe different from the way people
might think they're supposed to engage
with their local governments which is
through planning application boards but
this is a kind of a Mormon
between kind of spaces I'm also struck
by just an example of the High Line in
New York which for many years we felt it
was not gonna happen right until the
Commission's photographer to photograph
it's just the beauty of the space up
there and that was the sort of tipping
point of when it wouldn't actually
galvanize in people's minds as a place
it is worth fighting for
yes I didn't know that that's great so
the kids the first thing we did at the
manufactory apart from putting the signs
up was the dis so this has done nothing
to do with property development it's a
website with kids playing music and we
just go and listen to the music but what
it did was it created a platform for a
conversation so the fact that these kids
did these things upon here's quite a lot
of this a lot of them now meant that we
could tell a story about the history of
this place and explain why these kids
were being asked to go in these
miserable empty buildings and sing
acoustically and be recorded and make
films because of the history of this
place but the question about looking
back at the past is really important to
understand that is no good just using
nice pictures you can't you can't just
be grateful that there are all these
amazing pictures and you stick them on a
brochure and looks lovely and then
everybody falls in love and it's all
amazing cuz it doesn't work like that
because very quickly you realize that
it's just and so many architects that I
see make presentations about places they
desperately want to put the first 20
slides in their presentation of
historical pictures of the place and
then it gets to the point where you're
sitting on the edge of your seat having
seen all these amazing pictures of what
it used to look like foot was all pulled
down and then you go and and then get
one great big glass and steel office
block you know
 it so ever skin brighten and we did
a competition we do many competitions
cut and like them I just think they're a
waste of people's energy but we did a
competition and for architects practices
and they all the first 20 slides of
their 400 slide presentations were all
the same because there weren't that many
pictures on the internet of the historic
history of this place so they just all
use the same pictures and they showed
this thing and it was all about how in
Brighton the little windy streets are
little windy streets because originally
when the land was farmland they were the
the land was laid on what's called lanes
which doesn't mean alene it means a
strip of land that a peasant farmed in
the 14th century and they were just
these long strips of land like
allotments they were called the lanes
and the streets in Brighton in that part
of Brighton sought to follow the path of
the little windy bits of land so these
architects would say oh you know
Brighton is really famous for these
lanes and that's why it's called lanes
and they're little windy streets anyway
here's a great big glass of Steel office
building that we're gonna give you
instead and one practice said and so
we're gonna do little windy streets and
make really glorious gorgeous lovely
windy little things and you go great and
they got the job and we built it and
it's finished and done and it looks like
other places about some contemporary
buildings but it looks very much like
the other parts of Brighton we to fight
like hell with the castle to get them to
agree for us to put narrow streets
because of course the rules tell you and
planning that you have to put so many
metres between windows on a street but
we showed that in Brighton the most
expensive properties are on the
narrowest of streets and therefore
people must want them and so the plan is
very good they agreed and break the
rules but the history thing is why I
tell you that is because the history
thing is not just about using lovely
pictures to decorate your presentation
or even to inspire you aesthetically
it's about understanding what happened
in that place and what you can do to
perpetuate that thing that happened and
so that's my story of that Smithfield
about understanding that that place was
a public place in London and so it
cannot not be it's got to be a public
place forever
and so how that's where you start in in
Manchester I have a great big slide 25
acres it's derelict it's exactly like
the binder Factory it used to have a
mill on it in the 19th century in the
Industrial Revolution and that mill made
cotton but it made very cheap cotton
with the cheapest clothing cotton
imaginable and keep the cotton is not
white is muddy almost brown and so
whenever it was printed with a design it
was never colourful because you print
bright red on to brown it just looks
muddy red and so poor people who make
their clothes the cheapest fabric had
miserable colored clothes because the
fabric didn't allow them to be brightly
colored the guy who had the mail on my
site invented a way of cheaply turning
bleaching cotton I'm sure he killed a
lot of children in the in the process
bleaching the cotton but he worked out a
way of making cotton white which meant
that you could then print it with bright
colors and suddenly very cheap clothing
could be very colorful and it
transformed the world today and majesty
and so the inspiration that we take from
that is not colorful printing but the
use of technology in 1832 change
people's lives and so how can we be
inspired in 2021
to use technology to change people's
lives and if you can work out how your
architecture can do that then you can
draw a straight line right from Thomas
Oil in 1830 putting his mill on the side
bleaching cotton printing in bright
colors changing people's lives to some
digital craziness in 2021 that changes
people's lives now what buildings do we
have to make to put that in and if you
can continue that line you're doing a
good job
so it's probably already pretty
complicated to have two different
entities a private and public sector
coming together to make single decisions
and these decisions ultimately affect a
third party which is the public and the
community are there any instances where
that third party has also been part of
the conversation as to what is needed
yes
so as Ryan said I just have actually
just stepped down from the board of a
company called commonplace which is it's
a digital platform for community
engagement and I'm asked to join that
board today so internet startup company
I joined there for three years ago
completely amazed that it had not
happened before that in public
consultation in property development on
architecture world people still stand
outside a village hall on a Sunday with
a clipboard asking people do you like
this or not and took in a box we're
getting better now my view is really
clear in our business the words market
and research are never ever used in a
sentence ever ever because I work in a
business where everything that we build
sells and so as a business we don't give
a what people want because it sells
we're gone of houses so whatever gets
built ourselves it's terrible shocking
the state of affairs because you imagine
how much market research went into
making this something that you paid 50
pounds a month for instead of 1,500
pounds a month on your mortgage for you
on budget flat brick us and isn't that
shocking that this thing tiny little
thing has more market research money
spent on it millions and millions of
dollars more market research spent on it
than anybody in my business but I think
that if you do market research you make
a better product and so we see our
public consultation in our businesses
market research as going and finding out
what people want because if you find out
what people want you'll make that
ability
if you make better buildings they'll
sell quicker and to more money so it
makes sense so it's about understanding
that again it's best stepping aside
stepping into another pair of shoes and
looking at it from a different way and
seeing those people not as people who
you have to check in with to check that
they're ok with what you're doing but to
ask them what they want and help them to
understand how to talk to you help them
to understand how to communicate with
you to get out with them what they want
because more and more and more if you
don't do that you're gonna be in trouble
because they'll stop you if you if
you're a property developer now and
you're doing in a popular thing in a
community you're in trouble because
people are very very very well-organized
and very vocal very easily organized
into proposition HSS at this morning in
a meeting with our political consultants
who are helping me to understand the
changing landscape of politics in London
now that there's a new Tory government
so we have a very strong Tory government
in Westminster
very strong labour London so most of the
local authorities in London have very
large labor majorities and how is that
going to be and he said the most
important thing is what's gonna go on in
the labour party because if the Labour
Party leadership whatever happens in the
local party leadership
if Rebecca long Bailey wins it will mean
that the left has won they have taken
over the Labour Party
if that happens everybody who is
remotely interested in fighting
development will be supercharged because
there is a very much a characteristic of
that side of pop politics and so we're
just going to hear more and more and
more about stronger and stronger voices
from the community even if she doesn't
window it was still labour the Labour
Party in its hold over London politics
means that increasingly more and more
and more we're not going in the other
direction we're going in a direction of
more and more amplification of people
community voices which is not a bad
thing I think I think so
and in my business if you don't listen
you're full
towards politics a little bit yeah let's
open it up go get some questions Jesse
just because they're recording
okay um yes amazing to see how you have
engaged with the community on all these
projects and how they become part of the
creative act itself so I was just
wondering once you've delivered project
how you can kind maintain the
involvement of community in the long
term so that that kind of social
sustainability continues good question
in three ways I think one is that you
make places for people and so the very
fact that you make them and people live
and work and play in them means that
they use them if you're asking people
can I come to your town and build a
great big load of glass to steal office
buildings that you're not allowed to
come into by the way that'll have really
lovely cafes on the ground floor only
for the people who work in them and you
have to have a pass to get in in the car
park is that right but even if they
grudgingly saying all right there's no
engagement and nothing no connection
afterwards they like it I can off
then - if you make places that are for
people they use them and therefore then
they fight with their feet but what's
becoming more and more important in our
business is post development research so
do you go and ask people when they move
into a block of flats how is it and
again same thing how do we not want to
learn you sell 200 flats to people don't
you want to ask them are they right
because then I want to do it again if
it's wrong and I can't understand why
developers won't want to do that because
they're arrogant and lazy but wrong so
yes
on the subject of continuous use I mean
you look at retailer of suffering the
high streets and obviously that was the
markets and trade was always a wave
people communicating and connecting and
that's being taken over by Amazon so
what's your your view on the future of
that a very good friend of mine is check
called Ross Bailey who runs a company
called appear here and it is a online
platform for connecting landlords of
empty shops with small businesses who
don't want great big long complicated
leases he hates the word pop-up but it's
sort of that he tells me that on their
site they have six thousand at any one
time
six thousand empty shop units in the
London region and a hundred and thirty
thousand people looking for
opportunities to use those shops to try
out ideas and he says I don't need to
say any more than that the retail is not
remotely dead it's just not being served
by property and it's not being served by
the property industry and it's not being
served by the planners who want to
create places that are not economically
sustainable so I just moved back to
London from living in Devon for three
years which was quite an experience I
lived in a tackled Exeter which is the
capital
county town of Devon it's relatively a
big city in that part of the world
relatively affluent and I lived right in
the center of the city and when I came
out of my front door I looked to the
left and I heard of Debenhams store and
to the right matter House of Fraser both
of which are gonna close that's nearly
three hundred thousand square feet of
retail property in a small city it's
gonna absolutely devastate
but the problem is that the people who
own those shops one is the crown estates
and the other is a pension funding from
Canada know what to do with them
no they just think that the world is
ended and it's all over and it's because
they don't employ the right people who
imagine what they could do with those
places and they're not prepared to to
experiment because their business models
don't allow it and so they're going to
have to change or as they're going to be
left with great big huge empty
purpose-built buildings that do not are
not fit for purpose anymore I think also
that we have to remember what high
streets were for so high streets were
created because people needed to come to
a well to collect water every day for
their homes and when they came to the
world they gossiped and so there were
women mostly while the men were out
working in the fields gossiping and
doing their daily sort of thing
collecting their water and then the
person with the apples decided it's a
good place to come sell some apples just
some people so they brought their voskov
apples and then the man with the big
scam and then and so it became a places
trade we have to remember why people
gathered in those places in the first
place they gathered for essential needs
so they gathered for water and for the
food to eat so they couldn't get
anywhere else so if to ask why do people
gather today so they gather to take
their children to school so why are we
putting schools on the edge of towns
massive anyway so we should be putting
schools in turning Debenhams shops into
schools there goes the doctor so why are
we putting doctors surgeries on the edge
of town so you have to take a bus or
park your car in a car park why are we
putting doctors surgeries in debenhams
in the high street an8 departments why
are they so I know that those right in
the middle of the high street we just
have to find the new things that people
want to do because in the end of the day
it's easy to click on Amazon but unless
you're a really weird person and you
still want to talk to people you still
want to meet people you're still human
want to interact with people and we've
got to find ways of reviving and
blinking newly about why people want to
come together in a day time in a public
place and do stuff not how do we hire a
face painter to make more people want to
come to this shop on Saturday morning
and sell things that people don't want
I like that as a place to leave any
other questions from the ground
hi I want a bit of a specific question
and I brought their second one I also
really liked the signage idea how you I
guess in a1 I decided to put the sign up
which causes 15,000 pounds we've seen
hundred pounds right okay I guess it was
a bit of a common sensical question but
who sponsored that sign it's just a
personal investment of yours a large
part of changing that place physically
hiring an architect drawing all those
buildings building them selling them a
large part of making that successful is
changing people's minds about what that
place is like people in that town think
that place is horrible
and so you have to tell them it isn't
it's going to be amazing and if it's
called London Gate Business Park and has
a really ugly sign that says that then
shann finished you get your hands off
then why would anybody want to go there
if you call it the old vinyl Factory in
a big sign and then you start to do
stuff that's colorful people want to go
and you change people's
perceptions of a place my second
question is about calling ourselves
agents of social and economical change I
was wondering why you I mean overall the
presentation to me it felt like you were
avoiding the word architect as a self
definition but you don't I guess you
don't think that agents of social and
economical change and architects are
mutually exclusive
no no the same thing I wasn't asking you
to stop calling yourself architecture I
was suggesting that you just think of
yourselves differently because I didn't
want to be a property developer
typically want to be a property
developer now but I enjoy the power that
it gives me to change places and so I
would rather say that I am an agent of
socio-economic change and I happened to
do it I happen to do it by doing a
property developer you will do it
because you were architects that make
sense
and I was just wondering and for the
kind of for the commercial part of the
of the and projects if and if yes to
what big thank you you kind of curate
the type of business going going and in
there I think the origin of the
questions because all of the your your
images kind of so just a creative crowd
going going going down so I'm so the old
vinyl factory we were we had three
quarters of a million square feet of
office space now that is not all gonna
be creative businesses there's no cannot
enough creative businesses in the world
to in one place to do that but in order
for larger less creative businesses to
imagine that that place is an attractive
place to put your to send your staff you
have to have like a little beacon a
little flashing light of interestingness
and that was this so we made websites
and brochures and exhibitions and nobody
came because when they came in their
cars they would they would get you know
they would look online and see this
amazing place and then they're getting
their car and they'd come and then like
where the is this and they'd come
and they'd get out of their cars in
their lovely shoes and it would be muddy
and dirty and they like see you know CEO
we invite us back when he's finished
then we'd say we can't you've got it
sign up now or else we won't be able to
do it and see you and he had a very long
time when nobody came and we realized
that it was too far away
- gone - dead - wrong to persuade people
through brochures and websites and
advertising campaigns and stuff we had
to actually do it we had to put
something on site and so we could say
look it's happening get with the program
or you'll be left behind and so we made
this it's called the Central Research
Laboratory and this goes to this is a
good place to end because it gets full
circle so this is about in in 1925 on
this site there was a building and it
was called the central research
laboratory and it was the kind of R&D
development building of the e/m eyes
factory it was where all the products
were invented and they were load of
scientists in that building and they got
to invent things and everybody in the
company left them alone until they
invented an amazing thing and then the
marketing people would take it inside
that building got demolished years ago
but there's a book about it and so we
decided to remake it so we made we took
another building and we've referred it
and we called it the Central Research
debauchery and we started a kind of
accelerator startup engineering business
hub so not digital or tech because
that's all in East London we've went to
completely the opposite and did
engineering dirty business and it cost a
lot of money but the coolest youngest
most interesting people were working in
this building in partnership with Brunel
University and the GLA gave us a grant
so that when people came to look at the
site we can point and say look you know
really interesting people are working
here and it carries on that whole
process of this place being a place of
invention and enterprise and and
industry so why don't you come and
Sano's came and put their headquarters
there and then the minutes on us were in
boom it went so you have to do it
thank you do it
