because even in everyone hi thank you
very much for joining us this evening to
celebrate the book launch of the space
between that as you may know is the book
is a newly released third part of the
intended collected works of Allison in
Peters Mason and is complementary to the
volumes the charge buoyed architecture
and the third board urbanism tonight the
SD atte have invited professor max Risa
Lada to present both the content of the
book and the story behind its
publication max Risa Lada his professor
emeritus at the department of
architecture at tu Delft his research on
modern architecture has resulted in a
number of highly acclaimed exhibitions
and accompanying catalogues amongst
other the round plan versus plan Libre
comparing the work of art of loss and
macabre SIA and Tintin in search of a
utopia of the present as a teacher Risa
Lada was also most influential not only
by studio work but also by helping
setting up such important platforms as
our key breaks Europe an in the
Netherlands he currently runs the
architectural collections and production
departments at tu Delft as well as
lecturing internationally after his
presentation max will join debora's aunt
Susanna Hagen the van der Hooven
Annabella's ramos to discuss some of the
issues related to the book and more in
general to comment of the world can
legacy of the of alison invaders mix-ins
who were not only influential architects
but also educators and incredibly
prolific writers and editors the Prasant
who will be tearing the discussion is a
director of the award-winning
architectural nor personal beliefs
practice TS DHA she's currently leading
the redesign of the public realm between
Tottenham Court Road and Gower Street
which is just around the corner on our
doorstep as well as the refurbishment of
the Smithson cyclic economies Plaza
she is also active in teaching and
research in 2014 she completed a PhD
thesis as part of the RMIT
this research program as well as a
research fellowship in the built
environment awarded by the Royal
Commission for the exhibition of 1851
moreover she's the commissioner for the
independent transfer Commission and is
on the founding faculty of the London
School of Architecture the LSA Suzanna
Hagen is professor of architecture in
the University of Westminster and and
the founding director of research into
environment and design re D which is a
design consultancy that promotes the
role of design in making cities more
environmentally resilient she has
published a number of books most
recently she wrote ecological urbanism
the nature of the city which looks at
the role of design in making cities more
environmentally friendly during an
career her career Susannah was head of
research at the Royal College of Art
School of Architecture as well as the
University of Brighton as well as
teaching at the University of Brighton
and here at AAA
dirk van de haber has received his PhD
in architecture from tu Delft where it
teaches as an associate professor is the
head of the became a Study Centre in
Rotterdam as well as an editor of the
publication in serious Bosch and the
architectural Theory journal footprint
dirk curated the exhibition open a
became a celebration for the Dutch
Pavilion at 14th Venice architecture
Biennale he previously worked as an
editor for the back door journal ose and
there's co-authored together with
maxilla Salada a number of publications
including Tintin in search of a utopia
of the present in 1953 1981 and Harrison
Peters made sense from the house of the
future to the house of today as a
recipient of the Richard Rogers
fellowship from Harvard GSD Dirk is
currently developing a research project
on new Brutalism and British welfare
state politics and finally
anomalous Ramos he's an architect she's
a principal as a ballast it's really
difficult words parents
researcher educator and curator she
obtained a doctorate in architecture
from the universitat politècnica de
valència with the thesis titled Allison
and Peters medicines the transient and
the permanent and she has taught
internationally and at the present she's
teaching at the school of architecture
at the University of Valencia in Spain
so after the talk by Max there will be
so presentations from each of the
speakers which will be chaired by
Deborah as I said and then we will have
a Q&A and there will be drinks offered
by the AAA and the opportunity to buy
the books and approach the speakers for
a more informal conversation so who's
going to leave the lectern team sequence
and not turn pictures back each time
which I must do thank you so much for
bringing me here for the presentation of
the book which we worked hard on
together with my this design are not my
designer but the designer from trees who
was also in the room and after we
already had three other presentations
one in Berlin because this missus were
firm attached to Berlin she wants the
Ron's wrote it a text Berlin as an
island in our mind of this beautiful
poetic titles of course it was also in
instituting Rotterdam and then also a
New Castle in the place for dismisses
work the region where this business were
educated but because in the AAA is very
important that it is here because this
is also the place by dismissing these
ups and downs came to teach several
times it was here already in the early
sixties I was informed by friends the
lady we took care of the slide library
we worked a slide in that time about
them respectfully describing them as
being a line and
what effort that means in that time but
of course I was very curious to hear
more about them without meeting then of
course personally them however I knew
them by the media in particular ad where
their sense musings were regularly
published and the projects and realized
works were extensively published there
was for example a complete issue
defaulted to the Economist this interest
was also stimulated by the team 10
birdies jab Bachmann and all of an egg
over my teachers during the series in
fact my final project for the reef
abundant of an station in new turist is
highly influenced by ideas and related
projects of the smoothness of that
period the cover of the book this is
about the period in which I'm talking
about is the most the period of the 60s
and politics like the competition for
Berlin half thought and also the merits
problem where the projects I admired
deeply and this is the project I did for
putrid station as you can see there is a
deck running across the rails but
reaching the old city and connecting it
to this tea place for of the fares for
her model and of course they're not
project which form was in that time very
important for us there was an instant in
school because of its a sensual
detailing that sounds very strange to
say that but the way let's say the
different materials are integrated the
way how the concrete was in that profile
two beams
I think this affair it's a sort of so
the still became for the sensible thing
I felt at that moment and in that sense
it did not
in my opinion it was also the issue in
ad about Ray and Charles Yves edited in
59 by this miss insisted title and in
celebration which stimulate me to work
at their office and finish in the
beginning of the seventies and when I
became a teacher myself in the 70s their
ideas and words were already part of the
curriculum of our group we seen the
chair of Bahama like some of the
projects which were presented in the so
called Sally section of 1953 in XCOM
province you will see the section which
were of course the famous action by
Geddes in which they added a scheme
which had to meet to do with the scales
of Association say from the isolated
building up to the city to the city this
is a very famous diagram which respect
the products they were doing in that
time and which we each time studied and
looked at the third world the so called
closed houses and of course the the
Crescent buildings with gallery the
street in the air which was an important
field in our lectures and of course this
project was after long time at last I
realized in this idea was Riverside in
the Robin Hood gardens where now the
population is still living very
interesting on the decks ok I know it
started to know this missus more
personally in the beginning of the
eighties when they took the chair
Bachman for two years after he died in
1981 his staff welcomed him hardly
knowing about the work already for many
years as being one of the outspoken
figures in Tilton of which Bahama was a
sort of godfather as you can see here
this is the meeting in Spoleto perhaps
or in poor be know where Bahama in a
typical way extending a little bit aside
from the group as the guy not really
looking in the camera
looking down and and there are all these
other people's honey for my boots
Japanese guy Brian Richards this is a
skeleton and it's interesting to see
that in this meeting Sarah always the
women of the wives of the people who
came with them in this so-called family
meetings apart from me assisting Ellison
is a housing project in depth my
colleague Otto does together with some
of the students were already producing
one of Alison's manuscripts she was
eager to make public a snds
an eye on the road in one effect one of
those she herself like to call a
sensibility primer I will come back to
that these are the mock-ups by alison
herself and then were then prepared by
the students together with Otto dose
since then my relation has become a
rather affectionate and stimulating one
I even dare to say in both ways first
mostly with Ellison is Peter in the
background and since 1993 after the
death of Alison intensively with Peter
tell his passing away in two or three
this collaboration in the end resulted
in six publications and an exhibition
which we produced with them or about
them within the received program modern
architecture and the welfare state of
the Faculty of architecture and delves
to mention them till ten meetings 1953
1981 a rather personal report of Ellison
of the meetings which was by several of
the participants rather criticized
especially olefin egg because of this
photograph in which it captures said
Ellison retyping a manuscript what all
the Vinayak throw in the toilet
whassa 1951 being a result of lectures
or even a seminar on occasion of the
presentation of the exhibition climate
register at our faculty which was
produced at the AAA
by Peter Salter and pieces missing your
earlier rear management is missing
celebration of course we were imitating
his the Ames celebration publication
date themselves did many a long time ago
and in this for this publication we
produce a long chronology of their works
a timeline in fact borrowed from I meet
my devs who were the first to do those
things
Tintin you know the exhibition catalogue
Ellison pieces missing from the house of
the future to a house of a day to get a
visit from the air phone which was a
fairly popular exhibition event to
travel in England Holland Germany and
many locations in Spain and it resulted
also in Spanish version of the catalogue
in the end it might be that it was so
popular because one of the other group
is of dismissals is hundred Morales who
was very very instrumental in that say
putting the work of species in Spain and
also sending evening students to London
to work with them on different sort of
projects this is the exhibition we
produced and in that period in the
Design Museum and of course there is the
belt et bien project in search often the
topi of the present center that in
Rotterdam and catalogue produce again
with Dirk but in this case also with
young from twist and and yeah from I
think the cover is a very amazing cover
because it you know attracts immediate
attention and in fact the covers based
on this scheme by dismissal called play
Brubeck suggesting that the meeting
of this missiles in fact were a sort of
play of children together so Deva said
you know you were doing the meetings
were not really let's say conferences or
sing with there were just you attacked
each other and they that's a beautiful
description of the death I tried to make
a variation of it telling a little bit
who were the people in the center the
the core on eggs missing the car low
back math Kondylis boots parka muffin a
girl unit and then around them there
were the others and the groups to which
they belong this is a publication I did
for a B so no polygraph is the critical
energy analogy with text written about
this missiles from 1953 until 1905 I
suppose I'm not sure anymore
again published by this shown a polygon
alpha and in the end there is of course
this is the photograph American carbon I
already mentioned them in the class that
is this book the space between this
brings me back to the publication which
we are celebrating today the charts
point and the space between are the
titles given my Allison Peter two three
publication as already mentioned they
considered to be the summary of the
thinking and excess activities as
architects all three men Scott were
initially prepared by Allison before she
passed away in 1993
do you read years that fault this sex
were revised prepared for percolation
but Peter before his death into all
three as as you already have understood
the two volumes about architecture and
urbanism were published in 201 and 205
it is brief introduction to the first
volume of the charts for architecture
Peters consciously
iterates their intentions with the
choice of the title as follows in
calling architectural become our
architectural works the charts for it we
are thinking of Architects capacity to
charge the space around it with an
energy which can join up with other
energies influence the nature of things
that might come the capacity which can
feel and act upon and outcomes but
cannot necessarily describe or record
the third column the space between
remained unpublished for over ten years
a complement of the charge void books
this podium is a reference work which
richly Illustrated mostly photographs
taken by the sufficient themselves in
this film the pair seeks to capture the
identity of places while traveling in
looking around whether in Britain or in
specific locations around the world that
caught their fascination in addition the
system formulate what they call a
sensibility of place a notion developed
over several years and already made
public in many texts they like to call
the so called sensibility promise some
of these have been published but many
are still awaiting publication in the
Smithson family archives in Stanford one
of the best one is of course shown a
SMGs an eye on the road on occasion of
the presentation of the book at the
faculty in Delft Allison Road yes in Des
adds another document to those
sensibility promise that are intended to
touch the five senses the aim of our
primers has been to facilitate change in
repose attitude in patterns of use in
architecture and urbanism in fact the
first use of the word Sensibility
we found on the back of one of the pages
of the third typescript of a s already
produced in 1933 but she said qualities
of movement can be described through the
waist at the landscape buildings
vehicles past the car window the
permutation of movement within the
capabilities of the private car and this
be experienced in the pattern of a
machine from it monitoring the sensation
of movement soul can raise mere
mechanics of movements to a level of
appreciation given their way the taste
of a sensibility of movement I decided
to read some of these texts because of
the special the language of this
machines which which I think are rather
poetical and so and you are really in
the beginning when I started as an non
English spoken persons who rhythm it
it's very difficult to come into them
you really have to read and safeassign
to really and off for many years and
really think old it's about that
especially if you related to their
project they became aware of the
extensions of the manuscript of the
third book during the preparation of the
exhibition from the also two to two
hours of today when after the passing
way of Peter in two or three we could
end at last the little archival room at
catalogs to discover that well-ordered
archives by Ellison and many versions of
still unpublished manuscripts this was a
generous gift of the season children who
decide that our project should continue
also as a homage to their parents this
is the little archive as we found it
after when we could enter it photo by
summer losada
this is me working in the Sutra home
the project of the hexan house of UCB
these drones were just put everywhere on
the ground things like that this is deer
typing some document but the children
the grandchildren of the Smithson were
playing in the garden it was a wonderful
summer
I remember for some weeks then we also
discovered that the box of the file of
the space between those texts and it's
ages were missing and we really did a
big job to find them back in fact we
found him back in New York with the best
designers who had been disappearing to
China at a certain moment so that they
were not available anymore and and said
mom I started to look at the Google
asked I'll also use Google sometimes now
and then I found the name of the guy and
he had been presented in a photo gallery
in New York and so I found the guy from
the gallery inside oh yes they are back
from China so we went to see them and
they were very happy to give us the
boxes with all the material it's very
strange story in relation to this book
the space between is another way of
talking about architectures capacity to
charge the space around it it's written
in the short introduction to the charge
for it mentioned before here it is about
distance and relation and these pieces
are perhaps trying to define a specific
concept of space as could be perceived
in an anglo-saxon tradition of
architecture urban development a concept
that is embedded in the word space as
understood from the dictionary where
it's simply could be defined as an empty
place or more complex as an empty area
that is available to be used or even an
area around everything that exists
continuing in all directions but also as
distance not only between objects and
pearl
but also between words also between
words this original meaning of space is
unlike the German word around which is
related to the English word of room but
ROM has a double meaning it is both that
is enclosed and enclosure itself this is
not the case of space I think there are
these are about emptiness which can be
circumscribed dismisses are more
specific in the text which already has
the title the space between written 1974
are shortly after that of Lewis Canon
and the opening paragraphs said already
the general Torah and tenor the most
serious the most charts of architectural
forms are those which capture an empty
air the standing columns of the temple
who sell a walls have been gone the
empty barn the can house of the square
brick columns the chimneys of the
English Renaissance switch forms of
double-acting concentrating inwards
radiating buoyancy outwards and then it
comes this the drama is set up by the
ring of chairs at the roundtable table
before the Knights arrive beautiful and
in another text written by Peter an 81
this the title space is the American
mediator mediator a speculation Peter
states that the most important
characteristic of urban space in America
is that of distancing that of the space
between by which the interval became the
language of American and tourism it is
this idea of the interval that might
have given us missing the reason to use
the space between as the title of the
third book which is certainly a text
book richly illustrated many in this
publication like in many of their short
stacks written before a space between is
also present in a more imaginative sense
as a space that is left open for
interpretation it's often a space that
comes about with the confrontation of
seemingly different types of ideas
and concepts which are put practically
unmediated in relation to each other and
therefore rose curiosity one of the ways
this dialect of space manifests itself
is the way texts and projects also
really live each other there's always a
distance between texts and projects and
space open to one's own interpretation
this space also appears in the titles of
the of the essays they wrote it might be
illustrated by titles like for the book
ordinariness and light what's that or
essays like the Final Four
not with the bang but this is a flicker
or even pathogen and the roots in but
today we collect ads they even omit the
first term of the confrontation the word
but evokes a number of possible
associations in addition dismisses could
think and write at the same time about
such that I fight subject as the Greeks
orders in a parallel of the orders in
the same on the Doric and the work of
Ray and Charles Eames in in celebration
both published in the same year in
autumn 1966 and the it's the same place
that appears in space that appears in
one of Peters Smith's most quoted
statement this is great but or
communicates this experience what they
also like to call a charge void this
balancing act between such diverse
concept as ordinary sent light defined
in the fall with the more basic ones
like identity and neutrality separate
this end and connection relaxed this and
intensity still renders I think
topicality to the work of Allison and
Smithson but I think the most important
example of separated and connection or
relation and distancing is perhaps the
fact that Alice and Peter are a couple
who think and work in parallel
constantly discussing and writing in
first instance for and to each other
while defaulting their IDs and works it
is so simply illustrated in a short text
published already at the end of the
fifties this digital title parallel
interventions with propositions and
suggestions for other appliance houses
projected during and after the
presentation of the house of the future
and then buy them separately together
this is the page it's only one page and
on the left-hand side you see that the
Aniston projects and these are the pizza
projects and there is a car tranquilizer
so these are designed for a retirement
house I think for one of the parents of
dismisses I still don't know what which
one and there is of course a text also
in there tribution contributions only I
think I have to end with this one thank
you so much now after much presentation
to take a close look at the cover and
you will ask why the cover well it
provides plenty of food for thought
before even opening the book the photos
on the front and back covers and also
the photo-op aside the grades page show
the 1990 reconstruction of the patio
pavilion installation at the London
Institute of Contemporary Arts rather
than the original 1956 installation at
the Whitechapel Art Gallery 1956 and
1990 virtually the same dates as
beginning and the end of the right is
compiled in the book nineteen fifty
seven and nineteen ninety four ninety
three sorry two very different moments
for the installation and also for them
first as an exhibition of emergence in
the promazine 90
50s and after us conscious act of
interpretation by others this is an
exhibition of reflection in Peter
Smithson's own words that enable them
not only to recover some of their lost
prominence but also to reappraise and
become aware of the persistence of the
ideas that they crystallize in the
writings looking at these photos now
that's not merely confirmed the constant
rain interpretation of their work but
deliberately encourages readers to take
another look at the material in this
book for stating the installation and
its concepts once again 25 years later
both photographs offer complimentary
points of view about Allyson and Peter's
different approaches to the perimeter
and present the contents on display from
new perspectives the series of photos
taken from different angles give an
overall impression of the atmosphere
inside the gallery these points of view
seem to span the space between their
gaze and the reflection between the
ideas uncial and those yet to come
like the interstices in their own work
and the writings such as a chart spoil
and the space between and in Allyson and
Peter themselves as occurs with the
photographs rather than the objects also
the space between emphasized
relationships in the places that lie
beyond their architectures and how these
architectures affect and define the
spaces outside their perimeters it is no
coincidence that the title the space
between implicitly
such as the existence of material even
though it is not the focal point
thus the many different architectures
put forward by the British couple
suggest connections between the work and
the range marks and suggests
relationships between words
and images but they also provides links
between Allison and Peter who emerges to
authors with a voice of their own who
help a totally coherent conversation
lasting more than 40 years and this
conversation extend far beyond the pages
of this book exhibitions and photographs
to powerful vehicles for conveying their
ideas together with the writings for
sure during the early emergent and
reflective periods of their career
opportunities for asking questions and
finding answers back and forth because
now you like to quote its inventive
architect refuse his energy by
connections he sees and I would like to
add that the connections he sees in the
space between C thank you very much
anything my introduction I am obviously
not a Smith sense expert but it's a
great pleasure to be among them
and delighted to be here tonight my view
is that of an outsider who has studied
the procurement and design of The
Economist's Plaza within a larger
research project on public spaces in
London post-war and now at the
University of Westminster in the case of
The Economist Plaza we were particularly
interested in the smith's ins ideas
about emptiness as they relate to the
plaza itself and to their urbanism as a
whole so following on from Max for
soldados comments about the space in
between here are a few more almost 40
years ago in 1976 Allison and Peter
Smithson stood in this same room and
gave a joint joint talk entitled the
charged void urban form
the phrase itself charged for it may
seem simply a provocative contradiction
in terms
an emptiness that's full full of what
but when it's forced to consider it it
sticks in the mind is an urban idea full
of possibilities the plaza of the
economist is plinth raised half a story
above a street level to accommodate the
parking underneath this raising
introduces an uncertainty into the
reading of the space by pedestrians is
one allowed in there or not is it a
square a passage or a private precinct
in both its abstract organizational idea
and in its particular architectural
expression it's ambiguous this is no bad
thing if the space was intended to be
semi-private but the clients The
Economist newspaper intended this
opening up of the perimeter block a
traditional perimeter block which you
can see in the left there and you just
see the very thin red line around it the
opening of this was supposed to be a
civic gesture a gift to the city and
more self-interested Li more likely to
win planning permission than the popular
slab and podium which had taken over and
post-war office development with the
podium taking up all the site if one
ventures onto the plaza there aren't
many visual cues or amenities to
encourage lingering there is one
beautiful stone bench to sit on and no
cafes or stands just to slow you or stop
you for the Smiths things however
emptiness was an important urban quality
and closely tied to their thinking about
mobility and flexibility as Alison
Smithson wrote for a cognitive society
one would be would be in control of its
direction spaces need to be calm
obeying even a little empty today
instant crowds
Dirigo to reassure private investors
their money has been well spent and
income will flow in this 1976 lecture
here
Alison Smithson observed people that
have become inured to overcrowding both
the needs of human use and a system's
growth however demands space more elbow
room if the movement systems of the next
half century are not to jostle with
buildings this of causes they're part of
their hub stud competition entry from
1957 there are two ideas in this
quotation room for calm and room for
growth suggesting the deliberate
construction of parts of cities that are
in their words scattered and low-density
the accompanying idea of emptiness
wasn't universally understood however
contemporaneous critical reception of
the plaza often interpreted the empty as
the incomplete this is Ian now in 1964
here in an era of pedestrian precincts
which nobody uses is a speed space well
people will crowd into naturally it
deserves all the kiosks and cafes that
the economies can bear to see on the
plaza and if it then made a lot of money
it would be a just reward for not having
tried to cram this site with lateral
area in other words the reward for
leaving the plaza empty of build program
is to see it fill up with bill program
cafes and kiosks and with people of
course there are in fact drawings of the
plaza by the Smiths ins dated March 1963
showing just such a kiosk in the lobby
of the bank building and had it been
pursued it might have jump-started the
appropriation of the plaza by the public
for better or worse the idea of
co-production
of public space dominates today this
refers to its production both by its
makers and by its users with users
bringing a space fully into being
completing its intention to be public if
this is the case and it's hard to gain
saying this model again say this model
then the Economist Plaza isn't fully
complete because not fully used more
generally there is lingering doubts over
the appropriateness of emptiness in a
public space emptiness in such a context
can create an impression of abandonment
and feelings that the void charged with
threat rather than in something more
positive The Economist Plaza however
avoids this by being intimately scaled
and continuously watched over by the
staff on the ground floors of the
buildings entered on the podium but this
doesn't mean that emptiness per se is a
virtue it has to be very carefully
calibrated first by the designer and
then by the manager of the space space
by space but nor is emptiness
automatically a problem either Cafe
Society is merely one form of use
emptiness encourages other less anodyne
activities see how many of you recognize
us
[Music]
[Music]
it's the rather mysterious opening
sequence to Antonioni's blow up for 1966
starring the comments browser thank you
[Music]
I'm Deb from the earth oh and very happy
to be here Deborah thank you for the
invite I wanted to use the opportunity
to explain why publications were so
important for dismisses and why maybe
publications are also so important for
architecture right because dismissals
next to making buildings they also made
a lot of publications and especially
elephants missing I think had a real
inspiration ambition to become a writer
a novelist
she isn't produced a novel and as Max
already mentioned in the archive in a
family archive this or this well not a
whole shelf maybe but there's there's a
series of of unpublished manuscripts and
she had a very special way of thinking
how to develop a new kind of novel
official enough over texts and visual
documentation was being combined now you
may think well publications are
important for architects many architects
use publications as let's say an
amplifier to propagate their work but I
think for this business was really
different in that sense and their love
for making books also came about that
when you think that's when they didn't
have a job or jobs for halt it's they
rather for going out to acquire jobs
they would make books like the special
issue for the heroic period of modern
architecture that was done and finalized
when the job for a British Embassy in
Brasilia stopped for instance so rather
than trying to bring in a new job and
new work all the efforts in energy went
into debt book and I think also in the
book to say to use the art
also very important book a wonderful
book actually so why are publications so
important for dismissals and maybe also
for us and they write and speak about it
themselves this is constant acts of
reflection on what they're doing has
speculation and maybe that's also why
some people find them too self-conscious
I think some colleague architects don't
like that they're over there as many as
oh also within T 10 family itself saying
well dismisses are always writing their
own history in a way they are right
because when you think of the hero
period of modern architecture they
explain his wife so important for them
they want to position them themselves in
a proper tradition of knowledge and
creativity and in the hero period they
write the modern architecture tradition
is the rock on which we stand and from
that firm position they want to arrive
at their own inventions and publications
are a tool to arrive at these inventions
so in some of their books they write
they write like proper students like
always learning always absorbing so
there's also a touch of the Dylan test
which they cherish because you'll find a
lot of thing it's about curiosity and
there's also one thing that's very
important to mention here I think that
the publications are a way to transfer
ideas books they say there are like
cultural parcels that are sent out into
the world and this is something that
Ellison for herself discovered when she
was a teenager in Edinburgh and I think
one of her aunt's enter Ladies Home
Journal from America
and that was like a gift to her from
another world in the days of the war but
they also talk about the way
publications are translated or the way
publications mini scripts in particular
also the ones from the Renaissance are
finally published many centuries later
unwrapped as a message from another
world in another time so books enable
architecture to travel across continents
across countries across cultures and
across time is very important and books
often although they seem sometimes
stuffy and desolate they travel through
time in that sense also to us also these
men are scripts I would say the charge
void - Chris because the first volume
was published about seven years after
Alison died right and Ellison started to
work on that monographic exercise of
their own work and when the second
volume was published Peter had died
already two years and then this year or
last year I don't know exactly finally
the third form came around so you see
there is a delay and as a which is
necessary I think to look at the books
in fresh again and also just now we
discussed whenever you take up a book
after a while and you have been reading
it first and when you pick it up again
you you discover new things and you
think what what's that really there it
didn't I see it before it's also because
you yourself changes I'm working with
other questions now and as a last remark
maybe why publications are so imported
also esss a way to rethink publications
themselves and rethink architectural IDs
the charge for tis three volumes in the
first is architecture the second is
urbanism the third one is called the
space between as if it's the space
between architecture and urbanism maybe
it's also
of texts and it's a very particular
selection of text if you notice missins
writings as if they were working on a
new book again and it's not but it's
more it's even differently like that
because first I thought okay they're you
because I was looking again at these
books from rereading them first year for
of course the architecture party here a
logic and then you have the herbalist
party yeah okay there's also not in fact
the same projects occur in the same
books so it's not that straightforward
it's as if the second volume is actually
commenting and reflecting upon the
projects in the first volume and with
the third for you we have the same
situation so you what you're looking at
it is a continuous let's say
regenerative principle shifting of the
perspective that I think is productive
in the sense of bringing new IDs teasing
the mouths and it's one of the ways one
of the reasons are really yeah I've got
myself interesting dismisses I think
it's still yeah very inspiring and
always worthwhile to pick up a book by
dismisses that's what I wanted to bring
thank you I just wanted to say remember
if you have to go early do stop and pick
up a book because I have to say I am
person who was talking with Dirk just
beforehand and I've been carrying this
book since the summer and I've read it
in various places on airplanes trains at
home and it is a different book every
time you open it it really is and I
think it was for me the first time that
I had read Allison and Peter's work and
found this poetry that I think is under
the surface all the time in their work
and I don't know there's a kind of an
emotional connection in this book that I
didn't find perhaps so much in the first
two but then of course I didn't have the
privilege of getting snow the Smithson's
work so much when I read the first
so it is definitely a case that it's
constantly evolving I was just going to
sort of get the ball rolling maybe by
asking you to sort of comment on some of
the things each other said I mean for
example max was getting very animated
when susana showed the movie from Antoni
another blow up you were also very
animated when Anna was talking about
taking another look and you know this
sort of complementary connections I
don't know if you any reflections on
what you hear from the contributors - no
I was I was of course I was already
four-month I'm thinking about that film
do you talk because of I think I think
it's interesting to understand when to
think again on the period when the
gladsome was realized it was in the time
when the young people were conquering
the street some in the end of the 60s
you know you know what happened I mean
you know so so the young people
discovered that they had their own right
in the public space and I don't know and
and one of the things I know that is
there was always people sitting on the
stairs
in this time yes the stairs were because
the youth were hanging on the streets
you know you were not you had no not to
do a business you know life it was not
running and that's why you asked what I
did but then the plaza was really a
place where anyway the stairs were very
important in that sense and so of course
and I was thinking about the form of it
because of there is a ramp cost yeah
the ramp is very interesting why is
there the ramp and so Antonioni who has
been an architect educated as
that's very important found this place I
think for this film to introduce because
it is about young people in Liberia I
think that's what I when you were lucky
I said yeah this was in that time
perhaps Austin was it it was still an
elevated place which made itself loose
from that say the business of the three
but in that sense there was a connection
still in activity it's interesting you
mentioned the cinematic connection of
him being an architect
yeah he's but also derek jarman was
known in the 60s to take friends when
they were visiting in london there to
show them so it's quite interesting I
just read that recently somebody sent me
an article in The New York Times from
them from about ten years ago of
somebody relating how when they came to
London as a student in the 60s they were
taken there by German and so there must
have been this kinetic impulse when you
were there that was evident to people on
their first inspection or perhaps it has
many - of course many to do that because
of the arrangement of the towers so
there is a stage constant changing
perspectives when you also you know when
you go when you come to near the corners
that you certainly so there is a more
better sort of let's say a telling way
of experience space when you are on the
plaza which because let's say the
pyramid rock is broken so you certainly
look under the columns and before you
already come really to the street so
that in that sense moving through space
is quite having as an architect in a way
quite interesting instead of them having
all always these blocks where you have
the corners cut off and I think there is
even interesting now this is a
constraints associated and then the cut
of or bizarre contributing to that
because I remember that a bit dismisses
well said there was always a big sort of
fight between all when I complete this
mission in Tintin and you know but also
stole my cut corners because it was a
very conscious act to do that I think
that might be a sort of comment on my
jumping up on you I'm very curious to
know whether the younger people in the
audience are familiar anyway with the
Economist browser is it does it feature
in your lexicon of of buildings because
I find it it doesn't feature in the
young younger generations and I wonder
if it's anybody brave enough to comment
on that from the floor you can confess
if you're not dissing me a break
it doesn't as much as it should so it's
a mentioned but it's not explored to the
depth that I personally think should be
explored so we you trained here no no
Kingston University so it is their work
is something that we explore during
teaching but it's I guess with any
university yeah you have a certain
amount of time and then you have to
explore such a broad range of architects
and work then you just drop names and
then it's up to students to explore it's
extraordinary isn't it when a resource
like this is within touching distance
we're getting very familiar now because
we're on site with the Economist Plaza
and we're regularly fielding European
students coming on a very regular basis
in fact the client is a trained
architect from Switzerland and he
himself came to the economist Plaza and
was taught about the spaces maybe
fifteen years ago
but sorry gentlemen here wanted to say
something to do thank you I think it
brings up while numerous concepts in my
thoughts and experience I mean first of
all I remember at the a at the time it
was a space is political no one's
mentioned that and I'm very aware of how
it may just be me but I have met with
numerous people who say the world's
incredibly unbalanced unprecedented
unbalanced at present and with this in
mind you know the fact that space is
political and in the sixties one had the
freedom to occupy it without any
commercial tea I think is relevant
I'm also remind you know that
Shakespeare said you know the world's a
stage you know and we're all actors
playing our part and I think that's
quite interesting as well because you
have the freedom I'm reminded of my
visits to Dennis for example and I love
I actually love empty alleyways and
pedestrian groups through urban spaces I
think it's wonderful because it allows
the opportunity for meeting sitting
reflecting reading listening and all
those other things which I think we are
forgetting in this mad rush to consume
all the time so the other thing I just
wanted to bring in was the idea of I
didn't have even heard of
seagull I'm very very taken when I
discovered it in New York
there's a school he's dead now but a
philosopher and he believed very much in
the coming together of polarities when
polarities come together with a certain
man contention and are resolving their
polarities with the communication there
that is the production of a beautiful
thing
it's his definition of trying to define
what really true art is it's the coming
together of two unresolved polarities
and I think that's extremely interesting
as well now the negative and positive
spaces and so it goes on you know I just
thought no one anymore it was too much I
was you know I was only thinking about
because the the economists class has in
fact a no when you walk I have to it's
very same time was in Paris before yeah
and then I once again walked inside
young man was it is fashion man that is
the plus divorce in the mother no I mean
the that little square where which is so
silent in the midnight this in San Simon
is another square where which it is
let's say industry blocks and it is then
there are two little alleys go into a
very quiet place which is effective
public place everybody can go there but
no in fact only the recuse ones go there
I mean
the point is perhaps you should also
make phrases for those who are curious
it's set up for everybody in this engine
and so in a certain sense that the
economists that is half private and
private and public sort of feeling but
you'll really feel and you walk there
it's a good thing because of that
ambiguity were talking about so that for
those who are curious they go there and
then they experience something which I
don't know what it really is and I think
this is and of course the photo it's
very you have to really look very well
at the photographs which are making like
Michael Carr pity a new photograph the
economists in in that way so that the
people who are there rather they are
walking mr. heads on top or spend
expenses it's always a sort of like they
are a sort of stranger in that space
those photographs are really expressed
that I feel do you know the photographs
of the economic famous further work of
beating which part sort of iconic
photographs of the economists in a
certain way but and I would he feel
about the representation of the use of
photography and imagery I mean building
on that point I think that they were
using all media as the opportunities to
build were faith you they were using
every media yes just press they all
thinking at their own position about
architecture all the photographs I
brought also that one of Allison and
Peter and Nigel Henderson and Pilate
sitting in the middle of the street in
the night that was it is also very
meaningful now in the 1950s sitting in
the middle of the street using the
street as a living room just having a
conversation and I think that also for
example that use of the of the public
space from the beginning was very
conscious on the work because I think
that almost in every projects there is
like an empty space that everyone can
use in their own way they took sometimes
now that the book this book of the space
between is a gift but I think that also
all these spaces between all these voids
all these empty spaces are also a gift
for the city for the community for the
family if it is a house but there is
always undetermined that the people who
is going to inhabit it can use it in
different ways but it is not about
something completely undetermined no
like open space and nothing happens is I
think is the magic point that that of
the max was talking about the distance
and the relation no it's not only about
the distance and having a huge space
like an undetermined multifunctional
space it's not about that it's like
completely determine but at the same
time is possible to use it in many
different ways I think that I find that
really magical and when I know when I'm
designing my own practice we are always
looking for that how to design and not
leaving things open but at the same time
in the place for inhabiting for for make
a wrong thing for every inherited so and
the economies plus I think it's like
masterpiece for good yeah it's very cool
what about you were raising this point
at the end about the kind of perspective
that writing brings of passing on a
reflection on a previous generation and
in in the book in Max's compilation
there is a piece about the idea of
generations and what you get from back
so what what do you what do you find
yourself thinking it is the gift from
this book yeah for today big question
yeah well I
well maybe I'm really worried in that
sense so I'm now here in London for a
couple of months here as this watch is
federal and you get to know the city
better and what's happening here with
breakfast and hours in crisis cetera and
you start to realize that a position
like the ones of dismissals for
architects today is very tough and very
difficult and not just for dismissals
but in the sense of when you talk about
room for calm room for reflection room
for allowing to look around you room for
allowing to weigh several options and
alternatives let's say so there's a like
real room for choice to make your own
choices rather than a monetized sort of
society that you have today so each
little bit of public space today is
being monetized at the moment but it's
also happening in schools I think at the
moment so so room for reflection and
room to think is really crucial and you
wonder is it really allowed to be these
days so in that sense this this book is
very idiosyncratic almost wrong regard
is being demolished instead of 200
houses have to be 1500 houses which may
be a fair thing to do in these days but
you wonder what is left for other ways
of being other kind of urban spaces is
it only about yeah this machine of
making things into money which which and
and and in that sense the book is
idiosyncratic and very precious but I
really wonder where what sort of
or what sort of effect it might have
today and really yeah I hope I mean I
sort of I find they weren't very
galvanizing because before we started
working on this project my studio our
motto is the city is our client yeah
because we find ourselves always having
to work between people with the money
and people we want to help and the kind
of world in between and I think you know
particularly in a time when even
exhibitions and publications here at the
AAA are under a challenge because of
money
we need these spaces for ideas and we
need we need all of these manic I mean
what was so poignant about hearing you
talk about these other manuscripts is
just it makes me very positive to know
that there's more to come we can get
some strength from because it makes you
feel less lonely as a practitioner
particularly talking to susana when I
started on this project we were looking
at this conundrum of everybody will be
saying that restoring and refurbishing
The Economist's is about the money well
it's not about the money it's about the
economists Plaza and what it can be it's
any kind of active architecture is paid
for by money any occupier in the city is
engaged in exchange but listening it to
having this amazing conversation with
Susana when she got out these original
minutes from meetings with Alison and
Peter and the client and this amazing
guy Morris Babb this other architect on
the economist Plaza that we don't know
about who was employed who was the
economists architect and he was the kind
of grown-up architect who was placed in
between the young architect and the city
to make sure the economists got this
fiery fantastic passionate architecture
but he acted as a kind of negotiator and
he's their critic in a crit like you
know student crit and he eviscerates the
first distillation it's really it's
quite interesting he says the buildings
are too close together you you can't
serve
says you know the building that the
tower was substantially larger and was
pushed much closer to the bench the
famous bench but he says I'm on their
side
and he helped support the reduction in
the size of the tower so that the public
space flourishes and that I wouldn't
know this if it were the Susanna's works
really amazing seeing that has young
architects coming through the
competition process being open to listen
to other architects other pressing I
mean it was amazing just I think they
talked in the book here you know about
the complexities of making urban and
architectural space the Susanna's
research you can find it online he's
really interesting just to see them you
know firsthand grappling with the
realities and commercial imperatives
that planning imperatives and still
getting this generosity which i think is
still possible today if you have
determined commitment I mean this was a
this is paid for by private money this
was not a state project lit columnist
yeah okay and it's probably worth saying
too it was it's probably one of the
first examples of privately owned public
space it's still privately owned but he
was going on post-war as well it just
wasn't the dominant mode of procurement
it was certainly going on but perhaps
because the dominant mode was state
procurement and a general assumption was
that the state would pay for the public
round and therefore didn't have to earn
its keep in the same way private
investors felt probably more civic
minded
seems fantastically successful
successful yes should we open it up to
some questions from the floor did you
want to a client uses a lot of expensive
real estate as just space they're also
projecting the power in doing those oh
yeah so a powerful thing in the sequel
building was look how great we are and
having philosoph to enjoy this building
okay well that's also building codes if
you want to get that high then you have
to get that far back from having
yourself because the you ziggurats in
new york to get around that and if you
look at the buildings left and right of
the season they fill the space so it's
Leslie Martin I mean I again I'm a
follower of Leslie Martin's work again
when I was at a you don't he was saying
you don't need to have these talks in
fact because with the tall blocks you
need more space around and then it
creates other problems like micro
climates and things like that you have
to guard to used to load those tall
blocks there but you can actually get
the similar densities by building lesser
stories but Moto's together I mean I'm
thinking you know how it's been question
2 to compare the density of say Paris
where people actually living in the
center of Paris and you know
no Lava Falls and they compared it with
London and and I having lived in the
States
I'm very aware that this center of
cities become uninhabited really at
night and you know I think there's a
there's a whole lot of things that come
into this you know I like the fact that
this economist wasn't a powerful space
like the secret but it was perhaps
emulating the alleyways of London this
is this is the desire lines you know
people going across and I think that's
really valid yeah come on Maxie please I
was so I was trying to think about first
of all this talk you know I mentioned
take the instance in school is a very
central building as we might remember
because the question of the materiality
is talking about the public building the
materiality of how the steel becomes
essential material not only in its form
with you might know that even they use
steel because of the Korean War in such
a way that they passed through the so
they passed through this short official
a senior official loss of how much they
still could fully we called it in Dutch
I mean there was an interesting whole
story about how this still first of all
was not available so much because of
security role and things like that but
so I think also the we can also talk
about the the e-commerce s building how
how they use the materials in the cities
so that you know the same story that the
material should be clean I think that's
a very interesting thing also of the
economists building that it and the
other thing you were referring to a
famous essay they wrote the problem and
the root which is with the elbow room
and so I have understood when the song
was a recon
certain part of the economies that Peter
was not at all upset because if because
of this idea that you know that we made
something which gives the possibility to
change in fact and perhaps losing some
of the architectural corners they were
putting in it but by erasing it let's
say as pavilions which their own that's
a internal structure which was possible
it gave the possibility to in the
outside space to that model called the
elbow that you have you make yourself
possibilities for change I think there's
still one of the issues I think it's
interesting because of the using of the
constipation and the root system and of
course they were agreeing against the
metabolic who who made this immense
structures where they suggest change but
nothing could be changed and was no
elbow room so that was one of them so
I'm so I think what you are doing he
will not agree about it and there's so
people don't know Roberta you know
something I have a question that has to
do with technology in that I wanted that
what are the effective that the current
is that we have available today on the
charts point whether we're talking about
the buildings all we're talking about
writings so for instance students don't
go to the economist building because
they google it
and it's a way of going there somehow or
done by certain books bill I don't come
to the lecture tonight because they
watch it online so what are the effect
of these technologies on the concept of
space and this missions have given us I
[Music]
guess you have to make something good
maybe digitally only what do you think
duck I you you that it's not to go you
can only well with picking up other
discussions we had it's so funny that we
had various myths and events one after
another not related to either the
debates on the economists are all hype
around robot cars but it's just
happening in various places both the
DoCoMo event was a wonderful event with
many many young architects actually it's
quite surprising and now here so yeah I
think it's it's ridiculous to think that
technology will replace the body I mean
you lose of course something is of
course why people are so anxious about
these technologies taking over because
we will lose things qualities etcetera
and one of the great things of
dismissals in their work is that there
is a very different approach to how you
experience space in urban space then
let's say for instance the Bell front
tower very close to Roboto Gardens which
is done by Goldfinger is also very nice
building but there's a difference there
and I was there with Al Arab elk in
today who was so kind to organise a
visit to someone who was living there
nice Bangladeshi lady and so my claim
would be that a bell from Thai will be
enlisted being safe rescued is easy yes
and it has a clearly recognizable like
iconic status as an architectural
language it has a gestalt
you could say from it all theory that
aesthetic theory or as Roman gardens or
The Economist they don't have a gestalt
like that they don't have a kind of easy
accessible language they try to avoid
you can never ever really experience the
economists or Robert Gardens as a whole
as you
fight peas or SS you move around Robin
Hood gardens and the garden the
landscaping around you the building
changes all the time and the skin and
the milliliters or the verticals it's
the perspective always shifts there and
you can only experience it when you are
there me I don't think you can
experience this on a Google screen egg
maybe with the new fear our technology
we definitely going into a vr cave and
you can have all senses attached to your
body too but I think it's a shame you
didn't show your photographs you took
today because work has no maybe
afterwards you can ask to show these
pictures inner being in an apartment in
voluminous state gardens and I think
they're the role of Technology is
fantastic because it makes you realize
how tragic yeah the scale of this was
because people look very very happy in
their homes and it seems just a
financial equation but I mean what do
others want to talk about the technology
question yeah I was just trying to
reflect up on this and I think that
Google allows these connections to
establish new and new connections now
with the internet you have everything on
your hand so you need to decide what
connect with that so what we charge your
references which are do new connections
because you have all the information I
think that right now maybe when they
were practicing they are in the book it
appears references to two places that
they were close to them like hem reach
or path or whatever but they also talk
about Garcia they talk about Japan and
so on but at this moment I think that
you need experience for sure but also
you can have like different you know
things of what's going on so you can
make your own connections now you can
make your own rotations I think that
although all the information is there
the important thing is the connections
you make
no information is it probably said that
is only the letter formation about the
surface yeah it is and the problem of
course the Argos is that it is a layered
thing so how the surface is made from
things like that so does that say the
problem of that the system of the
columns and the economists how that they
are very complex very complex component
because they also include the
ventilation and things like that which
is all to do with materiality and with
with this comfort and things like that
you make architectures comfort that's in
different sort of feelings that you feel
somewhere what you should feel at the
iron bank law says the bank is and
although we making Bank it is a bank and
houses a house and you should really
know by the architectural way I was
treating light and things like that that
they are the things and so that's why I
think it's the point is that you should
not all only look at go there to feel
for sure but also to understand drawings
and what I know that students can't look
draw eyes anymore
I think that the problem right now is a
program of images I mean there is no one
that the superficial I think they would
have found internet fascinating
disseminating their ideas
interesting on the Internet Oh potatoes
got Internet like they let's say I like
Ellen started to read books or something
say because when you have a clear thing
what you want then you will find the
things on internet so you it is not a
question off the hook yeah how do you
call the scanning neighbors word for it
that you that you use follow the things
in the no that's no that's a tour it's
all the material so you first have to
know I have imported a what you want to
find by in certain way you know it you
know that's actually what you find that
things so that that's why I mean there
is this amazing book called I'm not
making advertises for the matter speeds
there is this amazing public called for
the sky is it looking for the sky
it's about and it is about and excites
how they how they are how they are how
they are let's say play made place it's
mostly about the ground the treatment of
the ground for in antique places yeah
and so what this missions did they do
with two things
they went there to there's an immense
set of photographs made and they found
out of it at the same time this Ellison
went to the library and was looking for
all sorts of texts by written by people
from the period describing what they
experienced so I mean they saw the
materiality felt by themselves now and
how these people didn't and that book is
I think it's an amazing book which which
were
so that that's all there to to complete
different things which and then brought
together as a collage so for you to go
into it because yourself you also have
to go into the text to really think what
they said what is happening and it's mr.
own photographs I think because photo la
I mean the photographs are very
important blue they've had a certain way
of photographing let's say B side is
just aside from what is really about
yeah but so that's why they don't and
there are many photographs of tell them
well with that with that call to arms to
get up and explore the city and I'm
looking at my clock and it's five past
8:00 so I'm going to draw things to a
conclusion maybe we're just with and
invite everybody to have a look at the
book to have a drink as well and to
converse with the fantastic panelists I
was just going to say I think what's
interesting about the discussion this
evening it's been a lot about binary
relations of and of course it all starts
with Allison and Peter but I think
what's brilliant about that the trilogy
that's come out is it I think it
captures more for my understanding this
idea that there's a discourse between
more than two things is what the city is
about it's not good it's not bad it's
much more entangled and complicated than
that and I think I just like to say a
huge thank you to these wonderful
panelists that have come a long way to
be here
so thank you for your attention
[Applause]
