hi everyone and thank you for coming
this evening to the final lecture in the
a xx 100 series in our centenary year
celebrating a hundred years of women at
the AAA I'm Manny J Verghese I'm the
curator of the public program and I'm
also a member of the a xx 100 steering
committee together with Eleanor gone
here in the front row and as you
probably know by now
a xx 100 aims not only to celebrate the
contribution of a women over the last
100 years but also to serve as a
catalyst for a wider discussion of about
women in architecture and it's a
multimedia project that culminated this
term with a major international
conference a collection of historical
and critical writing and a big
exhibition that you can see across the
way in the gallery as well as upstairs
that closes in Saturday so if you've not
seen it yet I encourage you to go now
and but just then moving to tonight's
event we're delighted to host this
conversation on the architecture of
family between architects a man a man
Murphy and geographer melissa fernandez
and they've each been looking at the
social structures of family and their
spatial implications across very
different contexts through the lens
provided by their respective disciplines
governance through housing in iran is
the focus of salmon A's PhD here at the
AAA and the ways in which women adapt
and assimilate their homes in their
day-to-day practices of dwelling and
Melissa's research has looked at the
transformation of social housing regimes
in Puerto Rico and in Brazil and tonight
she's gonna focus mainly on Puerto Rico
but she's happy to discuss her work in
Brazil she said during the discussion
there follows so they'll each to do
short presentations and then we'll
follow that with a conversation that's
chaired by Leopold Lambert who's the
editor-in-chief of the Phenom beulas
magazine and that's for sale after the
lecture in the South cetera room and
there's also going to be some drinks or
encourage you all to stick around and
have some conversation with us for them
and both Melissa and salmon a have
contributed to the finalists in the past
so you can buy there the issues they
contributed to as well as the current
one and anyway so to briefly introduce
tonight's speakers Melissa Fernandez is
a lecturer in urban futures at Lancaster
University her workforce focuses on the
social material home as a critical realm
of inquiry where historical desires
everyday life and future aspirations
intersect summon a mafia is an architect
and researcher based between the UK and
Iran she's a PhD candidate as I
mentioned at the AAA and a research
fellow at forensic architecture and in
her work she examines natural
environments and realms of domesticity
as apparatuses of governance and Leopold
amber is an architect and as I mentioned
as well also editor-in-chief of the
Phenom bolused which is a print online
magazine and podcast dedicated to the
politics of space and bodies he's the
author of three books and many articles
about the intrinsic violence of
architecture and its necessary political
instrumentalization
in particular in Palestine and in the
French colonial and postcolonial space
so before hand over to Melissa I just
wanted everyone to join me in welcoming
the three of them today
thank you very very much for this very
kind invitation I'm really really happy
to be here especially that this is a
Women's Forum women series and a
celebration of women in architecture I'm
not an architect myself I wish I were
but I'm just really honored to have been
invited so thank you right so I have
about 15 minutes you might want to keep
me to time I'm gonna be reading so
hopefully I will keep the time what I
want to do in these 15 minutes is to
propose some ideas about the social
architecture of family in relation to
the work that I've done in Puerto Rico
and as was mentioned I've worked in Rio
de Janeiro as well but I'm not going to
be speaking to that happy to discuss it
afterwards what I want to do is think
about how family forms and family
typology ZAR deeply entangled in the
production manifestations and imagery of
housing spaces so to give you a very
brief background about the context in
which I'm speaking in San Juan Puerto
Rico I looked primarily at a
contemporary case of social housing
high-rise that is called las gladiolas
that you see here in the bottom that was
threatened with demolition and
displacement and this is Leslie Ana's
again who's mainly women residents were
also involved in multiple sites of
activism including a class-action
lawsuit against the Housing Authority
and in many case in many ways sorry this
case was not unlike but now emblematic
battles that we've seen waged here in
London for those of you who are familiar
in places like the Aylesbury or places
like the hay gate estate so I was
interested in the residential struggle
for sure and I studied the residential
struggle in depth but I framed that
struggle as part of a longer history of
what I called other which was part and
parcel of colonial hierarchies and urban
development therefore I was also working
very deeply in the archives trying to
understand some of the historical
colonial conditions that had impacted
the production but also this desire that
was there to destroy the modernist
social housing spaces and what I learned
amongst many other things was that in
the production of these housing
topologies and
their suburban counterpart which I'll
discuss today as well
these were inevitably tied to the
construction of the so-called great
Puerto Rican family this is a concept
that was actually included in policy at
the time but in order to understand this
kind of social architecture of the so
called great puerto rican family and how
it seeps into what our current familial
ideations within the nation i think we
need to take a step back and look at
this concept of cultural nationalism
basically cultural nationalism emerged
and was nurtured as a concept right
around the time where puerto rico status
as a commonwealth was being developed
also as a political concept and a
practice and during that time the
islands creole and creole means kind of
spanish to sending white intellectuals
of the time we're trying to strike a
deal with the americans to renegotiate
the islands fully colonial status at
that time and turn it into what some
call the light colony which it is today
and and that's obviously very debatable
whether it's a light colony today and in
order to convince people that this kind
of arrangement was a good thing
cultural reappraisal z' of the nation
and of puerto rican identity were
mobilized in two key ways so firstly a
number of these very paradoxical
policies were put in place that required
islanders to on the one hand preserve
their cultural identity as puerto rican
so they had to preserve their language
they had to celebrate their local values
their customs that were seen as very
very distinct from the US but at the
same time they had to deepen their
political and economic ties to the US so
interestingly they kind of managed to
produce this fervor around a collective
cultural sense of puerto rican identity
at the same time that there was no
political independence or economic
autonomy and that kind of continues
until today and the second way was i'm
by embracing within these cultural rio
whistles the three supposin roots of
Puerto Rican identity and again these
ideas continue until today one of those
roots was the Taino or the indigenous
Indians of the island the second was the
Ribeiro which is this emblematic
masculine figure of a noble Highland
peasant of supposedly European origin
and that's the figure that it's the kind
of most romantic version of a pure
Puerto Rican and then the third is the
African and the idea behind this was to
create an image of Puerto Rico and
Puerto Ricans as a cultural amalgam of
kind of conflict less harmony and
integration where we were all this one
big great family and that is in Spanish
la grande familia por Torre Kenya so
this cultural and political family is
very much founded on this myth of racial
democracy or the supposed absence of
racial prejudice even though what
existed in fact was an ideology of white
supremacy and black inferiority and
that's a kind of racial prejudice that
is expressed still today in myriad
cultural forms that are both explicit
and subtle so I wanna sorry just to kind
of bear that in mind on what I want to
turn to now in the context of this very
particular kind of American colonialism
that exists in Puerto Rico is to think
about the modern Western family and how
that was constructed alongside concepts
of home ownership and by extension the
stigmatization of other kinds of housing
tenures and I'm gonna expand on this in
relation specifically to the suburban
and social housing typology that took
shape more or less contemporaneously in
Puerto Rico's post-world War two ERA and
were the constructions of homes as
materiality and representations and
colonialist thinking and American
imaginaries of space and morality all of
these things together influenced the
social and material creation of our the
islands kind of urban and suburban order
sorry I didn't show that one so we can
start with this image and what you see
here comes from a document that was
produced in the 19th
fifties by the Puerto Rican government's
housing investigation board which
doesn't exist anymore portraying a
typical North American uniformly er
suburban home as a scientific reference
point through which to speak about the
islands emerging idealized home which
was also suburban in character and
amongst other things that this report
said it said that it should be both
close to the center and embedded in an
ambience of quietness and stillness it
should have white enough free spaces for
future expansion and from which to
isolate the household conveniently with
trees so as to serve the rural touch and
give feelings of exclusivity the color
and vegetation of the immediate
surroundings should be taking into
account to generate a sense of amplitude
and construction materials like plywood
and masonite should be simple and
inexpensive so the specification here of
materiality and of an environmental
atmosphere were key right because they
allowed the government to combine what
was understood at that time which was a
period of rapid industrialization what
was understood to be the rural migrant
dream of access to a very modern urban
life without losing this kind of little
piece of land of the rural mountains
where they had previously lived and we
see a very similar kind of message
repeated here and this was an
educational strip that was produced by
the Planning Board in the 1960s where
they were likening home ownership of
freestanding suburban homes not only to
personal satisfaction but also to this
national project of modernization and we
see here on the right-hand side the kind
of white Criollo men who had dominated
the dom the top-down institutional urban
planning board that originated actually
in the 1940s so they'd been around
already for about 20 years then leading
the way into this kind of modern
urbanity
and what you see here on the left is a
literal kind of biblical Noah's Ark
march towards progress with the u.s.
space shuttle delivering them towards
this progress and you can see the racial
triad actually of this great Puerto
Rican family here through the depiction
of three particular figures in this line
of people so the shuttle itself carries
this indigenous name
of the island Bodine King not Puerto
Rico the sound of the local frog Koki is
sounding in the background so there is a
kind of reference there to the mountains
but there's also a few men that
represent the Ribeiro
at the back of the line with that hat
and then finally have a single black man
at the end of the line so this visual
discourse combines the cultural
nationalism that I described earlier
with notions of American Progress and
crucially it also involves gendered
images of middle-class decency that were
supporting this kind of development with
a few demure early dressed women on the
left and the wife that's supporting her
city planner husband on the right so
here we can see gender race and the
culture of urban order literally drawn
out and we can see the concrete and
tangling of internal colonialism the
politics of space production and housing
provision all materialized in this kind
of singular goal of a suburban family
home tied to the mythical imaginary
American Way of life but in addition to
owning a home homeowners were also meant
to improve them right so here we have
some images from the puerto rican
magazine boy also from the 1960s that
said that private properties must be
improved because quote
growing families required by your houses
and quote more spaces necessary for a
more comfortable life and the kinds of
improvement projects that were promoted
here included and I'm only really
quoting the most kind of gendered
undertones the ones that had the most
entered undertones quote preparing a
store shed in the patio including an
apartment for grandparents letting your
kids have a room adding a room to work
on carpentry in addition to this I found
other planning board documents that
dated back to the 1950s that noted quote
the family has to be able to live up to
the standards of the housing itself it's
account with the means with which to
improve it so as to make it evolve
so this responded actually to an
official policy at that time of the
Housing Authority agency that private
property was an investment that
protected families futures through
inheritance that is to say that the
success and the economic
progress of this idealized family had to
manifest itself through not just the
purchase but also the continuous care
and the physical evolution of the
individual home and the residential
design that was proposed to guarantee
this kind of domestic bliss was based
very much on the American home sweet
home model and according to traditional
social parameters and imperatives of
family life so in these documents you
find allusions to rooms that are meant
to be for rest kitchens that are meant
to be for the female head of household
and hallways that are meant to be for
privacy etc so within Puerto Rico's
colonial context this responded not just
to the social transformations that were
happening at the time which were
definitely happening particularly around
issues of gender and work but also to
the growing moral and saya T regarding
dark poor bodies that would live inside
these new suburbs that were being
created specifically during this time as
I mentioned of industrialization and
mass migration from rural to urban areas
the discourse of the so called problem
of slums emerged alongside the solution
of public housing and the figure the
racialized demon mother was popularized
precisely during this time seen as
responsible through her over breeding
for the urban spectacles of poverty for
uncontrollable disorder and immorality
and I'm using words here that I found in
in official reports which needed to be
salvaged and literally kind of contained
as we see here within a public housing
structure so public housing was created
very much as a temporary measure and a
literal ladder that we see pictured here
towards home ownership of a family unit
that would extirpate the social
difficulties and the ills of an
inadequate and stigmatized slum dweller
and one of the ways that it was it would
achieve this was by placing the actual
projects next to middle-class
communities because the people from
these middle-class communities were
meant to educate to integrate and to
elevate the cultural levels of the
poorer families and so here we have an
image of a good family man as the story
denotes moving his things moving his
children and his
partner from a slum to a public housing
project the story also denotes that he
has no money and no work actually but it
doesn't matter because he has all these
other features as a good family man the
other way that public housing kind of
educated people was that it educated
women specifically orienting them on the
roles as homemakers teaching them to use
new technologies but also home economics
so the images that we see here are
images of beautification of women
ordering bodies and improving them
really in a way legitimating the
American colonial project consumers
middle class colonial project of
domesticity as the norm and reinstating
the figure of the woman as the
housekeeper the wife and the mother in
case that had been kind of missed in the
slums that preceded them so what we get
at this time is the creation of two
opposing domestic kind of family women
one is the idealized suburban white
woman straddling this hybrid line of
American Progress and suburban home
ownership with the traditional virtue of
her feminine decency and the mothering
practices also expected to improve the
nation through a nuclear and reduced
family model the other is the creation
of the aspirational public housing
residents that was firmly grounded on
the same middle ground aesthetic of the
suburban private home but underpinned
always by the stigma of the slum so a
kind of failed cultural marker but then
reappears and kind of seen sustained
still today the reputation of social
housing as a supposedly failed national
project alongside its criminalized
depictions it's really the lazy welfare
mother that is the most reviled figure
still today projected as never
surpassing her roots and therefore being
stuck reproducing an inappropriate
family model and threatening the health
of a nation by my consequence almost so
I'm just nearing the end and I wanted to
finish with by jumping really to show
you two very contemporary images of what
has been called an innovative social
housing scheme and for
Rico that to me really demonstrates the
legacy of this the header of normalcy of
the American suburban home and the young
white and middle class resident that
it's always in a way meant has has meant
to be housing so this here is a 2006
advert from a building that's called
metropolis which was getting built just
a few blocks away from the PhD site las
gladiolas that I introduced right at the
beginning so this was happening exactly
the same time that there was this huge
activist struggle about around the
demolition of towers that were not you
know were just a few stories less than
these towers but the army the argument
that was given in that case was that
residents had never really adopted the
residents that lived there originally
had come from slums and the argument was
that they never adapted to the high-rise
typology that their families never
really kind of moved out of there
in the in the stairway well that they
should have but also that they never
really understood how to live in a
high-rise this tower however was
targeting young white and wealthy
heterosexual couples right around the
same time and these were the ideal
residents that were imagined for this
new gentrifying district and the
language in this ad is of course all
about exclusivity luxury elegance
healthy sporty living and a suite of all
sorts of personal services and
conveniences that would come with it and
the racialization of the property type
ologies is very clear here particularly
when we contrast the typology of the
social housing high-rise that's right
next to this to this kind of white and
luxury high-rise and it's a kind of
whitening of luxury high-rises I would
claim but as the housing crisis hit the
developers of this building went bust
and they were bailed out actually by the
public housing authority so this was the
very first time that a luxury foreclosed
building was used for public housing but
when that transition was publicly
announced there was this massive popular
outcry by the majority of the population
it was all over the media it was very
controversial and it materialized in a
number of ways but particularly to me
interestingly through the production of
this mean that was widely circulated in
social media and to me this is a really
interesting image because
despite having that building the luxury
building in place
it's a completed disembodied image you
don't see people in it and what we see
instead are these clothes that hang from
the windows the horses the bouncy slides
and these are meant to be sufficient
markers constructed in the media of
course over the years of social housing
residents cultural difference and their
lack of discipline and class it's about
disembodied by the bad behavior or its
possibility the possibility of failure
broken social and physical architecture
combined kind of in one so this mockery
really activated long-standing stigmas
related to public housing tenants and
highlighted the long lasting cultural
unease with and fear of poverty that is
tied to the public housing family in
urban space particularly around
high-rise buildings so that's the end I
just I wanted to finish with this image
it's very very disconnected from
everything that I've been saying now but
you know it's been it was really
difficult to to write up this talk and
think about Puerto Rico and think about
the legacies of you know the historical
continuities of of housing when just a
few months ago we had hurricane maria
and the island is entirely devastated
and hundreds of thousands of people have
lost their homes either entirely or
partially and so I thought you know I
should address the dislocations of this
event and an amass out migration and the
family rupture is actually that have
resulted from it and what I find
powerful about this image is in a way
the overlay of the scales of the home so
the home here is seen as a domestic site
it's kind of a community because you can
see a house in the backs and there's
some kind of neighborhood happening to
there's of course a national homeland
signified here by the flag and the sign
of course on this wooden kind of would
be door I guess which reads in English
you may have destroyed our home but not
our spirit and family so what's
interesting is not just the layers of
the home meaning but the sense in which
families understood to endure beyond the
physical structure of the home which
sits on the same plane as as this flag
and it makes me wonder
you know what family means in this
context what new homes and national
projects will be created around
idealized normativity Zintan times of
disarray as they are now and however all
the fractures in space and social
relations will be managed and
reconstituted along similar or
dissimilar lines to the previous
racialized and gendered imaginaries of
family and progress thank you I don't
know how to follow up that was such
great talk
this was amazing and I think there's a
lot of lying that's will that I will egg
her and I think it will be a great
discussion afterward so I'm looking
forward to it what I want to do today is
to tell a story of two wolves one from
about a couple of years ago one from the
1970s one that is removed one that was
built one in the city of Isfahan another
one in the region of this fool both of
them in Iran both in a domestic units
both domestic unit that is part of the
kind of a national housing program and I
want to frame these mundane acts of
moving a wall or removing it as
signifiers of resistance local kinds and
are most definitely not talking about
grand revolutions but nevertheless firm
responses to forms of domination and I
want to begin by this image this house
and I want to begin by this space that
have kind of marked in red and I want
you to kind of and and the story that
I'm gonna tell is about this wall that
this weird wall that is half separating
the kitchen from the living room this is
the same this photo is second from the
same space so you see the space for the
kitchen in the back you see the weird
wall here and the kind of living room is
in the forefront
the woman that you see in this image is
my son she was working she had a
full-time job at this point she was an
assistant to an attorney a public
attorney she wasn't making that much
money she was herself from a
working-class family and and she was
explaining this work that she was doing
something that was more of a necessity
than something that is liberating for
her in the sense that and she was very
she felt she was telling me how she felt
very unsafe at work Misun said there
were cases of sexual assault that she
couldn't really tell anyone because it
was a public attorney office like they
were all and I think they were related
to the state somehow her bosses and also
she couldn't quit her job because she
needed the money because she needed the
money to buy a house so that she could
marry her fiance and this is her fiance
he had his name is mathie he had studied
social sciences at university but then
afterwards he couldn't really find a job
that was suited to her his degree and so
he found this weird job it wasn't really
paying well enough and so he couldn't
really buy a house with his income and
couldn't ask his father was standing on
the side because his father was also
from a working-class family he was a
cleaner and and therefore they were kind
of like dealing with this weird
situation if only they had a house both
of their problems would have been gone
always told Madison wouldn't have to
experience sexual assaults anymore
because she was given what she was
saving up for a house so she could quit
her job and she didn't have to worry
about his low income anymore because he
was already given what he was saving up
for a house and and this is this line of
thought is of course very problematic
but but I wanna I wanna invite you you
too to put yourself in their positions
and think how this could kind of make
sense right this idea that if I owned
house
then I'm suddenly part of the middle
class then I suddenly don't have to do
these things that I'm like doing as a
working class member kind of hissing and
and they were given a house the house
that he saw them standing in was a mere
house mere is a state initiated project
of housing in Iran launched in 2007 by
the former president of Iran Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad near the name of the house
and in turn the name of the project
translates English as compassion the
house was therefore to act as a gift of
a compassionate state to the working
class a gift but also its high a strong
side that entangled the residents with
the power structure to receive and to
reciprocate right now will support my
state who has given me a house there
were there was supposed to be four
million of these houses to be built not
all of them I mean 2.3 million were
built but that still has something
around 8 million individuals these
houses were built in the form of
settlements positioned far away from the
city any settlement the houses were very
similar to one another and this idea of
sameness was important in the size in
the sense that we are all given the same
gift we all kind of are in the same
position to the state the houses these
settlements had a particular morphology
in the sense that all of them were only
composed of housing there is no kind of
shared equipments that would allow a
form of a community to be formed the
sense of a common like a as in there was
no possibility of a common interest that
was not supposed to be harnessed and it
was did this the at least I mean the the
building of these shared equipment was
postponed to a later date the idea was
to just build the houses and give them
out
and these houses these settlements were
distributed in the territory nipple
check in a particular way so I'm looking
at the region of Isfahan here this is a
drawing so that you can kind of see it
bit more clearly where the city is in
the centre and there is a river that is
passing through and there is this like
small villages around this area these
are the distribution of the mere
settlements around the city the red line
here is showing the municipality the
municipal borders of the city and so all
of them were kind of positioned within a
30 minute distance from the city this is
an isochronic drawing and each contour
line is showing areas that are within
the same distance to the center and so
this red is showing the 30 minutes kind
of contour now I want to come back to
this house that I showed you earlier
there was another twist to this story to
be eligible for a mere house the
applicant had to be the breadwinner of a
family but not just any kind he had to
be a male breadwinner a son a father
husband again not all male breadwinners
could apply only those who had failed in
acquiring secured over the space of
their families through the gift of mayor
this gendered failed breadwinner could
regain his patriarchal legitimacy in the
context in among the people who were
supposed to depend on him and to deserve
a house of mere men and women had to
conform to this gender role men were to
be depended on and women to be to depend
so the architecture of this house this
gift was to secure on one hand
reciprocation the feeling of
indebtedness to the compassion of the
state and on another hand a kind of
these gender roles right and a familial
patriarchy in a way and a
it's very clear in the organization of
this house right because we have the the
kitchen were because although this is a
very small space the kitchen is not an
open kitchen in the sense that it's the
station is a space for reproductive
labour and it's performed by women and
therefore it has to be separated from
the space of the living room as in this
space of cooking is separated from the
space of being cooked for the role of
serving is separated from this role of
being served but the first thing my son
does when coming to this house is
removing this wall she argues that I
mean if she she frames it in a different
way of course she says that you know I I
always wanted to invite all of my
in-laws in my house and I told my
fiancee that you know this is such a
small space I can't really do this you
have too many family so we have to
really remove this wall and all of the
people who have this who are living in
the same apartment have and have the
same units are removing this wall and
therefore we should kind of do it right
and after that she does something else
to make sure that this space is not it's
not becoming an entirely space for
reproduction
she puts the most ornate elements of her
dowry or jaha say the bosses the China
plates the mirror all of these things
around the book it kind of like framing
this space so the space is more of a
kind of a living room than it is a
kitchen and that is her way of securing
securing the space I've looked at
several of these examples through my
research and I'm not saying
that I saw similar practices among as in
there were similarities between them no
they were quiet individuated these
practices but each one of them was a
response to a form of domination that
the residents was experiencing I would
argue so this is a case where they
didn't really have money to buy chairs
or proper church but the resident was
really she really wanted to kind of like
had this ornate thing on the wall I have
this golden curtain on the back and so
have this feeling of this kind of like
have a claim to a middle-class maybe
that she wanted to claim again the
similar case here in this case they were
from a little bit they were kind of like
an opera working class and we can see
this beautiful veteran at the back and
the woman was telling me this story
that's you know I mean usually these
veterans are showing the dowry of a
woman and she was saying that well this
is not actually my dowry this is the
stuff that I bought myself because my
dog wasn't good enough and you know a
dairy is something that represents the
class location within which a woman is
brought up so this is a gift that her
mother gives her and and it's a
representation of what was the context
that she was kind of like growing up in
but so she was saying that you know that
didn't represent Who I am now this is
who I am and I want to kind of like
reorganize my space in a way that
represents my location now Who I am I
want you if there is a little bit of
time left I wanted to kind of like come
to this another example that I want to
show from the 70s very quickly it's
different projects it's for this is
we're looking at south of Iran in this
full this is the case for industrial
farming
the idea was to build this dam and then
build new settlements in this area so
that the area will be firmed and this is
what the area looks like before so the
Motorola it's a best land condition so
the water would kind of rise up and and
the houses would be demoted be kind of
like taken over by water but then the
residents would rebuild their houses and
there was this act of rebuilding and
rebuilding your houses as time would go
on this is the structure of the
households at the time and so you have
one man with the three White's living in
the same household you have one man and
the two sons with their wife living in
the same household so it's a very
complex kind of a structure and it and
the house shows it so the idea was that
each one of the women in the household
would own a room of her own and then all
the men were to dwell in this one room
together and this room was a bit higher
it had beautiful surfaces in the inside
but then at nights the men would go to
the woman that she's sleeping with and
this is a case where a man has three
wives right so I said it was a way of
kind of conflict management but and it
was a way for this helpful to survive
and and the the order of the house would
change through time as the as the family
would evolve and a few of these
households would form a village there
was something like hundreds of these
villages in the territory and they
relates it to one another and to the
turrets were in a particular way and in
the sense that the
there was several rituals that allowed
them to relate to one another one of
these rituals was for it was a Shia
ritual mixed with folk kind of things
parts of this ritual is still performed
in Iran so for 10 days up coming to this
one day for 10 days and people in the
village would be cooking for each other
so pass holes would take turn in to cook
for the entire villages and then at this
point at the 10th day everybody from
across the village would do a procession
to a sacred site and their men would
take off their shirts and they would
start beating themselves harmoniously
according to this folk song that
somebody is thinking and the
anthropologists grace gudell describes
this ritual as something that is not
necessarily sacred so much it is a
series of acts performed in a specific
order that allows people to relate to
one another to relate to their territory
and kind of like understand it otherwise
they didn't have the means to do so this
was the very means to do so all of this
had to change with this industrial
farming scenario so the 100 villagers
had to be this sure destroyed 13 shocks
a 13 of these new towns were to be built
and this is what each one of these new
towns looked like so you had houses
aligned in a grade you had institutions
in the center one of these institutions
was of course the mosque and that was
important because the village didn't
really have a mosque it must belong to a
city which is a larger kind of a
population and this mosque was to act as
an institution you would no longer need
to perform a ritual this would be a
place to kind of like do your prayer and
and have these kind of like sacred
things that you would do and then it
will all be kind of institutionalized
from now on another institution there is
the institution of school but but I
don't have time to kind of talk about it
much but there were also a set of gender
roles that were introduced through the
school to children they were taught to
children's but I want to come back to
zoom into the scale of the housing this
is a drawing that grace Goodell has of
the area the way that these houses were
kind of like crossed Ravens so that is
one unit of housing and you can imagine
how problematic it is for a household of
that complexity that I showed you to be
broken up so that it can fit into this
think into this these two rooms the
space was also it had a yard and the
yard had to be open to the streets and
the idea was that the authorities would
be monitoring the space and if you're
not taking good care of your house as
you were kind of like saying some of the
stories then you would be fine and and
and so that will stick the kind of a
rule now something strange happens here
grace Goodell says and that's my last
slide that I'm going to show the
residents will start putting things that
looks like garbage in their yards as if
exhibiting it they kind of look not one
household but all the households within
this the town will start doing it
together it's a very mundane act it's
like you know it's not doing a
revolution or anything I'm just putting
garbage in my yard and the authorities
will start saying that okay we're gonna
find you again and again we're gonna
jail you and it's not really working
they do flan topics things saying that
it's really not healthy what you're
doing and like so on and so forth but
then at the end what they have to do is
to change the law and say that everybody
has to build a wall in front of their
house so that from the outside there is
an appearance of order and you can do
whatever you want inside your house
and and and so yeah that's that's that's
where I want to end so the story of a
wall that is removed and a story of a
wall that is the possibility for it and
the possibility of looking at these as
acts of resistance I get to orchestrate
a conversation here where I'm still what
I'm still sort of flabbergasted by such
an interesting thing to think about
especially in the case of so many it's
not actually it's not exactly what you
had written in the magazine so I'm and
it's actually brand-new material for me
so I just said literally 10 seconds to
think about it well maybe I'll take I'll
take a minute first to say how
incredibly happy and to be here and I'm
organizing quite often some events with
contributors like that but it's the
first time that someone does it for me
and and is generous enough to invite me
to be part of it so I'm very very
flattered honored and happy and and man
this is hard
[Laughter]
well okay let me maybe put it this way I
think what was interesting and I'm sorry
to bring it back to to the Phenom II
list here but I guess that's my that's
my cue to make it work what was
particularly bad the two issues in which
in which medicine salmon a broad was
that they were consecutive and they were
even though they definitely did not
carry the same name one the one the one
that Melissa was part of is called
islands and the others that say my name
was part of is it's called architecture
and colonialism both of them very much
engaged with architecture and
colonialism
so the islands one was actually actually
Puerto Rico was was really the biggest
island of all like say it was it was
really mobilizing some very small
geographies but Caribbean philosopher I
do at least some would call the small
countries with with every I mean and the
importance of the small countries and
and talking about decolonizing struggles
indigenous struggles demilitarizing
struggles and so so what I really really
loved about those two papers in those
two different issues that actually form
two volumes of the same story somehow is
how we are dealing with an analysis that
brings
feminism and and and decolonial struggle
together maybe in the case of salmon a
maybe not quite as not quite as directly
as in the case of Puerto Rico for the
good reasons that Iran was not colonized
per se but
maybe actually a good good way to start
the conversation would be maybe to ask
you if you could tell everyone what what
the article was about and in which way
do you do you relate it to what you just
presented which was absolutely fantastic
oh yeah in the in the article that that
that's I was doing for for you I was
looking at a case in Isfahan II was part
of the projects of the 70s that I showed
later on and it was a case of women who
were moved from a shared courtyard house
into these kind of like it was a flan
tropic project it was built by the point
four point four program the American
point four program and they kind of like
look like these suburban houses and I
and and they were it means they were
they were only given to the factory
workers to the male factory workers so
again like as Amin had some similarities
with the case of Mirrors and they were
only given some two men and you as a
woman would only have this house if you
were kind of like related to two men and
back then there was whole kind of like
infrastructure that has to be built as
in people would make marriage
certificates on the spot so that they
could apply for these houses like maybe
they didn't have a marriage certificate
as such but so but but I really looked
at it as as how it was breaking
[Applause]
the effect that it had in the way women
lived in the sense that yes the shared
courtyard had so many problems in the
sense that you know you had I don't know
if you've seen the courtyard plan right
you you I'm sure you've seen the plan of
it I think there's a court here the
various rooms around it in the case of a
shirt courtyard each one of rooms is
owned but I think it's occupied by a
different family and they're all from a
working class and they're all or you
know even Lord doesn't working class and
so it was very problematic in the sense
that you know you didn't really have a
privacy everything was bleeding between
the rooms you would hear everything but
it also allowed for a kind of solidarity
between women because they knew because
they were the ones who were usually at
home and were always outside and they
this kind of like courtyard brought them
together it was a space for they that
they shared the stuff that they were
going through if their husband was
beating them they knew that the other
woman is good they're gonna hear and
they're gonna come and stop the fights
somehow then these kind of like these
kind of small things but then when they
were moved to the American kind of lawn
house is very similar to the ones that
are shared
[Music]
here it was the inversion of a courtyard
house in the sense that the yard is
outside it is the space between two
units you're not sharing anything with
other units and if you are a wife and a
mother of a family then you're alone
there is no one that you can talk to
you're you're in the space and you're
alone and so so there was kind of like
certain ideas of how you should be
leaving that our communicators through
this project but then also it's kind of
like this idea that back then the 70s
there was different types of these
settlements built being built in Iran at
the same time so that was built by the
Americans but then another case I'll
talk about there is built by the Soviet
Union by the Socialists and it's a
totally different idea of what a
household is and and this one is built
by the Americans as well but not in a
plan for big way in a kind of a you know
in a industrial kind of
industrialization and with the
organization kind of a way but so yeah
it was never I mean the thing is Iran
was never colonized but these but the
architecture was a means for bringing
these enforcing these forms of life into
people I think this is a new model you
have to live like this not not in a
Authority way but once you move in this
is how you should button i interject so
that's super interesting so it's like
this there's this with the change of the
architecture model there's there seems
to be always a kind of shift towards an
imposition kind of top-down imposition
of a new form of a family or no form of
sociality so these two things are kind
of put together in in the different
cases that you've mentioned so I'm
wondering how because that obviously is
also the case when we're thinking about
the movement from the slum to public
housing in in the case of Puerto Rico
that's exactly the kind of break of
old solidarity networks the kind of
collaborations that used to happen and
that you could find in oral histories
about communities and kind of extended
familial networks that were really
broken up by this new typology which of
course then generated a new kind of
sociality and new kinds of networks and
that has evolved over the years so it's
not that you know sociality stops it
just transforms into something else
but I'm wondering about your first case
also this new social housing project
because that reminds me of the rio de
janeiro mass social housing program that
also attempted to build millions and
millions of of these units very much for
communities that were displaced many
mainly from Cabela's and again one of
the strongest boutiques there has been
around the breakup of old forms of
solidarity all kinds of communities and
indeed changes in in family structures
in many in many ways so I'm wondering
how this more recent case in the case of
Iran how it is also representing some
kind of imposition of a new model
because you describe the individuals
involved and the women and how they're
changing the walls but what are what are
they coming from
in a sense and does this project also
represent you know physically and
socially some form of radical change in
what they used to live the thing is that
I would have loved to be able to do a
kind of a study of that but I never got
to but what was clear for me was that
many of the cases I looked at they were
people who got married through the house
I mean they they wanted the house and
they wanted to get married and so the
two of them kind of happened
together so the change of life for them
was in a way a change from being a
daughter of the house to become the wife
of the house so there was this kind of
changing of the role as well and then
I'm gonna be like my own home now and do
something else I really wanted to and
what was striking for me was this
feeling of empowerment that I saw as
that I saw in this woman because say
with the case of seven six that I looked
at and also it's a question that like
about research methodology and how did
you like I want to hear how you did it
but so in the seventies I've been
relying on a lot of writings by
anthropologists which is always entirely
negative but yes it's based on written
texts that I've been looking at whereas
in in this case I had the opportunity to
go and meet these people and I mean like
no not on my own I had friends who were
kind of putting me in touch these photos
are by fact she didn't Astrobotic
I want to say but but so it was and it
was a totally different experience
because yes I think there is a kind of a
domination that is imposed into the
architecture and it makes you relate and
have a particular general and so on but
it also powers powers no no I hear that
I mean I with the metropolis the last
the very last building that I showed
that was a very very short study
actually that I did about you know how
that came about because it was very
current when I went there a few years
ago and and I managed to speak to some
residents and take pictures of the
apartments and in fact it was something
very similar to what you're describing
so the women I mean for different
reasons they were feeling the residents
there were feeling very disciplined
it was a new kind of social housing
project within this luxury building the
rules of governance were it were very
different from the usual social housing
rules of governance so they were in a
way policed much more than the typical
social housing resident the levels of
kind of cleanliness the access that they
had to common areas was much stricter
and they were feeling that and and they
were able to kind of recite the rules of
engagement and they knew what they were
not meant to be doing and yet when you
went into these flats you have something
very similar happening particularly with
the women were they were kind of
screwing the rules so it's something
different right but but that was you
know they were doing what they wanted to
do they were making the space their own
in in exactly the ways that they were
not supposed to and the reason that they
were not supposed to do those things is
because if they did those things
signified again that they were not
orderly or they were not proper
residents and they were kind of
reclaiming that and saying no we're
gonna do this and this makes this makes
it home and we kind of don't care what
what you're saying so there was also a
kind of resistance and an empowerment
there and in those acts so I kind of I
think I see in a way what what what
you're saying yeah yeah there is also
this these layers of policing that
that's that is I mean not in this case
but in in the case of I mean some of the
cases that have been dealing where there
was also said there was the idea that
you have the authorities who are
policing the settlement in a sense that
is looked after but then also the
woman's new gender role is to police her
family to make sure that you know the
guys
this is going to the factory coming back
in time and like you know that the rent
is paid on time and so on so there is
kind of like these layers of policing as
well that is happening but maybe you
could talk a little bit about the did
who about the architects or who made
these plans because you never talked
about it
really the ones that the four that's
Galliano
so the ones that I mean there were a
series of architects that were
associated to this planning board so
they were and they were Puerto Ricans
that hurt were mainly educated in the
United States so there was this kind of
traveling typology colonial typology
again kind of brought from the US
interestingly the way that suburbia was
kind of designed and imagined Wasabi's
the American model was through a Mayan
architect that at the time I can't
remember his name now he'd made a name
for himself in the US and the Puerto
Rican government hires him to come and
do this kind of City suburban plan so
most of the kind of designs that you see
at the time are of this or Hawaiian yeah
of course has a kind of sensibility for
for Latin America I suppose or Latin
American cities but is trained in the
United States and then brings that model
to support Oh Rico but what you have
mainly our local architects the
architects that designed las gladiolus
or the building that was eventually
demolished that I studied were the same
architects that designed a series of
about very much actually like like here
when we think about the Aylesbury and
and and these kind of projects that were
built by local authority architects in
the 70s so there were architects that
were hired by the government and that
design designed and then built this kind
of series of social high-rise social
housing right at the beginning right at
the cusp and they were still seen as
modernist kind of solution and very much
in a positive light so those that's the
kind of course male architects and
that's the kind of context design
context within which it arises I
actually don't know who the architects
of the luxury ones were I didn't it I
didn't acquire that with the developers
so yeah not entirely sure what I mean
you know Fernandez has a particular
agenda in itself not like there is
criteria I guess that you have the back
of your mind and there is and and so I
wanted to know what where does this
question of gender sit within your I
mean it's it's it's gonna be a somewhat
yeah well I think I think the important
thing about gender in that case is both
to dismantle Patriarca but also a tear
on normativity so I think some things
that someone I wanted to bring up in
this conversation if in an ideal
conversation I would still be sitting
here and instead of me we would have
another contributor of the magazine
Olivia Ann who wrote a very very similar
article and creates an incredible
dialogue with your two texts in which
she looks in particular at ads
suburban city of Levitan in Long Island
New York and how at the exit of the
Second World War this type of town in
the US was very much the technology of
gender making and here again gender
making as in like really replacing woman
who had been in the workforce during the
war in the factories who were sort of
losing the characteristics that a tree
or key wanted to see in women and and
reassigning them in the very in the very
particular space of domestic in houses
that were accessible only by car in in
sometimes families that only own one and
obviously driven by the by the male part
of this nuclear family so she's looking
both at that and simultaneously also how
I've been a little bit like what melissa
has been presenting about the fact that
it's also an extremely thorough
normative space so reassigning
reassigning this gender on to female
bodies is not just it's not just about
patriarchy but also a Turin normativity
and how how there was this reason iation
was was also done with an imaginary of
of women in the workforce who were who
were we were called lesbians or or like
have having an entire homophobic
imaginary brought to brought to them so
what what what she's doing which is
absolutely fantastic and you can see how
I'm not speaking very well about it when
she would fit you would be able to do
much more better than me but it's like
like you summon a she's really really
looking at the space itself and the
microscale of architecture in how its
come by how it really is able to
calibrate general relation in the space
of the misty city and at large in a
space in of society
and and you know I don't think it's I
don't think saying I mean like like most
things in the phenomena it's not really
about like denouncing some sort of
conspiracy where everything is thought
for one very very precise agenda but
it's just that's a strength of no
maturities that's that's what brings at
the end result so anyway that's a very
convoluted way to answer your question
but I really really wanted to take the
time to science Olivia's work as well
but to answer your question I think I
think the Phenom list is very much in a
perspective of of interest
intersectional struggle looking it with
maybe a particular trope towards de
colonialism but in in almost every sense
of the term even though I'm a little bit
worried about it because we tend to
decode to one to decolonize everything
now and we tend to for maybe forget
actual colonial situation when we say
that but to look in general how built
environment is very much an instrument
of our for better or for worse I mean
when it's it's pretty amazing to have a
your talk you finishes with like
building a wall as a form of resistance
which is pretty much almost everything
I'm writing against it in general but it
makes so much sense in that case
and so it shows very well how it's not
like well there are good world and there
are bad world is like their walls it's a
technology of power is like but which
power ironically we're actually
embodying in it is it the dominant power
or is it a form of resistance is is a
real thing so I think I think that's
pretty much what the magazine is trying
to do to really not give good points and
bad points to think that very much
insists on those technologies of powers
that architecture and bodies in relation
to bodies which we wet which we're
starting to do more and more in the
architectural world but it's quite quite
not enough yet so I mean I think that's
why I was so amazed to have those two
presentation yeah I just wanted to add
there that you know I think rightly so
we're focusing on gender and we're
focusing on women and women's bodies but
I think we have to also kind of recenter
the racialized body and obviously that's
part of the the decolonial impetus of
the Phenom II list and I know in what
you're saying and the works that that
you publish and so for me and my work it
was impossible to think about what was
happening from a feminist perspective
and in terms of women without thinking
about race in the context of Puerto Rico
and as I mentioned the particularities
of the racial determination of the
nation which was very unique and
different to the United States or the
American model of segregation so the way
that public housing plays out in the
United States has to do with a different
kind of racial configuration and I think
that intersectionality is is also
important to bear in mind when when
we're thinking about this these physical
architectural spaces so one quick
question was you know because I'm
thinking of race and gender together and
of course class figures into that and I
think your talk was really strong in
relation to the class element
yeah I think we discussed this before
but it's because I'm unfamiliar with the
Iranian context but how other kinds of
forms of discrimination of
marginalization of particular kinds of
Iranian bodies that are classed in
particular race is there another
segmentation of the body of what is
hidden or what those walls are trying to
kind of keep behind that's not just
gender in class yeah I mean there is
there there is also another layer that I
feel is very strong is religion in Iran
and and and different I think it is so
it works a bit differently to race
because I think the depending on what
religion you belong to and also the
degrees to which you align yourself with
this religion or you you feel like
you're you're religious that then
differs where you sit as in in some
cases you know you have to perform as if
you are super religious person in order
to be able to receive some of the
welfare benefits that the status is
offering and at other times you know you
have to lie about your guy zina so that
that is like a different kind of it but
but also what it brings the surface is
that you know the the practice of
emancipation for women is different
depending on which class you're from or
which race you're from or like what kind
of a relation your whole depending on
your context and sometimes what seems to
be an emancipation for a woman at this
context is not the same for the other
one you know because like I had a
problem with the case of my son where
she was saying that I am working but I
don't really want to be working and I
was like what do you mean
I mean isn't working the thing that you
want to do and and so and it's and and
these are very local things that you
have to kind of like very much
understand in a medical context within
me how they how they translate I also
wanted to say something about the
colonizing because there is there is a
Adrian LaHood the University I was it
was giving a talk earlier and a few
weeks ago in the ia
and he was talking about the idea of the
decolonizing architecture in a sense
that we always think as in as lots of us
architects thing that the house as a
house you know a family is a family this
is what this is a normal minute of
dueling you live in its a family house
but in fact it is a total construct as
and if we go back in time I mean even
now you can like look into different
models of dwelling that are coming out
depending on like where we are now that
sharing a house or like so first but if
you go back in time there are models of
dwelling that are that have nothing to
do with any of their family that and
their work they work as a model of to a
link there as legit as anything and
somehow we've lost these differences
sometimes in time and so it's it's it's
important to kind of go back and try to
look at those and understand anyway
decolonize the architecture today
somehow by going back and bringing there
is that that was what he was maybe if I
can plug in my whole other area of
research
is actually on cohousing and alternative
thing and it's interesting you mentioned
that because I work a lot with
architects in that context and and you
know there co design process with
residents and if you know a bit about
cohousing it's a strange combination of
individualized kind of homes that very
much
you know mimic a traditional house house
is the house kind of thing of an
individual household combined with these
kind of collective spaces of
collaboration and solidarity that are in
a way trying to go back socially
politically to a kind of commoning that
that was truer to other kinds of
communities perhaps in the past they're
also trying to make a kind of village
feel so there's many things that are in
a way or oki'll about it if you will and
there are other things that are quite
revolutionary from the design
perspective and from the social and the
political side and I think the more
interesting case is probably design wise
are the ones that are working with the
people themselves in that process and in
a way questioning the models of families
so they're questioning how they want to
live both individually and as a
collective they will be living as a
collective but in that process they're
thinking with the architects about you
know what that means how can we kind of
create a space that that breaks down
certain barriers that we've come to
accept as the nuclear family and a lot
of these models are really trying to
challenge the nuclear family or the
heterosexual and doing that in part not
fully through our detectable practice so
they're very clear about not wanting to
be architectural a determined neither
they're a social unit collective and
they're about much more than than the
built environment but the built
environment is definitely key to how
they're kind of reconstructing the
notion of home and around a notion of
collectivity and not
individual living perhaps it's
interesting to think of architecture as
well in when looking about architecture
and ideology or or the norm itself is
like we know it's not really the chicken
and the egg because we actually know
which comes first which is the ideology
but once it's once it started so to
speak then we really have a self fitting
loop of how ideology inform architecture
which itself sort of implements spatial
conditions for this ideology to really
be embodied and incarnated so I don't
know I find I always find that
fascinating how those two works
worse together despite the fact that the
eggs come first yeah should we yeah open
it to the floor try so there's like it
was mainly about this try like his
triangle of things constellation of like
elements and and issues that kind I
think cycle around what you've been
saying and kind of speak about scale
like a scale like the scale at the
moment in which like a resistance or an
enforcement happens and so and again
about normativity so okay so you speak
about spaces and like the you know as if
it's something within a boundary somehow
and you're actually the the moments in
which something is enacted is often this
easily of summoner's it's this mediator
II space of the wall right and then
under water threshold blah blah blah
like it encompasses all of that and and
then the normativity happens within this
neutral mediator ii
and the act of removing this neutral
mediate to be things precisely
resistance against the normative kind of
like enforcement right but then I guess
with with your work Melissa it's like to
end on that disembodiment like to end
with like an a space being like or be it
through catastrophe and I don't want to
I don't want to indulge and that image
right but like that it really is reduced
elements somehow and it's like taking
away from being this space enclosed with
an entirety I think it's quite
interesting like this is a reflection
I'm not sure how to turn it into a
question but I feel like it was I also
don't want to break posture but yeah I
don't know and then also I can't read
yeah I'm gonna leave it that but
something in like scale and I think
quite a few conversations here and house
where and the past eight years or so
it's been on this like scale of which
something operates in a problematic way
as well I was so bothered about like
where's the agency and like we do
architecture and it somehow has the line
around it and it's system hosting and
yet all the things were interested in
and all the moments in which we see an
emancipated potential actually is in a
moment of disembodied potential or an
element or something that's dismantled
so it's not a criticism but there's
something going on there that I
constantly notice oh yeah that was it
and then it was like if you talk about
elements and you spoke about modules
also even projects that kind of like
speak about the amounts of patients
lectures ability of a space or something
by moving you know the chance to move
your element right or to repeat your
module and that goes back to the gift
there like equal gift it goes metal
loads of theorization of capital right
means chapter three volume on like it's
all like it looks like somehow
homogenize asian into a module that
somehow equal and somehow has the
potential to like be the murder they're
the vehicle of resistance
and yet it's not the entire bount like
it's not the whole space or something I
don't know there's like loads going on
that don't know anything about like
firstly thank you both and kind of a
thing for I mean also to interesting
examples in which you know the the case
of Puerto Rico is not kind of
traditional colonialism it doesn't pour
in that kind of European expansionist
kind of sentiment that we understand in
Iran in the case of it never being
colonized per se I just wonder if you
just go back to the wall the wall of the
kitchen and that kind of the reading of
that and it's not a segregated space
right like it's not closed its kind of
partial and so I just don't know if you
could elaborate on that
as being a kind of like where is that
moment where it becomes my yeah just
that can you if you could elaborate on
that because it's not like you know in a
traditional not if there is such a thing
about Muslim house we have you know on
the left the women's and the right the
men's kind of greeting area whatever the
this wall is a partial wall which then
gets removed and I just wondering if you
could following that kind of train of
thought in that in your reading of that
being a kind of act of again it's that
kind of patriarchy and
okay so the reading off of wall is
something that it's coming okay talking
about scale the scale in which the wall
operated was way bigger than the
domestic unit and the family that it was
in and there is a layer of the story
that I didn't say in the beginning of
the projects because these houses were
really small there was no wall
separating the kitchen from the living
rooms that's what the developers thought
would be the most economically viable
thing to do with no kind of gender
perception with purely an economic
question soon there was a wave of
criticism in popular media about the
fact that the wall that separates the
kitchen from the living room is the
essence of Islamic architecture in the
sense that there are norms about
muharram and no muharram about what you
know about segregation of men and women
about and obviously working in a kitchen
is a woman's task and therefore she has
to be separated from the living room
where the foreigners would come in where
there would be a foreign man in there
and therefore this wall is the very
thing that separates and allows the
woman to be separated from this
foreigner and so and and of course this
was not this was a pure constructs as
and you don't have an essence of Islamic
architecture it has changed numerously
through time depending on different
contexts the house of Mohammed was like
basically three rooms and a big yard
there was no difference between the
rooms there was not even a kitchen in
the house so so this this is and of
course they had used this as a political
means to question the entire idea of
welfare that
president of the time Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad was putting forward so then
this wall we are both becomes something
that allows you to like question an
entire scheme of house and from then on
the the minister of housing goes on
saying that on you know every house has
to not have a wall and however this wall
is you have to put some sort of a wall
in there and then so this house was one
of the later houses after this new law
had came in so it is in like in its way
we as in it's not it's definitely not
complete but it's not complete because
the space is too small to actually allow
for it to be operated that thing but it
was very much built because of the
argument of this is something that is
supposed to be Islamic and it's supposed
to like makes this house Islamic and
have that kind of like you know with all
of its constructed nature of things so
and and for me then you know looking at
this removal of her wall yes for her
maybe it makes me it's more of a like an
emancipation in the local state scale of
this is how I'm gonna run my own house
from now on but then if you think of it
if you think of why this wall was
constructed and then this woman removing
this wall you kind of it can be framed
something against this whole kind of
like framework this this this this this
framework that is at the larger scale of
what the gender roles are supposed to be
and so
and maybe she's not aware of it and
maybe it doesn't really make sense if
it's one woman doing it and if it's not
conscious but there's a project there
you know it's just gonna add to the to
the multi scaler thing because I think
that is a really it's a really important
thing and I in relation to studies of
the home and you know critical
geographies of the home and specifically
feminist critical geographies at the
home have been thinking for a long time
now about the multiple scales and being
able to read home whether it's a wall or
a room or material objects or a family
unit things that signify mean and home
well beyond you know with with the
material and with the social and then
that kind of brings in all sorts of
scales but importantly also crucially
really all kinds of temporalities right
so I think there's something interesting
and in both of our talks that happened
spontaneously which is linking history
to the present and I think there's
something about the multi scalar and the
multi temporal and somehow when you
start to bring in these different skills
it's almost impossible not to think
about the multi temporality of it so you
know in the case of Las Colinas the
community of thought that was resisting
the demolition one of the things that
often came out in in people's
description of what was going on in
their activism and and how they were
resisting and what they were talking
about the meaning of their home was to
think about what their hallways used to
be like or what community space in the
towers used to look like or what the
painting on the walls that had been
erected by a police state really in the
90s
against social housing had looked like
versus what they have turned them into
so there was always this memory
temporality that was built into the way
that they were making sense of the
physical presence and the social
presence so I think it's also it's also
important to do that and it's
interesting I was just at the a
literally the American Anthropological
Association conference last week and
there was a session on urban
anthropology and the future of urban
anthropology and the debates of the
future of urban anthropology and one of
the main things that they concentrated
on was scale so they were saying
actually anthropologists have been in
some way notoriously bad at thinking
through scales thinking collectively
about scales like very very good a
beautiful fake description that that in
a way kind of into its scale but not
thinking really explicitly about how
these things connect yeah and I'm kind
of saying actually an urban anthropology
must we must be doing this into the
future probably only have time for one
more questions if anyone has one now's
your chance
do you ever find her questions well talk
about pressure no nothing that would
really create an organic sequel of what
we've just been talking about so well
maybe I have a question I guess speaking
of scale both of you spoke about high
rises like when you showed the the mayor
houses as a field condition and then
when you showed that last project where
the luxury high-rise became book was
saved from you know prop C by public
housing and you both spoke about the
high rise as a place that if badly
designed can remove all sense of
community and I was just curious if you
could speak more about that as a
typology like when done badly how it can
actually destroy communities as it like
through its spatial design well I don't
believe that I mean I I'm sorry that's
what came across Simon I think what I
was trying to say is that that's what
the policy discourses that's what the
government I'd yeah I didn't think yeah
I just curious about how to think yeah
so definitely the high-rise
interestingly and and I've written about
this you know that and this is true two
high-rises and certainly social housing
high-rises and in many western context
not just Berto Rico that kind of
creation of a of a problem before and
then the high-rises a solution which
very quickly turns into a problem again
and it's very easy to turn it into a
problem because the people that you're
housing there had already been
constructed as problems to begin with so
in a sense it's never it was never about
the high-rise right the high-rise was
was gonna house whoever it was about the
way that the culture of the people
living there was constructed and what
was key to to the destruction of the
story of high-rise public housing
high-rise
solution was in in saying that people
did not adapt to that way of living that
somehow the physical structure didn't
work but they didn't work because the
people didn't adopt right so it's not
the typology obviously in a luxury
building those people learn how to live
there but if it's a if it's for the poor
people then then it is a problem and
what in fact you see and I think anybody
that has studied the people living in
public housing high-rises is that they
do work and they work very well as
communities and they do turn into
communities and there's all sorts of
ways that people adapt those spaces even
if they are alienating at the beginning
a community of sorts and networks emerge
and the elevators are used in very
particular ways the stairwells there's
all forms of sociality that emerged
through the particular high-rise spaces
that become community spaces and
actually those are the spaces that
matter more than the the top-down
community space that's given to these
buildings right it's these other
in-between areas and really people's
apartments also and importantly the
corridors in the context of Puerto Rico
corridors were huge important hugely
important to the formation of
communities and the maintenance of
communities so that when corridors
became neglected in all of the kind of
public spaces that the maintenance and
the budget that went into maintenance is
taken away that's how you first kind of
attack the community it's by not
maintaining those those in-between
spaces of sociality which is never of
course about the people or their power
about apt ation are there community
making skills but about budgets and on
policy really III just want to say that
there there is I mean obviously you have
good high-rise good design and you have
bad design and like I mean there is
nothing yes like specific about the high
the high-rise itself they only got a
critique to a high-rise itself only goes
so far because it very much depends on
how things are designed but I think one
thing that the high-rise requires as in
its inevitable is that there are a set
of shared spaces there is the corridor
there is the spare there is the elevator
there are spaces that are shared between
a set of residents and it's something
that you don't necessarily have say you
know you know suburban settlements or
anything and that and the the
administration of discharge think then
is is very important do you leave it to
the residents we ask your residents to
take ownership of this shared space and
figure out how they won't manage it or
do you make it a space it means for
policing who is living in these
settlements you become the authority
who's in charge of managing this like
share things and and this is something
that I think is very distinct to the
high-rise that it definitely has this
yeah that was there's more provocation I
guess I'm not a question but I think you
in both of your responses you talked
about this idea of how social structures
can remove some of these walls and
create these shared spaces
really
I guess if no one has any more questions
I guess we can wrap things up but I
encourage you all to stick around and
get to talk to all of our speakers and a
big THANK YOU to Leopold's who actually
gave me the idea for this talk and I'm
really glad he could be here and I hope
you all chance to check out the magazine
that he looked logged over personally
from Paris please make sure to look at
that carefully thank you don't make me
go back with this thank you to all three
of you for really thought-provoking and
you credibly inspiring talk and
conversations so I hope this is the
beginning of many more like it thank you
[Applause]
