can we turn up the lights and just oh
good like can we get it really dark like
completely little let's just sit for a
minute in the dark before we really get
started and just settle in relax take a
deep breath that's good do it again
did Whitney 20 isn't it nice to be back
in a year that sounds like a proper year
I mean I don't know about you guys that
I've really struggled for the last two
decades you know the year 2000 just it's
ponderous the odds it just sounds so
awkward the teens is a little better but
22 money just trips off the tongue it
sounds normal again plus you know 20/20
vision that's a good thing and I really
don't mind admitting there's an American
citizen that dark November night and
2016 2020 seemed an awfully long way
away but don't get me started
[Music]
it really does feel like we like
Earthlings are like in trouble a bit you
know this is a troubling time that's the
plain truth so so what I want to just
see if we can agree sitting here in the
dark in principle if not down to
granular detail that our presence in
this room in this institution on the
square in this city at this time just
that is enough to qualify us as among
the most privileged people on the planet
we have water we have food shelter and
beyond that we have access we have
access to education opportunity and two
powerful networks of people who we're
sitting beside you in this lecture hall
tonight or in your classrooms or on the
tube or the cinema or in your social
media feeds you never know cities fees
with the energy from these human
networks even if they haven't been fully
activated yet they fizz with the
potential of course the opposite of this
is also true elsewhere on our planet our
people who struggle to find food water
shelter healthcare education peace
opportunity or safety so I think it's
reasonable to ask
what are we gonna do with our preference
what stories do you want to tell the
children of the future about what we did
with our time now because I think
they're gonna want to know I want to
think about that with you tonight but
before we begin can I read you a story
okay so this this is by an 11th century
it is an 11th century Tibetan myth
shared with me recently by my friend
Kate who you'll meet later this version
was written by the Eco philosopher
Joanna Macy don't fall asleep
listen as if the world depended on it
because it might the story of the
Shambhala warrior there comes a time
when all life on Earth is in danger
barbarian powers have arisen although
they waste their wealth in preparations
to annihilate each other they have much
in common weapons of unfathomable
devastation and technologies that lay
waste the world it is now when the
future of all beings hangs by the
frailest of threads that the kingdom of
Shambhala emerges you cannot go there
for it is not a place it exists in the
hearts and minds of the Shambhala
warriors but you cannot recognize a
Shambhala warrior by sight for there is
no uniform or insignia there are no
banners and there are no barricades from
which to threaten the enemy for the
Shambhala Warriors have no land of their
own always they move on the terrain of
the barbarians themselves now comes the
time when great courage is required of
the Shambala warriors moral and physical
courage for they must go into the very
heart of the barbarian power and
dismantle the weapons
to remove these weapons in every sense
of the word they must go into the
corridors of power where the decisions
are made
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
and welcome to acting up documentary
site-specific and verbatim performance
as political protest or PPP with P
tonight we'll be looking at a series of
creative acts of protest that have
confronted urgent issues of their time
most of the examples we'll look at are
from the United States of America my own
country and the source of more than its
fair share of the global [ __ ] will be
contending with the rest of our lives
the first we begin with ancient history
between 1987 and 1991 the AIDS epidemic
claimed the lives of over a hundred and
fifty thousand people in the United
States alone at that stage there was no
treatment no cure and no end in sight in
this clip from Jean Carlin Bustos film
Larry Kramer and love and anger we meet
Larry as he addresses in aids forum in
New York City
trade we are in the middle of a [ __ ]
play play 40 million infected people is
a [ __ ] play and nobody acts as if it
is nobody in this hospital nobody in
this city nobody in this world forty
million people is a [ __ ] play every
person I talked to in every city in
every agency gay-straight aids is this
despondent as they can possibly be
nobody knows what to do next
nobody knows what to do next
[Music]
it was an unspeakably frightening time
people dying in a matter of weeks after
first exhibiting symptoms it wasn't just
the gay community but they were
suffering the most by far Larry was a
writer he had no medical training no
political experience and no real history
of activism but he stepped into the
breach and led the fight he co-founded
the gay men's health crisis GMHC and
with them formed act up the AIDS
coalition to unleash power a direct
action protest group agitating
ferociously relentlessly dramatically
and creatively for solutions to the AIDS
crisis really we're doing theater Street
theater and we had a lot of very
talented people
the analogy is really with the movie
business I was trained in the movie
business and you call it direct action I
call what putting on a show
[Applause]
the years of anger backed up
we're incredible we all loved each other
to death
[Applause]
I don't think we gave a good flying F
what anybody thought of us and that was
part of our strength they didn't like
his tough [ __ ]
[Applause]
no one was responsibility power or
authority was adequately addressing the
issue of HIV and AIDS in the United
States at that time the National
Institutes of Health the gatekeeper of
American medical research and
development had no mandate and no plan
to accelerate the long process that
makes new drugs available Ronald Reagan
president at the time had not at this
point even acknowledged the AIDS
epidemic at all Larry went to war with
all of them but he aimed his fiercest
and most sustained attacks at Anthony
Fauci of the naa NIH just watch I was
coming over to me and saying what's
happening is anything happened cuz they
were sick and they were getting worse if
I got a chance have you heard of
anything and of course was the time you
had to say no but it made you go out
there and fight harder it made you you
don't be even the sto to Tony's out to
the kinds of inroads that have made as
small as they are science works in small
building blocks of knowledge and Tony
stop it yes the answer could come
tomorrow why do you automatically take
such a negative attitude you're not
gonna get it let me finish Tony
all of that is bureaucratic [ __ ] and
you ought to be ashamed of yourself
there are a thousand things that can be
done to make all of this happen faster
and you know it and that's the part of
you that makes me so angry
Tony more than anyone in this world
knows how awful everything is knows what
has to be done and yet he could never
say it in public like I can say it in
public I think it's unfair to the
President to say that he's just sort of
sitting back and taking it business as
usual and I think deep down you know
that Tony I'm gonna say something when
you talk like that I hate you I know I
know Larry
when he didn't think things were going
right he raged out I love the brutality
of that exchange I mean I respect
Larry's righteous anger and I respect
Tony's evident empathy which you may not
have noticed but he gets it you know
even if only to remind me that an honest
exchange like this between situational
adversaries was once possible in the
public sphere
giancarlo moose doe is the filmmaker who
gathered this footage who attended the
meetings developed relationships with
the key players recorded the history and
had the presence of mind to archive
everything until a few years ago when
she made this film Larry Kramer and love
and anger was nominated for the Grand
Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival
in 2015 it was distributed by HBO and
received two Emmy nominations as well
I asked gene what alerted her to the
need to shoot and preserve this footage
and what sustained and kept her working
on it over the following decades she
answered I made the film to show how the
persistent agitation on the part of one
person could inspire a movement to fight
back against all odds and create lasting
change he disputed in any history that's
written they would not be out there but
for act up the AIDS drug cocktail
enabled you know hundreds of thousands
of people around the world to have years
added on to their lives what act up did
was the most important chapter in the
history of medical activism not only in
the United States but of our time anyway
there is nothing remotely comparable if
you look at medicine it's broken up into
two major areas there's medicine before
Larry Kramer and then there's medicine
after Larry
and his army of activists the world of
science didn't get it they got it
because it was their lives and their
people and their loved ones and they
turned it around the transforming role
that involvement of the afflicted
community in how scientists and public
health officials think about how you
approach a disease is amazing the level
of ferocity that Larry sustains
throughout this fight is remarkable
you'd think all things considered that
it might have killed him but I would
argue that his rage and his commitment
to sustained him and I'm happy to tell
you he's still alive today
having just last week published his
second volume social history of America
I shouldn't but I'm going to read you
the Amazon blurb for it in the American
people vol 2 the brutality of fact Larry
Kramer completes his radical reimagining
of his country's history
sorry ranging from the brothels of 1950s
Washington DC to the activism of the
1980s and beyond Kramer offers an
elaborate phantasmagoria of bigoted
conspiracists in halls of power and
ordinary individuals suffering their
consequences was with wit and bite
kramer explores among other things the
sex lives of every recent president the
complicated behavior of America's
greatest spies including j edgar Hoover
and the genocide 'el activities of every
branch of our health care and drug
delivery systems in addition to being
the undisputed leader of political
protest of the early aids era Larry
wrote film scripts books and plays
including the normalness
including the Tony award-winning the
normal heart which still remains the
longest-running straight play you should
pardon the pun in the history of the New
York Public Theater enraged by the fact
that
- few people including gays themselves
were openly talking about AIDS Larry
Kramer put the crisis weirdly squarely
and unapologetically in front of
audiences and paved the way for a body
of groundbreaking theatrical work such
as angels in America rent and the
inheritance that would keep the subject
of AIDS alive and in the public eye for
decades to come
another theatrical work that embodied
the red-hot rage confusion and
death-defying exuberance of the early
aids era was the show called father was
a peculiar man produced in 1991 by
OnGuard arts where I worked as a
producer the show was conceived and
directed by Raisa
Abdo it was commissioned to take place
in fourteen different locations
throughout the Meatpacking District in
lower Manhattan OnGuard was the first
theatre company in New York devoted
exclusively to commissioning new
performance works that used the city
itself as our stage founder and
hamburger is a truly visionary and
perhaps insane theater producer who
believed then and now in the power of
theater to challenge the status quo
sometimes turn it on its head and
hopefully always make an impact Raisa
Abdo was a rising international star
when Ana commissioned him to create
father was a peculiar man and it remains
one of the most consequential works in
on guard's 35-year history if you've
been to New York City in the 21st
century you'll know that the Meatpacking
District is home to the Whitney Museum
the bougie Highline Stella McCartney's
New York HQ
but in 1991 the neighborhood is really
relatively unknown to most New Yorkers
it was dark and dirty and dangerous and
deeply territorial it was common to see
bloody animal carcasses in the streets
of the wholesale meat market by day and
another kind of meat market by night
populated by transness dead prostitutes
their customers pimps and also
after-hours sex clubs and a veritable
night market selling drugs
we had some scrapes during the show any
and I we had to negotiate permission for
property owners to access power to the
19th century buildings at first everyone
refused
I remember going into one guy's office
and he pitch he said get out of my
office we kept going and he pulled his
jacket back and said I said there was a
gun here he was scary but eventually we
found our way to the neighborhood's boss
a guy named Jim Jim or 10 zeo of Long
Island beef and I swear to God I don't
know how did you guys are on your
Shakespeare bow we went into gym or 10
cos told him my name was Porsche and he
resided the entire soliloquy for the
Merchant of Venice the quality of Mercy
is not strained it droppeth like the
gentle rain from heaven I'm really not
getting on since your story that was
that Jim gave us the keys to the
neighborhood and we gave rays of this
extraordinary palette to unleash his
imagination onto we built a 120 foot
long dining table with a chandelier and
meat cleaver suspended overhead a
graveyard a prairie homestead and a
60-foot high curtain suspended from the
Westside Highway where we simulated a
hanging every night from the railway
trestle that's now the High Line inside
a blood-stained meat locker we built a
nightmarish winter wonderland and
sex dungeon it wasn't it wasn't always
possible to tell the the difference
between actor and audience or scenery
and cityscape or sacred or profane and
it was mad it was a physical
manifestation of the aids nightmare the
New York Times wrote near the beginning
of father was a peculiar man an
exhilarating evening of environmental
street theatre by OnGuard arts an actor
from the company of more than 60
performers approaches the audience and
excitedly offers his theory on the
significance of the pop star Madonna by
suggesting that sex is possible an age
of AIDS he says she is trying to become
a Christ she will link us together
Madonna didn't feature in the show but
Christ did and the Kennedys and Marilyn
Monroe and a giant Beanstalk and a
marching band and a red Cadillac and a
transvestite prostitute so we're working
the streets every night every member of
the audience became a part of the show
as well which is why I believe people
who were there still remember it to this
day if a protest about AIDS was at the
root a father was a peculiar man our
branches were reaching for the
neoconservatism of the reagan-bush era
in 1989 the National Endowment for the
Arts one of our guards most important
funding sources became embroiled in a
controversy over a number of artworks
that were deemed blasphemous by the
Christian so-called moral majority led
by North Carolina senator Jesse Helms
God rest his soul one of the artworks
that provoked Helms was pissed Christ a
photograph by Andres Serrano I really
want to digress for a minute to share my
delight in finding a fabulous
contemporary reworking of Serrano's
original photograph monster Christ is by
American photographer Nick fan sure he's
vert Serrano's original concept by
immersing Christ not in urine but in
glowing orange monster energy drink if
intent as a practicing Catholic was to
consider Christ's earthly pain during
the crucifixion
Fancher brings Christ's suffering to
21st century America where energy energy
drinks sports drinks and alcohol are
apparently three of the five basic food
groups and it's still cheaper to take
your family out to dinner at Wendy's
than it is to buy fresh vegetables and
cook it and cook a meal at home anyway
in 1990 the US government felt
terrorized by this image and so we were
warned not to tempt fate with our show
or display provocative imagery
especially religious imagery I suspect
that's precisely when razor decided he
needed to have a Christ in his show this
clip is from a documentary about razor
made by filmmaker Adam such it was
screened in 2018 at a retrospective of
razors work at the Museum of Modern Art
in New York
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
the thing that was so great about father
was that Raisa had such an extraordinary
visual imagination that he really
understood how to use the architecture
of the city to create spectacle
[Music]
it's on you to me what you do to me
[Music]
father was a peculiar man which was huge
you know all these people all these
complicated sets building and and Raisa
was feeling a little overwhelmed and it
was going into previews and there one
can be enough and there wasn't enough
time and it was so big and he was a
little he was actually a little bit
nervous and I said look you just do what
contour does put yourself in the middle
of it cast yourself in it you know say
I'm part of it and then if something
goes wrong just walk into the set and
adjust it opening night you had a you
had a run to get from one position to
the other and I had done the scene on
the table with a frigging shotgun and I
had to run booked way to the other end
of little West 12c playing next scene
and I'm running and I'm learning and I'm
run into Reza and he grabs me says what
happens next what happens next you'll
have to help me you'll have to help me
with that
and I said I don't know all I know is
that I have a [ __ ] entrance and I'm
late let go of me
it was really something in the first
weeks of putting father together Razer
discovered he had HIV which was in those
days a likely death sentence
of course this made his vision for the
piece even darker and more frantic and
more deeply emblematic of New York City
in the age of AIDS the virus would claim
the lives of many members of this
casting company including Raisa
who died in 1995 at 32 years old
New York City's gentrification made it
harder and harder to use public space
for long enough for a long enough run of
site-specific performances to be
economically viable I moved to London
and he moved to California and anger
towards was mothballed for a while but
we came together again in 2014 to take
on a most unlikely challenge
it began with our friend and colleague
Edie billows an award-winning composer
producer and the founding director of
the center for innovation in the arts at
the Juilliard School and came across an
exhibition of photos by Tara qiyamah at
a gallery in New York City Tara and the
three and three collaborators traveled
independently
meaning without the cover of provided by
sponsorship of a news organization to
southern Afghanistan and chronicled the
day-to-day experiences of the 1st
battalion 8th Marines or 1/8 as they're
known their images convey granular
personal and gut-wrenching details of
the Gulf War experience that most people
would never get a chance to see when
traditional media outlets declined to
publish their work taro and his team
created an experimental media project
called base track the idea was
deceptively simple
they used Facebook to publish the photos
and in doing so connected the Marines
with their friends and families back
home in a remarkably short period of
time the page attracted millions of
users at its peak 5 million of course
the US Department of Defense tried to
shut it down after all the posts
included details that could reveal their
locations and activities but after an
outcry from military families base track
was allowed to stay online the product
of this experiment is an archive of
strangely beautiful complex unsanitized
images that are a window open to
illustrate the impact of war on both the
Afghan people and the American Marines
as cuy Yama put it nobody has more
authenticity than the Marines to talk
about this war its costs its
consequences and maybe even offer some
analysis about how this could have been
done better it's hard to imagine 3 less
likely people to tackle a narrative
about the US Marines than Annie Edie and
me every member of our collaborative
team opposed the Gulf Wars none of us
had military experience or if I'm honest
any interest in the American military
machine what we did have was a genuine
concern for the suffering of the
veterans and their families the
historically large number of veterans
were returning home from the Gulf with
having survived terrible injuries and
with profound disabilities physical as
well as psychological
once they left the military these vets
were often isolated in communities where
people didn't yet understand the effects
or even the symptoms of PTSD when we
started on this project 22 veterans per
day we're committing suicide in the
United States there was already a lot of
support for vets with physical injuries
but we needed to understand how to help
those with invisible psychological
injuries compounding the problem was a
very evident entrenched stigma in
military communities around the subject
of mental health or worse accepting the
need for therapy so that's where we
focused our energy the first thing we
did was assembled an advisory committee
of experts in the field of veterans
mental health and they advised us every
step of the way we couldn't have done
this without them we realized that we
couldn't simply impose a narrative on
terra's images instead we identified the
Marines in the in the photographs
contacted them through Facebook and
conducted over a hundred hours of
interviews with the members of one
eighth as they're called
and their families as well playwright
Jayson grote used this material to
construct a script of verbatim text the
story centers on a renamed aging shoe
Buy and his wife Melissa Jason ordered
the text into a story arc that
chronicled their early life together
AJ's enlistment deployment and
homecoming but he didn't change a single
syllable from the recorded interviews
using verbatim text prevented us from
embellishing their stories for dramatic
effect or shying away from the harshest
truth of their experience most of all we
hoped it would give the work a degree of
authenticity that none of us felt
confident enough to create in a
fictional account and we cast a Marine
Tyler Lamar in the role of AJ to
differentiate between our project and
Tara's ongoing experiment we called our
piece based track live when base track
live opened at the Brooklyn Academy of
Music in 2014 the New York Times wrote
the experience of soldiers fighting the
law
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have been
widely documented of course but base
track live brings a vital intimacy and a
compelling visual allure to the
journalistic enterprise most of us know
about the impact of the wars on the
soldiers including numerous suicides but
this production brings the gritty brutal
truth alive in ways that nothing I've
read or seen has succeeded in doing to
our enormous surprise the times include
the bass track live in the top-ten
productions of the year after this we
toured the show across the country we
played at theatres but also universities
community centers and military bases and
here's the important thing at every show
in New York or around the country we
worked really hard to make sure the
audience included veterans and their
families every night after each
performance we hosted events that gave
people a rare opportunity to sorry no
place to talk about the mental health
issues raised in the show Tyler who
plays AJ would ask any vets in the
audience to stand and they always got a
round of applause then he asked people
to raise their hand if they knew someone
now serving in the military then if they
knew someone who had served in any of
America's historical conflicts and
eventually more than half the audience
raised their hands for the next 30
minutes we asked questions that
facilitated a dialogue between dialogue
between these two very different
constituencies it was profoundly moving
one of our advisory committee members
convinced the army the u.s. army to
conduct a study on the combat that it
would tended to show of base track they
identified a 36% reduction in the stigma
associated with seeking therapeutic help
after seeing a production of base track
isn't that stashing 36 percent
here's a clip that gives you a peak of a
performance for enlisted men and women
at Fort Hood military base
[Music]
and when I was in Afghanistan all I
wanted to do was come back to America
then when I got home to America there
was this empty field
[Music]
I'm telling you I'm sharing your story
could very well be anything my name is
ajju bhai I grew up in Fort Worth Texas
and I'm a United States Marine
[Music]
we like to see this in another military
basis because there's a lot of friends
issues and probably don't address some
and just got it on the right direction
to to get help
[Music]
do you think it would be a good thing
for us to continue this show and other
installations just by a show of hands
please yes or no yes is permanent
[Music]
base track was genuinely a radical
experiment it was an eye-opening
experience for everyone involved it
broke down barriers that exist between
veterans and civilians in the United
States and frankly if more work of this
nature could be done and done well we
might be able to address the more
polarizing issues that exacerbate the
problems that we're living through today
Virginia Tech Michael Brown Columbine
Eric garner Sandy Hook Tamir rice
parkland how many words did it take for
you to already know what I'm talking
about nearly 40,000 people were killed
by guns in the United States last year
so when composer ron raymond invited me
to collaborate on a project addressing
this topic i jumped at the chance we're
just working on it now and it's still
very much a development in a
developmental phase but it's been such a
positive experience creatively for me I
wanted to talk about it tonight with you
the relentless torrent of news about gun
violence in America is heartbreaking but
it meant admit a tipping point on
February 18th 2018 when a gunman killed
17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas
school in parkland Florida just six
weeks into the new year it was already
the tenth school shooting this time
thoughts and prayers met with the molten
rage of a generation of kids who've had
enough
within weeks youth-led activism in
southern Florida exploded across the
state and the country they demanded to
be heard they gave zero [ __ ] the empty
chairs in their classrooms that belong
to their best friends brutally lost
would fuel their fight for the rest of
their lives they were smart they
listened they understood the long
simmering despair in black and brown
communities across America that had
already given rise to the black lives
matter movement
they went to Chicago to meet with the
young people who'd been there fighting
against epic
entrenched gun violence for generations
the Chicago kids went to Florida to hang
out and figure out a strategy within
weeks there was a national school
walkout and a national dying day they
descended on their state legislatures
when all they got was more thoughts and
prayers they organized in a matter of
weeks the March for our lives America's
biggest youth held the youth led
protests since the Vietnam War an
estimated 800,000 people filled the
streets of Washington DC alone and many
millions more gathered on every
continent around the world the world
they marched they made demands they
started running for political office and
then they finished high school
snowflakes my ass now Ron is a classical
composer we're developing a multimedia
work for Symphony Orchestra that
amplifies the young activists driving
this movement we started started by
following them on social media and then
just like we did with bass track
contacted them recorded interviews which
I'm now using to build a libretto again
exclusively using verbatim text the
multimedia projection design will be
made from artifacts we collect from
their own photographs and from their
social media feeds and from news sources
I have had the best time meeting these
kids let me introduce you to a few this
is Jeremiah Trask 13 years old lives in
Chicago and a gun violence prevention
campaigner from birth his family has
lost 31 people to gun violence
this is him campaigning for Lucy Macbeth
who's 17 year old son Jordan was shot at
a petrol station by a 45 year old man
who didn't like the music he was playing
this is Jeremiah Trask with
congresswoman Lucy Macbeth
you see Bronco in here okay
on the end and the far right of the end
in front of the Woolworths
is Dominic Pataki a at 17 years old he
organized the March for our lives in
Greensboro North Carolina and is now the
Iowa statewide community organizer for
presidential candidate and senator Amy
Klobuchar hilarya Perez and Raquel Perry
high school students in Central Florida
initiated the fight against farming
teachers in the public school system
they lost unbelievably but they went
right back into the ring and demanded
that every school district across the
state had the right to determine whether
or not to adopt the policy they won that
argument they campaigned with March for
our lives chapters across the region and
so far not a single Florida School
District has made the choice to put guns
in classrooms because like what could go
wrong
this is alia Logan Jamaican American you
got youth activist from the Bronx I just
found out this weekend that she has been
granted a full ride scholarship to Smith
College alma mater of betty Friedan
Sylvia Plath and Yolanda King and one of
the top universities in the world she's
badass
that's Molly Lavoie on the end she
founded the March for our lives chapter
in Central Florida she graduated from
high school in turn for the American
Civil Liberties Union in Washington
where this picture was taken in front of
the steps at the Supreme Court I'll have
you know and she's been registering
first time voters for the 2020 elections
since 2017 this is Marcel McClinton mass
shooting survivor and 2018 candidate for
Houston City Council he didn't win
but he made city state and national news
and was featured in the documentary
running with Beto which was released
internationally he will definitely be
back on the hustings after he finishes
high school the truth is these kids mean
business and they're already making a
phenomenal impact they don't really need
our help getting their message across
except the older conservative skewing
audience for symphony orchestra is a
crucial constituency for those of us who
want to see meaningful gun reform in the
United States we know this demographic
is very likely to fall outside the reach
of existing teenage social networks so
we hope to bring the conversation to
them
here's a short proof-of-concept video
and we made last year
introducing 17 the new work for
orchestra the funds music dynamic
projection design and text narrated by
teenagers to reflect on their campaign
for American gun law reform
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
joining us tonight
it's my great friend and colleague
Mallon Kate Madeline Kate McGowan of
others story Madeline
Kate or Kate might have always trip over
that Madeline Kate is an activist and
filmmaker and I had something else on my
list sign here founder of other story
other story makes short films that are
essentially dialogues with people
affected by the monumental changes
happening in the world today they
Chronicle personal stories that range
from the migration crisis to the
emotional impact of climate change and
climate denial
I can't urge you enough to go to her
website and watch the film's other W
have died other - story org they're
beautiful and engaging and in a minute
you'll see a short film an extract from
a film about Phyllis young a Native
American Water protector from Standing
Rock North Dakota can you talk to us
about how other story was born and the
process you developed yeah and first
though thank you for inviting me on
stage it's really really inspiring to
see your work yes so in 2015 when we
also the refugee crisis unfolding in
Europe I at this point was relating
through the news as I had done through
my whole life mostly on a screen so
being in Denmark based in Copenhagen
most of the crises of the world would
unfold on a screen because the most
dramatic thing right now in Denmark for
example is a tag on the little mermaid
statue
everyone's talking about it at home and
I was in my mother's kitchen in Ireland
my mother's from Ireland and I was
making breakfast and listening to the
radio mostly just to hear the Irish flow
and rhythm of language and the radio
hosts gave the microphones to a Syrian
woman who had just come from Libya to
Italy by water so I turned up the volume
and I listened to a detailed story of
her experience of fleeing the war and
arriving to Europe by boat
a very dangerous quest and journey and
there was a moment there was a split
second when I heard it that I was I
there was a thought in my head and my
mind that said why is why is she gave
him the microphone and I had to look at
that because I'm I see myself as
critical thinking and empathetic and so
I had to look at that and I wanted to go
directly into that and kind of to face
that in myself because I realized that
there was so much talk about specific
people but they were never invited into
the studio and this was the first time
that I experienced a detailed story by a
person who was a refugee in a refugee
experience of life so in that moment I
chose to start traveling through the
Greek islands I found raised some money
and got a good camera ask some friends
if they would go with me and some months
later I found myself on a beach in
Greece and then I think from that point
that was like a major change from then
on we created film series about so we
sat down with people and had these basic
questions like when were you last in
love what is your favorite book describe
your mother which objects did you bring
on your journey like very simple kind of
naive questions being driven by our
curiosity and our desires
you humanize and I had this I had this
notion in my mind that's particular did
by a philosopher called Krishnamurti he
states that categorization is the
language of war so with the project it
was like we moved with our cameras moved
by the cameras and the microphones
letting the cameras and microphones get
us get us into situations where we could
sit down create a space where we could
have the time to really go deep in an
encounter
having the encounter as the action so
that was the activism but essentially
having this situation make what was once
a stranger some hours before become a
friend so this like very slow deep work
of friendship and of reaching out of
risk in the encounter and I would say
like the work of love so from these can
count sirs the films came can you talk a
little bit about the impact of the films
as they as they went out into the world
and then also with the impact of the
people in the films how it how it
affected them yeah so the films were
made and they were there about from five
minutes to 30 minutes long and they went
we went but they went out online and
they went viral and to give an example
one of the young men that we spoke to he
is 17 years old he came from Syria and
he states in the the conversation we had
with it we had with him that one of his
deepest desires was to record a
full-length album and he would play all
the instruments himself and when that
phone came out there was a young couple
from Holland who contacted us there was
a lot of people that contacted us and
wanted to get in touch with the people
in the films and they actually I
established the contact and they went
all the way from Holland to the camp the
refugee camp he was in in Germany where
the guitar
to give that to him so you could start
playing where he was and that we saw
that happening again and again that the
unlined became very physical I mean I
just say it was I stumbled upon other
stories films mostly because my my my my
son was becoming interested in going to
the Calais jungle and the whole issue of
you know talkto to to to volunteer and
the whole issue was becoming like you
know monstrously overwhelming and I
wanted something to help me understand
what was happening was kind of similarly
to the way you talk about the taking in
the news I wanted to understand well I
could really couldn't make sense of what
was happening in a way that was
acceptable to me so I when I stumbled
upon other stories films I contacted
Kate through Facebook immediately and
still today I think they are the framing
device through which I have been able to
make the most sense for myself about
what has really happened and it's you
know in a sense not on a bigger
geopolitical sense but in a in a human
sense not to the refugees but to that
person and that person I want to move on
time-wise and just can you talk a little
bit about about what what then triggered
your interest in Standing Rock and you
might need to just explain a little bit
what dapple is as well yeah yeah okay so
we started traveling and making films on
the Greek islands and we did that for a
couple of years and when we I realized
that it's the deeper issue is the
climate crisis that people are fleeing
because of resource driven Wars the
drought in Syria was glamour crisis
related which led to the revolution in
Syria so from then I realized that the
basis of this project is to show the
textures the voices the faces the
details and the poetics of the climate
crisis so getting close to one person at
a time and unfolding through that move
and get in getting closer to a person at
a time all the details that are hiding
behind this headline the climate crisis
of this title that we see or this
definition and so the next journey was
Standing Rock which is North South
Dakota its so-called Indian Reservation
and in 2000 1716 there was a camp
initiated by two young women one of them
I met who's called Hana rasa defender a
camp where there was around 10,000
people living there it became a city
with people from all over the world
driven by the Lakota tribe protesting
the death the death of project which is
the Dakota access pipeline bringing tar
like really dirty oil coming from
fracking across America and and a new
project is being initially initiated now
where there's another pipeline going all
the way from the north to the south so I
saw it again I saw this the same
tendency that we seen mainstream media
that is conflict-ridden
its drama based extremely theatrical
actually was a lot of dramatic music and
you know a casting of the goods and the
bads and so in standing what rock I saw
the same tendency or clear tendency that
the protesters activists would be like
terrorists and or victims or and then
the police the brutal force but also the
yeah like the the the keepers of law we
might say so we went there and start one
of the stories that we found when we
came there was this mythology and
mythology mythology could never be
breaking news I guess but for us it was
I would love to make a news channel and
have that big breaking news for example
but we found the mythology and
premonitions
articulated by sitting Bull old chief of
the lakota tribe he stated that when the
seventh generation is young they will
rise and the youth will be a key player
in linking the planet with human the
human race again this was 17 when i was
there and there was no trace of this
youth uprising that we see today at that
point it was I guess snowflakes and
Millennials and they're not lazy they're
not even voting you know this and I
heard this mythology and was deeply
moved by it and today I see that it's
happening right yeah as time went on
from the day we marched in April first
we created sacred stone count by August
there were over 10,000 people who had
come and there are over four hundred
sixteen nations from this country in
Canada who came who brought their flags
who brought their pipes and their
spirituality and joined us so that along
with people from all over the world they
were brought here by our ancestors and
all the lucky awliya face who left
because they are the Warriors who were
here at one time and went to the spirit
world and now they are the wind they are
the clouds lightning the Thunder those
are ancestors and they came and there
were six snowstorms it was a cleansing
and everyone had to stop in their tracks
no matter who we were the most advanced
a warrior in the frontline had to stop
the dapple engineers had to stop and
only the working yet they had that power
and glory and strength to stop
so at the time of sharing a time of
giving to the world our secrets and our
mysteries in our prayers and our peace
the youth you are the seventh generation
you have been allowed to have a life and
find the principles and standards of
humanity at the highest level and that
you have an obligation to carry forth
all that you have learned at all that
you have been taught and your love for
the land and the water and the air and
all the living things that we are
responsible for you are responsible for
that that is a task that you have to
carry forward so that you ensure the
seven generations to thrive that you are
responsible for you are the seventh
generation and now you have to carry
that torch that sacred fire that we have
lit a torch at Isha going and you have
to ensure the water is there for life
and to always acknowledge the second
gift of the stones who are ancestors and
carry those principles forward for all
of humanity that's my message
[Music]
before we open this up for questions I
just like to wrap up by thanking you for
coming on this dark and stormy night the
fact that you're here is evidence enough
for me to suggest that you're engaged in
the world and may be open to the idea
that protests can be creative and
politically productive maybe
protest is the only thing that makes
politics productive I don't want to make
light of the challenges mankind is
facing but I suggest that creativity and
imagination and the technology available
to us and the power that exists in these
devices that we carry in our pockets and
the potential capacity of our networks
we're really only just beginning to
harness the energy of those things and
bring them to bear against the biggest
problems of our time so I encourage you
all not to give up hope and at the very
least to use your privilege to remain
engaged there are endless ways to fight
the good fight the fight of the
Shambhala warrior so let's do it shall
we yeah
[Applause]
thank you thank you thank you any
questions I mean you can ask this
especially since Kate is here if you
want to start with anybody has any
questions about other story that would
be a good place to begin yes young men
oh sorry
okay
so you guys have talked about a lot of
different kinds of protests somebody I
guess my question is do you think
they're all equivalent or similar in
terms of how effective they are and if
not what are the differences between the
most effective and the less effective
kinds of political activism and forms of
protest I think we should both answer
that since I'm holding the mic I'm gonna
go first and I'm older I think that
changes with the times I think when I
was a kid in the 1960s and I saw the
kind of protests that were happening in
the streets especially after the Kent
State the room I don't forget any of you
even know this that there during the
Vietnam War a National Guard
shot and killed four students at Kent
State University in Ohio and it was it
just inflamed an entire generation there
was one of the things that triggered
massive protests against the war which
were in the end successful at making the
government respond and get out of that
conflict I don't think it would have the
same consequence today that kind of
action I think so I think it's a
moveable feast and you never really know
you never know when a crazy performance
piece like father was a peculiar man is
gonna have and at the time we didn't
think it was gonna make the impact that
it did people write their PhD some
father was a peculiar man it's
astonishing I mean they just it's it's
because it was just something that could
only ever have happened in its time and
it I just I don't know that there is an
answer to what is most effective but I
think about the things that are
happening today for example
[Music]
you know with the anonymous masks and
these kinds of things and the the
anonymous online secret organization you
know in its time when it first started
it was incredibly effective I think it
kind of it made people stop and think oh
my god you know I think that's the kind
of the point about the creativity behind
protests is that if it's ever-changing
and sort of really I
each affected either generation or
community that's doing the protesting it
has the power to destabilize the kind of
rigid government systems that are
usually behind the problems or at least
the lack of solutions to problems that
are in place
that's my non answer for you yeah so I
think about I saw a film about
baader-meinhof there was a documentary
that focused on their early years so it
wasn't it didn't show the period where
they were violent kidnapping and
bombings they were film students in the
early days and it was so clear the
moment they became violent that they
lost energy and I lost interest I didn't
even want to watch the rest and I
remember was the one scene where the the
counselor like the the leader of Germany
when they did their first violent action
and he went up and he did a speech to
the to the country and he called them
terrorists and I realized in that moment
like the moment you become violent you
give you give grant you give the gift to
the leader of being able to call you a
terrorist and and it was just obvious
watching it that it lost energy and I'm
pointing towards this because maybe you
recognize this but being so frustrated
with the situation in the world like
sometimes I consider violence
like where or I'm you know I'm thinking
like when will it become violent but
there were I know that I can't remember
the one of the founders of extinction
rebellion I can't remember his name
right now but it's it's based extinction
abelian is based on his PhD where he
researches revolution and uprising and
what he goes into depth with what tools
do we need to use to change things and
he can show statistics and empirical
studies that prove that violent
uprisings have a much there's so much
weaker in their capacity for change then
peaceful of course so so a base like a
starting point that we see also now is
that the the creativity the artistic
approach always finding the crack in the
status quo and going with that like it's
a foot back she just started sitting
down like she just stopped studying and
that was her crack and she stays still
and there's like a huge revolutionary
potential and stoners or friendship or
love so
[Music]
you are producing our singing from from
the choir where it will part of that
where to you you found Kate because you
were interested in that yeah so the
question then the challenge really
becomes how to engage the audience who's
creating the problems how to get things
in front of them and interestingly I
think bass track my guess is half of the
people sitting in that audience for
argument's sake are not from the same
thinking and it's how to get these and
that has to change and I'm sure it
impresses them so I pose to you how do
you attract people not in the choir it's
hard I mean it's it's um but I would
suggest as a producer as a maker as
somebody who thinks about things from
you know from from the conceptualization
of them through the development and
execution is that you have to Inc you
have to engage from the very beginning
and invite them into the process because
if you if you're really trying to be
creative and you know for those of us in
this room and I would imagine there are
many many of us here even if it's
something that you just did when you
were still in school the process of
really trying to create something that's
good that you are happy with it's
meaningful that responds to the thing
that has inspires you or instructed you
to make it it's a search for truth in a
way and when somebody that you disagree
with recognizes that you were really
seeking to establish something that you
can accept as truth it's powerful even
if they don't agree with you I have a I
have a facebook friend who I I he drives
me mad and he's a theatre director who's
I don't know something just got whacked
wrong in his brain and he's really he's
cantankerous and he's difficult and he's
and and is that my argument with him
usually ends with si Michael I'm sure
that we could get to a place where we
could agree on the fundamentals you know
the fundamentals of life you know
and then build something from there and
all those things are creative acts once
is you know we can we could fight
forever about almost anything but when
we are really fundamentally disagreeing
about the really major issues of our
time whether or not climate change
exists for example I mean you could
argue with your uncle Mel and you know
what I mean but but to participate
jointly in the act of making something
that responds to it you have to find
some common ground somewhere in that
process that would be my and then you
know when you're when you're doing
theater for example these kinds of
things or was 17 we're talking with them
very early on in the process we're
inviting them to participate and give us
data that we can then put into the show
it what I've got
so who's that what the kids that we've
been interviewing is there are you get
the people who were supporting the NRA
I I've interviewed them I've talked to
them alright at this point they're still
kids so but Marcel McClinton was a gun
owning Republican you know when he was
younger that's changed now but you know
in the beginning he you know they're the
some of these kids are not anti-gun
really some of them really are Jeremiah
Trask the youngest one was 13 is the
only one who said you know no guns I
want to ban all guns everywhere because
it's so traumatized by the but some of
the other kids who have a more nuanced
view that I completely disagree with you
know we've given them the chance to use
their voice to say these things to
record their point of view and to value
it and make it a part of the process
because we want them to know they're
being heard and we're not trying to
change them we're trying to address a
different problem so for example when
Marcel is campaigning in Texas there are
these guys who bring their ak-47s to
every March for our live event in Texas
a couple of the arts organizations we've
talked to have have told us we can't do
it because we'll get these guys with
ak-47 so it's too dangerous for our
audience but Marcel goes up to them and
says hey how you guys doing nice gun you
know I can have this kind of
conversation with them so you just in
the process are breaking down the
barriers that exist between people on
the most fundamental human level that's
what we did with bass track that's
really what we did with father was a
peculiar man and that's what we're
trying to do is 17 yeah I think it's
always a challenge and I I've we were
mainly based online for a long time and
I also saw this this is the like the
trickiness these films just traveling in
circles that agree with the point but
then again it's also important I
actually chose at a specific point not
to you spend my energy on trying to
reach the people that were totally on
another side but also seeing that
there's so much value in bringing these
documents as testimonies these voices
into our circles because because it's
it's so tough right now like we we need
these hope like sparks of hope so we
still we it's so important we can't just
forget our circles in that way and but
also I've been focused on bringing it
into physical spaces so inspiring people
to see the films as their tools for
activism and put up screenings in their
homes or like you know but they have it
more decentralized so everyone can see
it as a tool and then maybe show it to
the stubborn uncles
[Music]
yeah I just have to put a disclaimer
here I kind of just walked into here so
I kind of missed most of it like so just
to put a timestamp on when I came in it
was when you guys started talking about
Standing Rock so that was really late so
I missed the comment I'm making is
irrelevant but have you are familiar
with johannes head verse s a sick woman
theory no so basically they argue
against what Hanna Aaron said about
politics and protests being having your
body on the street because your Hanna
head is suffers from multiple
disabilities particularly on the beat
Rios's and my chronic fatigue syndrome
and therefore cannot participate because
her body is physically unable to be on
the street so so the whole kind of essay
talks about how many like what kind of
different ways we are sick and how the
sick is kind of like expected to get
better one day with that kind of
understanding of pathologizing the sick
but when you are living with a chronic
illness that is never a possibility and
therefore with that kind understanding
of sickness that's something that is to
be healed or corrected care is not
considered normal in a way but but what
you think of this kind of provocation
that they make that's sickness like you
know there are certain bodies that are
unable to be represented politically and
you know you can't just consider it just
as physical illness but like for example
refugees are kind of monitored for
attending protests and if that will
affect their kind of immigration status
and yet these are the people who are
kind of victimized by kind of all these
issues you know that we are fighting for
yeah I mean I said at the beginning that
we in this room are privileged and I
don't mean that as a kind of okay boomer
sort of way I think you all know what I
mean we are we are here we have the
capacity to be in this room and we
should it's we're living through a time
where I think every every person should
consider what they want to do with their
privilege with their bodies with their
time alive and so we will all be
different in our response some people
may not be may not have a disability but
they may have a real predisposition
against a mass protest or a you know
kind of vigorous out in your face kind
of protest like that but they will it's
up to each person to use its creativity
in a different way so for somebody who
is differently abled in any way they
need to apply whatever creativity they
can to their desire to make a difference
and and and create a way to for
themselves and I'm sure that there will
be a community or they can build a
community around whatever is appropriate
and inspiring for them there isn't a
there isn't a single path or a single
way for this to be done and the more
creative the better as I said before I
think creativity is the thing that
destabilizes the structures that are
entrenched and in the way often so you
know I just think it's some things you
couldn't turn around on its head and
find a creative solution to it and
that's part of the you know that's part
of the protest really is to find out how
you can
also another question I kind of had was
because I'm from a country that is not a
democracy
so I feel like I have a very strange
opinion on democracy so I find that
democracy has kind of a certain
mathematical impossibility to say
because it is about quantity and
maturity however as I said before there
are certain minorities that you know if
there are not listened to they
experienced far more violence from being
kind of missed or unnoticed in a way
then that any majority would ever
experience by having their democracy
manifested so like I'm I'm also
wondering like to what extent is that
creativity kind of limited to what
extent can you only advocate for
yourself because the dissolution that
your head proposes is that we to defeat
capitalism we must prioritize caring for
ourselves and caring for others so it's
not just politics through kind of
survival but then kind of creating a
code of conduct within yourself that
you're always thinking of others and
advocating for that minority voice and
kind of from my own experience like
navigating kind of more queer circles
I've noticed that in particular like
more marginalized voices such as like
transgender people seem to be the most
politically vocal yet they are in this
and kind of sensitive position so I've
always kind of thought it was
interesting like it seemed to me that
the solution was not solution but a
solution is possible it's just to
platform and give more resources to
those marginalized communities because
they feel a far more urgency the
situation that anything else well I
would say that those resources
I have to be fought for so in an earlier
part of the talk we were there was a
section on creative responses to the
AIDS crisis and anybody who lived
through that entire process will be
aware of how limited the funding
available was in the beginning to the
people we knew who were suffering it was
awful and the binge is genuinely
terrifying and and and really the gay
community led the fight and they they
liked to like these kids with you missed
that too but you know the people
affected fight for what they for the
resources for the attention for the
change you know I mean there's no
guarantee you're gonna win it's you know
if it was easy you know you don't just
get the resources you don't just get the
platform you have to make an argument
for it a good one and you have to build
a community around your community and
you have to identify the allies who
really understand what it is you want
whether it's to a cure for AIDS or to
end gun violence or more acceptance and
understanding and resources for the crew
or whatever community you know that
whatever the issue is it's about really
developing your messaging and your
community and finding the way that works
best for you I think I don't think
there's a single way that these things
there's no guarantee even that anything
I'm telling you tonight if you apply it
really rigorously and creatively that it
will work because these things like
Mateos question you know it's a moveable
feast things change the people you're
trying to motivate to do something
differently develop resistance to the
idea of accepting whatever it is any of
us have as something we want to fight
for
but I I appreciate what you're saying I
also think that the the transgendered
community in America I can say has has
has made some real progress in the last
couple of years I know it feels like a
like nothing and especially because the
most of the time I spend in the stasis
in New York so things have really I see
evidence of progress there but you know
it's a slow moving train that's the only
other thing I couldn't really say you
have anything to add to that game ok
anybody else
my glasses I can see I guess with a lot
of the projects that both of you've done
it requires a lot of community
engagement or social interactivity with
quite sensitive material especially
regarding mental health and I'm just
wondering like what the ethical
procedures that you have to go through
regarding accessing those people and
then also with the distribution of
material or selection of material after
that and yeah and also like you if the
individuals that you are working with
how much creative input they have into
the presentation of those materials
that's a really good question it's
different for me you'll have to answer
this too but for me it's been different
the the participation and the impact on
the materials different with each
project because the shape of the
collaboration and the desire for the
collaborating artist how they work has
to be respected in each of those
situations but I'm old enough now that I
made some mistakes when I was younger
that I learned how to do better so
that's why I mentioned earlier that when
we started working on base track we
formed an advisory committee of experts
in the field of veterans mental health
and really thank God we did we were
advised to do that by one of our mentors
who was the executive producer of the
Brooklyn Academy of Music at the time
because maybe like you he sort of said
we were so well intentioned and so
enthusiastic and so inspired by the
material that we wanted to develop that
he sort of was like slow down ladies you
know you gotta get some expert advice
here so I would recommend anybody going
out to do you know creating something
the idea of building a community around
the work that you're doing is a very
positive one you know people who care
about the subject matter who care about
what what it is you're trying to achieve
whether it's a an active protest or a
creative
a WebWork a barter piece you know fine
you know find your I would say find your
ancients you know find your advisors
find your mentors find those people who
are gonna care that you have the best
experience that you can and that you are
are behaving in a way that is most
responsible just in terms of the ethic
of ethics of your practice
so that's find the best advice that you
could possibly get I'm gonna let Kate's
begun that as well because yeah so this
it's a it's like the process of that has
shaped from the beginning of just
starting and I think like social
intelligence of course is the basic and
having a really good sense of situation
and the other person but moving into
situations with people that are in a
vulnerable situation it's it's like it's
a it's a journey as friendship so for me
I'm carried by curiosity and chemistry
so like with any other human encounter
in my life that I moved through the
person where I can I can sense that
there is a chemistry and dialogue and
and let it unfold and then in our work
with the films the conversation the
encounter that is kind of like it's a
almost like a repeating ritual for us so
this encounter stands as the pillar of
the process and of the document that we
create the film which comes out of it
and it's it's such it's like having this
space where you actively listen and give
permission to reflect slowly it creates
it's like it cook the groundwork of
friendship so for all the films that we
released is a friendship so in that and
that keeps unfolding and many of the
people that we meet and we make films
with they actually become a part of the
project also so I have one example we
met a young man from Syria his name is
Elias
and he one year after we met him on a
beach in class in the Greek island he
was presenting the stories work in
Athens where he he one year earlier
picked up survival gear to be able to
move by foot through Europe and reach
Germany so that's one example we never
publish films without the consent even
though we make a contract in the when we
have the encounter both verbally filmed
and on paper protect both them and us so
from the beginning it's totally obvious
what the project is about and most like
people understand because when we speak
to people we were totally honest about
that this is showing the detailed story
of humans behind the climate crisis it's
a humanizing project and all of this so
everyone knows why we ask the questions
we do and why we're there and so when
the film is finished before release they
also we also have a communication and if
they want something changed they have
the capacity don't they have the power
to say that tell us but mostly people
actually it's it's totally fine and and
I think yeah the long relationship that
we build is essential and having the
time to do that thank you so much
[Music]
- hi sorry it's been more of a
reflection about what whether
conversation has gone the Facebook
conversations they were taking stuff
into people's homes sometimes I think as
artists curators writers we think that
people above all we think that protest
is big because we think the test I mean
the narrative the respect ours is about
purposeful streets being marches and
protests that's how protest starts when
we ask ourselves a question that sorry I
forgot your name when you ask yourself
and this is a massively privileged
position why am i finding weird that
this person this Syrian person is given
the microphone this is protest this is a
critical act and it's tiny it's about
its you know is that tiny and without
that tiny critical act of protest and
there's nothing else going on so I think
sometimes lets you know kind of remind
ourselves of house whoa we are really I
think that's yeah absolutely so this is
it and this is kind of for me what it's
what it's been and the other thing is
that something that you said quite at
the beginning about again is artists
writers creators I think this you know
we work in various fields are working
jewelry art massively similar to
architecture in so much we both work
with the landscape of the body in out
but we have you know we kind of I forgot
what's gonna say this is we kind of
think that we we want to do big
but we don't necessarily think about the
effect and you mentioned about the
consequences of something that doesn't
just stay in the white cube or in the
building or in that you know that we
really really need to get out of the
bubble and not just speak to the
converse it but think what you know what
effect can I build into this and even if
it speaks to one extra person it doesn't
need to speak to you know millions and
we need be afraid of speaking to just
one person I think that it's worthless
right I agree completely good come in
you know just add to that is inspired to
reflect on this notion of like climate
activism so I read an article in The New
Yorker by Jonathan Franzen where he
talks about maybe we should we have to
consider that it's too late in in the
understanding of of us being able to
stop the climate like a ecosystem
collapse and so on and that climate
activism today is not just about going
to the street and shouting with others
even though that's also important but
it's not just about these massive
mobilizations it's actually the being
like the friendship the for the work of
friendship in your local community
because we can potentially face the
future which we already see where
there's an interest in division where
there's an interest in categorization
and other ring and that's already
happening so the activism of everyday
life is that a friendship and reaching
out to making strangers friends I
[Music]
so my question is about how you go about
it if you are feeling an urge for
activism for example when I was 13 I saw
a spread in Life Magazine of it was an
early spread of AIDS and I said I'm
gonna I'm gonna grow up and I'm gonna
help these people and so I worked at an
AIDS Hospital at 21 I was appointed
clinical director of the first women's
AIDS clinic in the United States how's
that st. Vincent's Hospital in New York
and so I was this picture fell into my
lap and that sort of steered the
trajectory of the next you know 10 or 15
years of my life if people are feeling
like they want to do something I mean I
don't know how you ended up in Greece
and then South Dakota nice places but do
you use the thing you're passionate
about to or for you Porsha I don't know
if these projects came to you or you
went looking for projects that were
geared towards the things that were
important to you so if people are
feeling leaving a night like tonight
feeling the fire of activism in them do
they go after the things that they're
passionate about or do they sort of wait
to see what comes to them I mean I think
that really depends on each person you
know if you are for example if you have
facebook or if you're on social media
you're gonna be bombarded with stuff all
the time that is you know represents the
the universe around you and you may see
something on one of those networks that
says oh I want to I want to help these I
saw this woman giving water and carrots
to a koala in Australia and I was like
oh my god but there I mean what a what a
wonderful thing to do and what a needed
thing to do and I you know if I could
get to Australia to do you know that
sort of thing I can't
there will be people who see those
images and decide to take up that kind
of volunteering
I think the blessing and the curse of
the technology that we all carry around
in our pockets is that we are confronted
with images of things like this all the
time and it's almost too much choice
around us to really zero in on something
that is genuinely you know gets under
our skin and really speaks to us in a
real way so it's about sort of a tuning
your spidey sense to what that might be
or you might be a kind of a person who
knows exactly what you want to do that
you're passionate about this thing maybe
whatever it might be that that's all
your life you've known this is what you
want to do just it's about a tuning you
were you were your mental energy your
psychic energy into the into the the
thing that draws you and and and and
finding you know the network around it
and the place for you that works best
for you I mean for me I was led into
this a lot of the stuff because I took a
job you know like I was working for this
theater company that took on this
project I wasn't a driver of that
project I was a I was an enabler of it
and a participant in it but you know not
everybody has to be the you know the the
body at the top we need we need lots of
warriors you know at this stage and I
think also there's gonna be a time I
imagine it's already happening now where
people are becoming more and more
conscious of the monumental change we
have to make in response to the climate
crisis and with that in particular which
in a way I think almost everything
funnels into that and now you know I
mean obviously there are things that
don't if you're if you're thing is that
you want to fight cancer or AIDS or
something like that it's not necessarily
wrapped up in the climate crisis but all
of these things it's a huge umbrella and
that we're gonna be moving under that
you know and it's about
finding those communities and connecting
to them and participating where it makes
sense for you as a as an individual
person you know I said warriors and then
sorry the activism that was taking place
in the kitchen where we sat together
with Thomas and her name Roddick Sam
Roddick Kashi all together all these
people with ideas and we agreed on one
subject which at the time was a
pollution and Howell was approached
potion wasn't it we all wrote about
different different companies we sat in
the kitchen 30 40 of us I maybe I bring
a different thing I mean I this was
something it was very interesting we all
went to the home of Samantha Roddick
who's the daughter of Anita Roddick who
founded the body shop who was one of the
first real brought social activism into
her business model and Sam was kind of
carried that torch on and actually the
event that I remember she invited her
but she invite her but how how many
dozens of creative people to her home
before the the last election I wasn't
there for that one the two elections ago
which was in what year no the one in
2016 UK election and she she she put
people into groups and each one of them
chose a creative act to execute around
the election identifying seven
constituencies that were were on the
cusp mark but there were marginal
consistent on the cusp of labor winning
and how many of them won I thought they
all did did they they all won and one of
them was like they took a boom Papa band
to the to the polling place and it just
attracted enough people to come to that
polling place to vote but the beauty is
that she initiates these things in her
kitchen she dishes in her kitchen and
it's a
bicycle wheel it starts here and it
spokes out and it's remarkable the
impact it can make I think that's the
other thing that we forget is that it's
especially with the mass protest that
they happen to be million people in the
streets and tomorrow the next day
everything's the same and that could be
very very disheartening and I understand
that I personally I like that the sense
of community in this protest I like
being with other people who and-and-and
reaffirming our commitment to changing
whatever it is that we're we're
protesting about but I do also feel the
pain that the next day it feels as if
nothing has changed and it's no doesn't
help to say that change comes slowly but
in fact it does and we have to remember
that we are also stimulating the idea in
other people that they can participate
in these acts of either protest or just
engendering change with these these
things no matter how big or small
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
yes
[Music]
understood
choices
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
Parthenon about
yes it's yeah I think definitely and
then we also have to remember I think
what's special about our time is that we
can now realize that it has to be
pluralistic so a lot of time is I just
try this again and again that I find
myself in a space with people that are
actors like activists people that are
taking part and acting and stop people
start discussing what is the correct
tool so what is the correct approach
what is the correct communication
strategy it's like sometimes it's like
in our collective we have this desire
that one thing will happen and then
everything changes like we'll find one
communication tool and then everyone
realizes what is the truth right and I
you know sometimes it could be is it
gonna be culture or is it gonna be tech
and realizing that it's both and that
it's pluralistic is a major step for us
we have to stop if we try if I think it
would be fun to look at all the hours
spent discussing which strategy to use
is being wasted in a way if we just of
course it's important to to be go into
detail with your tools and to polish
them and reflect on how you're using
them and what you're doing but let's
stop spending energy and discussing
which tools you use and also to say for
the mass protests I've been coming in
the in the European Parliament a lot
because I'm pushing a new project there
and listening through the Emmy piece
discuss the climate crisis and what
happens in political spaces right now is
that politicians that are green they use
the as a way of building ethos they
point towards the people on the street
actually the people being on the street
again and again is so important we have
to remember that it's not just that we
go to the street and then nothing
changes because that it's repeated the
people are protesting again and again
and again is used in the space by a
politician as an argument they say look
at the children look at the young people
look at the people in the street they're
out there right now
and they have to be able to be able to
say that again and again I heard the
rumor about vacant canapes I saw it on
the Facebook thank you everybody for
coming it was really great
[Applause]
