very warm welcome to the AF for this
session this evening under the headline
pathways to practice I'm in the chair
looking forward very much to what our
guests our panelists had to say my name
is Paul Crosby I head up the
professional practice part 3 program
here and as the chair this evening as
somebody's already pointed out I get the
chair with the arms but my aim is to
simply coordinate proceedings because
the chairs you will know has no views I
have no views on anything I'm looking
forward very much to hearing our guests
have helped say this evening I will be
neutral impassionate and help to steer
the proceedings so as a headline on the
website just to describe what we're
doing this evening a panel of
distinguished AAA alumni to discuss how
their studies and professional
experiences have enabled them to develop
unique pathways to practice in unique
and complementary ways exploring facets
of architecture outside of the
parameters of conventional practice so I
would like for saving my aim this
evening is for this to be as
conversational as it possibly can all be
it in a rather false setting it is not a
lecture hence the reason why we are
sitting here and there is although there
are images there is no screen it is like
an unscripted question time I aim to do
some very short introductions in a
minute so this is the format I'll do
some introductions I will ask some first
questions to set the scene and then
hopefully a conversation will develop
and I hope also to open it up to all of
you if you have questions throughout is
not a we speak and then after 50 minutes
an hour you are some questions and then
we go for a beer I should say that
afterwards after about an hour
ten hour and twentieth we're really
rolling we'll be having some drinks in
the south jury room when hopefully our
guests will be able to stay afterwards
and we'll be able to continue on the
conversation so it is an old trope that
people in my position say our guests
need no introduction but I'm going to do
that anyway by just saying a few things
that they have in common they are all
AAA graduates in chronological order
Roger
to my far right graduated in 1971
Meredith in 1990 Amandine my far left in
2010 and Jack in 2014 that's a total of
around the table 84 years post AAA
experience that we're going to tap into
in the next hour if you include my own
sorry
we'll find out Roger if you include my
own there's another 30 years to add to
that but as I say I my aim is to
introduce and just set this thing
rolling and then conclude at the end
with a question all of the architects
interestingly are or have worked for
themselves set up their own businesses
worked for and with architects small
medium and large both at home and
internationally but more than that and I
think this is the point of the evening
not just architecture but developer
creative director entrepreneur artist
theater designer interior designer
writer build a teacher academic editor
and curator amongst other things so I'm
going to race through some particular
introductions Amandine on my far left in
night in 2007 won the RBA bronze medal
for her project cabinet career
curiosities
she is a unit tutor as I think most of
you will know of unit 9 teaching with
Chris's Pierce and Matthews
she is also the assistant professor of
building heritage and architecture at
the Osmo school of architecture and
design she has worked forth and I think
this is a particularly interesting point
relevant possibly for this evening for
medium and big international a technical
term big international practices DCA and
OMA a small start-up practice al-jihad
pike and has set up forgive me Aladin
kassler skates f no thank you
I apologize 20 Norwegians in the in the
room in 2015 based in the centre of Oslo
it is dedicated to the principles of
sensitive transformation reconstruction
and restoration of existing buildings
both in practice and teaching Jack has
worked in Australia and France of the
latter from Nouvel in 2016 I'm sure you
all know he curated the British Pavilion
at the Venice Biennale the architecture
Biennale his author of Real Estate's
voila
a life without debt in 2014 a
contributing editor to the architectural
review and editor-at-large for Zura 32c
a contemporary cultural magazine that
believes in the intelligence of his
readers meredith on my right your words
not my words set up in 1997 and i think
there's a question here maybe we can
come on to is to what happened
postgraduate those years from 1990 91 to
1997 as to what you did for seven years
posted a a his website mol architects
website states they are an award-winning
architectural practice from the black
house in the cambridge offends which i'm
sure you all know to living architecture
collaboration on the balancing bond and
other projects collaborating the
practice has been marked out by its
distinctiveness originality and
personality
Oh further on on moles website it is
says when Alain de bottoms living
architecture asked whether we would
consider acting as a UK architect in
delivering houses delivered by overseas
in a veg Commerce Star architects I
pause for thought I was worried about
lots of things would we end up as
another architects Drudge is it to be a
thankless task would we end up bearing
the financial brunt of an impractical
design I think there's something really
interesting to explore there in terms of
of practice in the 21st century he is a
regular winner of awards including the
late last year 2017 the houseboat won
the Stephen Lawrence Prize the Hassid
launch price I should say rewards the
best project in the UK with a
construction budget of less than 1
million pounds mold would also like to
congratulate is the quote from the web
civil miles website would also like to
congratulate everyone involved
especially our site architect Rebecca
Granger and our client from Rogers
yegorovich and that segues neatly into
Roger he is a developer and a creative
director of solid space building new
housing and mixed used projects he
claims that entrepreneurship is fun in
his early days in 1974 he sold white
shoes on the Portobello Road
oh I've dredged we'll hear that story
later I have a question related to you
on the are a website I should say he has
up he was appointed honorary surveyor by
the Royal Academy in 2015 I was rather
intrigued by this the our a website says
he also sits on the AH raised client
committee and cost control committee his
supporters enabled the RA to undertake
this ambitious redevelopment Cigala
which is the Ras first honorary surveyor
appointed him recognition for his
contributions to the redevelopment Roger
argues that in his book let me kill know
this ish and we all be developers the
architects widely held distrust of being
commercial
having serious consequences for the
profession he advises architects to get
their hands dirty by expanding into
other areas such as property development
in order to understand their own
creative commercial mode and understand
the decisions that have a tangible
financial impact he is author of this
book we will be developers a very well
thumbed copy from the AAA library I
should say in which there are eight
dream scenarios finally Roger Moore says
he wanted to be involved in every aspect
from start to finish so I've been a
developer for 30 years
can I start by asking a general question
to all of you
let's start our beginning how did your
time at the AAA influence you prepare
you your time and academia prepare you
for the first years of your career and
did it influence the steps that you took
Roger how would you go for it we're
doing in order I mean as Paul said I
graduated here in 1971 which is a fair
time ago I kind of entrepreneurship was
was the excitement for me in this place
you know the a gave me an ability to
think which I really had no nature no no
approach to when I entered these doors I
was a young man of eighteen and I was
fresh from the suburbs and somehow that
first moment of a heady smell
of coffee and go while cigarettes just
kind of capture captivated me to an
extent that I was I felt I had arrived
at a place that I I just suddenly
understood and wanted to be part of and
I was lucky enough to be here for a fool
five years we had a year out where we
occupied a a premises as an office
across in Bedford Square we weren't very
good at paying our phone bill we had a
nice free phone bill that was being paid
by a and one afternoon a very sweet man
who was the accountant here called mr.
Russell always wore a smart suit came
trotting across the square he said Roger
I'm rather embarrassed but do you mind
paying the phone bill because they're
just about to cut off of the a a phone I
said of course I'd be happy to rushing
around thinking where that checkbook or
which checkbook I could write to that
particular time I think that the
experience that we I had here when I was
here
teachers Ron Herron was a great
inspiration taught me for two years
Ron Herron was I think one of the most
interesting of the alka gram people
really because Ron had a view about the
city and if you if you read his his work
about say walking City walking say to
the city as he described was its its now
with hindsight when you look at our
programs work it's very easy to see the
graphics and to see the graphics of
walking city but when he explained it as
his intelligence was extraordinary as he
in in in what we're talking about late
sixties he had a notion that walking
City was about the speed by which you
transferred Traverse a city
had this notion that actually a city is
defined not by distance but my time and
so he would say that if you have a
transport system that actually allows
you to traverse a city whether it's an
hour or 50 minutes these are standard
times if you don't have a transport
system that actually enables you to
travel this sense of a hundred miles
suddenly your city is a hundred miles
long and I thought this was a kind of
this was wondrous because it then
matched with other debates at sixties in
the in the a a about the notions of time
about the notions of transport and
suddenly the clouds lifted and one
became it became apparent that the the
thought as an architect made you able to
challenge what was happening in the
world around you and that was really the
experience that I had but can I ask you
when if I'm correct you left the AAA and
immediately set up yeah with Pierre's
another season WG yeah so your intention
was one presumes to be an architect you
know no it's not entirely true I did
have three days work as in a in an
agency than in a drawing office and the
job I was given was designing a barber
shop in a prison and I found it
difficult to sustain it so three days
was the extent of my professional
experience outside my own enterprises so
no yeah if the reality was that we we
established ourselves in a year out as
an independent little firm and we did
some very nice shock fitting jobs in
South Molton streets and as a young man
I had the outrageous thoughts to
approach the cities of air and say to
the cities of air that I thought it'd be
rather good idea if they thought of
pedestrian Ising South Molton Street he
was horrified how dare you who are you
I said well I just thought it was a good
idea and I thought I'd share it with you
thank you goodbye
so yes we did that in our in our third
year then when we finished we then
carried on setting out I'm on Tina I'm
gonna follow on that how did the AAA
impact my career choices I guess every
single job that I've gone into including
Chipperfield
which is a big practice i all of those
jobs came to me through people that I
knew from the air so even though I was
entering a large practice I was entering
a practice with colleagues that I liked
to work with and I think that one of the
biggest things that has come out of the
school has been the network of people
that you continue to work with once
you've graduated and whether that be a
chipper field or at Alto at Pyke or now
in my own practice I continue those
collaborations and I think that that is
one of the big things that the school
gives you it gives you of course this
way of thinking and an ability to think
creatively and it kind of teaches you
how to do anything in a way I think the
a so when you graduate even though you
are not necessarily coming out with a
traditional architectural training you
have an ability to learn very quickly
and to adapt to all kinds of different
situations I think that's a very big
strength i I don't necessarily want this
to be a debate about education but I
think the point is well made that often
I think we get caught up in the
education debate more training mm-hmm
architects being ready for practice and
I would say and I think this is
interesting that the four of you hope
have all immensely successful careers
as a result of that there's a bad
education so that at least me as the
eyebrow summarizing they're checking for
you well what can one say about such a
prestigious institution my time here was
always tortured actually and much like
in airplanes where they advise you to
put on your own oxygen mask before
helping those around you almost all of
my work focused on the kind of
pragmatics of the difficulties or no
difficulties of perhaps too strong word
but the problematics of of going to
architecture school in the early 21st
century I had no money I mean the reason
I applied to the AAA I had to do
something because the project I was
working on for Johnny Bell One New
Change which is a mall opposites and
Paul's
the Irish developer went bankrupt and
the project was subsequently sold to
someone else this is sort of early 2009
and there was like 90% unemployment for
architects in London at the time so I
thought I would go back to university
and the a didn't accept my Australian
degree so I had to start again and they
gave me one year off for I guess good
behavior or something but basically my
entire time at ba is a very natural
consequence of the time that I was here
and what was going on at the time I had
no money which meant that I had to work
in many other jobs simultaneously the
only thing I could really do was I had
some background in editorial so I
started typesetting science textbooks
for the University of Manchester Press
they had a little office on Fleet Street
where I used to work and then through
that I eventually convinced the
architectural review to take me on and
let me be a writer and then I kind of
branched out into website design because
that was a place where no one really
knew how much it costs to do things on
the web at that time so you could charge
a lot before I used to run kind of
package systems where I would do sort of
rebranding for like lawyers in bath or
you know midsize
veterinarian practices in Bristol and
you would go and redesign their logo and
produce all of their material and
produce the website I would do the work
of kind of four or five people and then
charge them half as much as what it
would cost somewhere else and that's how
I paid for my fees so I would work all
through the night and then come to
school so as a result I was constantly
concerned about not being able to make
my cash flow work therefore I ended up
writing about debt you know and and also
apart from that I'm basically the
synthesis of the four tutors that I had
while I was here Liam Young Kate Davies
Pierre Victoria O'Reilly and Maria
Giudice in that my approach to politics
the production of space architecture the
possibilities of architecture as a
discipline are just if you took all of
those ideas and somehow badly handled
them that's how you end up with me and
of course a confluence with the
political situation in London at the
time I mean 2011 which is sort of the
middle of my degree was a time in London
it was quite a remarkable year it began
with the Arab Spring and then kind of
rapidly escalated towards the August
riots and the Occupy movement and this
was a kind of political awakening for me
as well as I think many other people my
age and that's why I started a student
publication because AAA has such a long
tradition and there weren't none and in
the school at that time and I liked very
much this idea that you saw the student
publication it runs while you're at the
school and then you leave and it stops
rather than having these kind of
institutionalized things so in that
sense by the time I graduated from the a
I already had another career or many
other careers that were in other fields
you know sort of doing this and that I
don't know if that really just answers
the question no it does and you've
raised a few other points you've been
looking at my notes here no no no no no
actually there's one of your family one
other thing I would say which just comes
to mind which is decision making and the
economy I won't I'll come back on for
that one final thing I would add is I've
never been I'm kind of in a way
surprised to be here because I have
never been a very good academic
performer
in fact the AAA tried to kick me out
twice once for non-payment of fees
purity on my hand once for a very poor
academic performance and and yeah you
know often it's the case with people who
don't do well in a traditional academic
scenario you think the reason you don't
do well at the school is because the
school somehow doesn't have the
mechanisms to recognize your distinct
genre of genius and it's a shortcoming
in the institution and so then in my
fifth year and final year I decided that
actually I was going to show that I
could beat them at their own game and
then I would dedicate myself completely
to doing the absolute best that I could
I was gonna get honours I was gonna get
TSI pass I was gonna nail this and I
still did extremely badly which made me
realize that innocence was not a problem
of like unrecognized genius it was just
poor academic performance should we move
on we'll come back Meredith what
happened in those intervening periods
post a a a graduation to use setting up
mol architects which I didn't describe
in the introduction well I have to roll
back a bit before that so I came to the
AAA having gone to Sheffield University
and the Royal College of Art and before
and during my or after my year out I
also set up a business with two mates
which we carried on for our time at the
Royal College of Art and then when I
came to the AAA I was hung and you know
was wasn't entirely convinced that I
wanted to be an architect so I had
originally in fact applied not to work
in an architect's office but to work in
in the National Theatre and by the time
I did actually get an interview but by
then my money had run out and I've gone
and worked for an architect and that
came back around later a later date so
it for me architecture was always a
problem of long of how long things took
older I get the longer I
prepared to wait for the gratification
so originally I wanted to be a painter
so the AAR then left for a year and went
to live in the States and was painting
pictures and selling notes and then
after I left the a it was a different
economic crash at the time in 1991 the
last recession where there's no work
here and I went to work in the Far East
which was a very different kind of
experience and kind of way of producing
the Far East future for architecture in
architecture I worked for an interior
designer and and architect in Taiwan so
I was there for a few years and then and
then I got the opportunity to do some
theater work with a friend in Ireland
sided in Ireland doing theater work for
a bit say it was quite a secure TISS
route to come back to our retexture
which I then worked I worked for a guy
who wasn't Regan arctic but he was
interested in building things and I
ended up put in my hand I'm saying well
and he was looking for a project manager
to work you know to build things so I
said I wouldn't mind doing that because
the guy he had in mind it wasn't
available so I then did that and then
set up a building company with the
joiner who was on site and did that for
a year and found out that was really
really hard work and then bought a bit
of land I used the spreadsheet at Roger
gabion to figure out how I could make it
into a development and gradually I did a
small development and then I surf a
business running architecture say sort
of quite a long winded and securities
route and my sort of eventual decision
to really go for it was probably because
I was old enough to be prepared to put
in the time and to stay in one place as
well which is necessary and I want
he can't be an object and cut easily be
an object and build things which I was
really interested in I'm interesting
building things I like stuff and you
have to stay somewhere yeah not because
the building takes a long time but if
you want a business you need clients and
you need to you need to get those
relationships too so the clients have a
chance to find you before you borrow
somewhere else yeah I think in Peter
Thiel's book one to zero I know there's
a little quote of a start-up messed up
is not a very good starting place you
have to gather criteria right for
starting up so perhaps perhaps a
question also for Roger and for Amandine
and in the early I want to comment on
what jack says because I think that I'd
enjoyable time here but I was also you
know not and I wasn't in the top ten any
sense at all and I had kind of a and I
think the the most interesting thing is
that what what's fascinating is that
there is a mainstream here at the area
which is a mainstream career which in a
way one makes a decision that you'll you
actually are or not gonna be part of
that mainstream career and I think
there's a kind of I think there's
something that goes on in in schools of
architecture which i think is really
really dangerous because actually if you
look around and you judge for yourself
who are the master builders in any
generation you can count it on one hand
and it's almost it is immutable fact
that you can count it on one hand
whether they all went to the a or didn't
they count on like you're saying you can
recognize those people yeah that were
they they kind of in a school when they
and they emerge and then their careers
emerge but then there's a lot more than
the people you count on one hand that
are passionate about architecture and
passion and certainly passionate to my
mind was that that passion was driven to
me and given to me by my experience here
but actually those pathways as to how
you make a career when you're not one of
these
and for the master-builders is really
really difficult and so you actually
have to forge it for yourself you don't
have there's no sort of easy route okay
I can look back now on a kind of
whatever it is you say I mean it's fifty
years of practice so you can say okay I
somehow managed to get somewhere but I'm
still frustrated as hell when some
stupid plan that comes up and says
you can't build your and I'm just saying
I know just I'd be happy for 50 years I
do know what a building looks like well
how do you know what are you telling me
but anyway that's a they luckily that my
colleagues don't let me go to planning
meetings they're much more sensible but
I do think there is there is something
really hope that Jack has pointed out
and I think it's very important for all
of our pathways to actually pick a
pathway and I think it I think it's very
interesting that Meredith talked about
this kind of time it takes I mean I
played here when I was playing with the
politics of Imperial College i sat on
the council here just as a little story
at the side when I came to my my diploma
I got a telephone call from Peter cougar
but I just was just getting married and
he said Roger we're opening your your
portfolio there's there's nothing in it
I said Peter I'm in the bar Bobby my
haircut I'm getting married
I've been there for five years you know
what I've done I've rescued the a a from
the Imperial College just get on with it
and give me up okay now I know that
those things don't happen to the LA
but it's kind of in a way thank God I
mean Peter them rating very kindly in
his in his final report I remember it
was really very lovely he said Roger ran
out of challenges of the air but I know
you'll find themselves where health do
you do you think that is your
decision-making at an early stage even
at the AAA anticipating a career maybe
architecture related is it are there
conscious decisions to make along the
way is there I don't want to be so
cruise to say there's a business plan
but is there is there a pathway that you
know which road is gonna be that one
that one or that one and certain
criteria associated to that or is it
more or as well as the result of an
accidental sequence of fortuitous or
otherwise events influences I might make
a kind of more philosophical reflection
in that case which is I don't believe
really in the possibility of human
agency in as much as you cannot I mean
the beauty of drawing and then the
meditative quality of drawing for me is
that you cannot know what will be drawn
in advance of it being drawn it is
something which comes into being in the
act of being done and I believe that's
generally the way that you I mean we can
have some ideas about what it is we
intend to do but we cannot know what
those things will be until we are in the
process of doing so in that sense I
don't think it's possible to say I'm
gonna be a star architect I'm gonna be a
sole practitioner doing bespoke
resume to like baths you know you can't
choose that easily and one of the
questions I was asked earlier was how
does one direct one's career and it's a
very difficult question I'm not really
sure but what I can say is that of
course we all make decisions about
ourselves to the best of our ability at
the time knowing what we know about
ourselves and the world and you know I
can only speak for myself which is I
knew certain things which was I didn't
like working in an office for other
people
I had only had
experiencing officers were my attempts
to try and sort of take greater control
over the projects were stymied by the
hierarchy of the company and I found
that frustrating and I just knew that
that wasn't gonna be for me and since
there wasn't an obvious if there had
been another model which I had been
aware of that was perhaps more suited to
what I knew about myself I probably
would have gone with that but since
there wasn't one I decided to pursue
something else but of course yeah you
can't tell you you make decisions one at
a time even an overarching plan never
really is executed the way you think can
I count on you please I think very
little comes into being without
imagination mmm I think unless something
is imagined it cannot be hmm so at the
point you start with your pencil to make
a drawing unless you imagine which way
your pencils going to go there won't be
a drawing so you are if you will that
drawing into being it might not here in
the way that you have in your mind's my
yes that's absolutely right it's the
same with life and actually those people
have lesser or greater abilities to
imagine a future many people a majority
perhaps have very little ability to look
far ahead and actually stay in the same
job or this with you know in the same
circumstance for the rest of their lives
and often they're miserable about them
because they haven't got the will to to
see that change is possible so from your
story of your time at the AAA to the
point you're sitting at this table here
mmm I find it hard to believe that much
of that hasn't been the result of you
applying yourself to the next step it
doesn't matter whether it's the next
week you're saying you respond to media
circumstance no that's well no I should
be very honest about that which is I
have a 10-year plan and I'm a year 7 of
lutonium plan and things are going
mix success but the absurdity of having
the 10 year plan is precisely that I do
have an imagination for where it is I
want to be but also in the process of
executing it it has to adapt so of
course you know but I think I think yeah
I think I'd add to that to say actually
the recognition is the record
recognition of opportunity and I suppose
that really I would say the the the
skill the the skill that you betrayed
the way in which we value our
imagination is we use our imagination to
open opportunity and that's then a
tradable skill it doesn't matter where
in what field and I think that's the
unique tradable skill of an architect
I'm using words here which are not
really apply to discussing architecture
but I think that it's unfortunate
they're not because we are all selling
our selling our service we that's how we
survive and if we can't kind of value or
determine what the value is that we
bring to that then we're then we're
actually not selling ourselves at the
right level and that's why I'm
fascinated and I think there's another
part of this conversation which is a
conversation about opportunity but I
think it's opportunity but it's also
experiences and I think you have to work
it you kind of build yourself up
iteratively and until you've had a
certain number of experiences sometimes
you're not really able that's what has
been my you know you try something you
do it for a few years and that teaches
you something and then you see a path
from you know from that experience and
then that that pushes you on to the next
thing and I think that those that
ability to of trial and error and then
building on that and creating
foundations is something that's really
important as well I think it's operate
it's not opportunity by contemplation
it's opportunity by actually having to
face it by actually saying ok somebody's
asked me to do this somebody's asked me
to to rebuild their to do their logo
somebody's asked me to do the shock fit
in
now that's the opportunity how do I use
all my package of experience and I think
the most fascinating thing to me is is
in a genuine sense I really have
I learned something every single day of
my life I mean it's a kind of I kind of
can't quite fathom it
so again I take that route back to the a
I take it back to that kind of
experience I have all that recognition
of the pleasure of that of actually that
experience that that that clarity that
you never quite get there but there's
another opportunity another and your
experiences would you say it in in the
early years I mean you've Roger
particularly just generally that in the
early years everything is an opportunity
and you're looking at things in a not in
an objective quantified where you're not
measuring it anyway and and you see the
opportunity and and are able to develop
it well I think they're perhaps now
you're more measured I don't know I
think it's I think what's interesting is
is there's a kind of wonderful
youthfulness experior sort of a
youthfulness that actually says every
opportunity is one that I can attack all
so you don't have any limitations on
what you go for so you know at one stage
I own quite a large chunk of Liverpool
and basically it was a it was an
extraordinary opportunity and in terms
of how we did the regeneration and we
established something called the
creative industries course or which then
became a numeric all these things I lost
that project because it was taken away
from me because I was a principal as a
developer and as a developer you're a
principal not a not a professional your
professional but your principal means
you you're your they're committed to it
and when the market downturns you you do
it gets taken away from you so you know
in a way there's a kind of that I
suppose what happens is after a period
of years you kind of that this somehow
filters into your brain and you try and
go for the opportunities that are more
within your scope
rather than these kind of rather ones
that are wander but but I think the
opportunities to still the opportunities
whatever it is is that's the recognition
that's the kind of that's the kind of
translation between creative thinking
and the world around us that actually
does allow us to give value so it's it's
more than I think Walton Malcolm
Gladwell calls the a sequence of a
patchwork of lucky break see it is the
recognition all of those opportunities
of how your architectural understanding
can transform what you see so what we're
doing is we're in the we're we're in the
transformative process of remaking and
making and remaking our environment to
fit the future and that transformation
is a recognition of the opportunity that
that idea of luck I think is quite an
interesting one and you know people that
do get somewhere interesting or don't
get somewhere interesting the idea that
somebody's is lucky there's a book I
read on luck and the guy who interviewed
unlucky people and lucky self-confessed
lucky people or unlucky people at the
same interview in a cafe with each one
and he arranged to be five minutes late
and left some money on the floor for
each one and all of the lucky people the
self-confessed bucket people all of them
picked up the money and I have pocketed
it or and declared it and all of them
spoke to someone while in the five
minutes they wet work work waiting for
the interview to start and all of the
young lucky ones did neither of those
things
so in if we're lucky or do we make our
own luck do we see opportunities and
actually people didn't get places are
are connecting constantly and actually
in in architecture as in any other field
unless you're connecting to be unless
you you know the idea that you are a
genius and therefore you will be found
is such a fallacy you know it's all
about going out you know
hmm yeah I mean there are two kind of
aspects to what it is you both said one
is that from before I work
worked in architecture my first job was
in journalism and even from the very
first job I had I've always stood not
strategically but I've always said no to
things I didn't want to do I mean I did
a lot of things I didn't enjoy doing
because I needed the money and so on but
when certain opportunities which look
like amazing opportunities presented
them to me if they were not something
which I really felt would advance a
particular agenda then I felt
comfortable saying no to it and I think
being able to just I'm thinking more
about the context of how opportunity is
sold to people now increasingly it may
not be a real opportunity and maybe you
know do do this work for free and
there's an opportunity to get exposure
or there's an opportunity to work for a
large firm or there's a you know and and
often this kind of divert the truth that
Raj is saying about opportunity gets
concealed or gets repurposed and
repackaged in a way that actually is not
a real opportunity I think we have to be
very wary of other people telling us
that they're offering us an opportunity
I think and but the other thing I'll
also about kind of luck I mean yeah
totally I think people make their own
luck and make their unfortune but it's
also I think important to acknowledge
that you have certain luck or certain
abilities which are innate from birth
due to the random happenstance of the
time place and conditions in which you
were born I mean yeah it hasn't been an
easy path to found my own cultural
Institute and architectural practice and
so on but actually in a broader sense
it's been very easy because I am of
course a white middle-class mail from an
anglo-saxon country more and that allows
you immediately to operate with certain
opportunities and certain let's say luck
which is not a universal condition and I
think that type of let's say chance of
birth is also important to acknowledge
yeah but I think it's I mean and I think
a lot of other thing we're not talking
about as well as how much hard work it
is how much hard work Oh Jason like what
it actually is in the end I think when
you're trying to like set up a
trajectory for yourself it's it's just
gonna be a lot of hard work yeah and
it's not very glamorous often you know I
think especially when you start out for
yourself going back to your point about
how long projects take you embark on on
a project and then it takes three years
of your life if it's something that
you're building on-site sometimes it can
be very labor-intensive very involved
and you just you never know exactly what
it's what those projects are gonna
become and I think while you're doing
those I mean that's been our project for
example we've been building a house on
an island in Norway where we have to
travel down in the middle of winter and
go twice a week to site and it becomes a
kind of all-consuming project but at the
same time many if you can see other
opportunities like doing the visiting
school there at the same time and you
can start to tie academia to the
projects that you do or bring students
so that these projects that are very
involved it can have many facets and I
think that that's one model that for me
has been very successful I think it's uh
I would I would support that and I'd say
that actually if I look back on my life
it's a life through projects and I think
that those projects I think because
projects do have different timescales
and I think in as a developer a huge
amount of sites that I look at to try
and acquire which are to mock to my mind
the opportunities I did I don't succeed
there's no chance or luck about that
reason I mean we're having read your
book you're you're you seem to be
tramping the streets of London the whole
yeah
okay yes I have you are actively seeking
out those opportunities yeah but it's
it's a very visual its it it I've toned
myself to look at this in a way so it
says when I'm standing on a street I'm
actually looking at what I refer to as
soft sites and soft sites really just
mean they're that they're sites where
development can take place whether we're
an insertion in the city could happen
but but actually my success in my
ability to be able to make that project
happen is a long way down the road it
doesn't stop me being as passionate
about that first moment that first
glimpse of standing there in that corner
and basically falling in love with that
particular site but it's okay you know
sometimes it's a rejected love affair
because the site doesn't want me so I'm
kind of enquire yeah that's a kind of
stalking spurned rejected love affair
I'm conscious that I'm failing in my
duties as a as a chairperson having
promised that I would open it up to the
to you to ask any questions throughout
the session so does anybody desperately
want a microphone sir thank you very
much I'm Richard Wolfe and I'm very
grateful to done my part three here and
I think it is a Cinderella part of
architectural training alas I agree with
Roger we are looking at any one moment
in time not at a handful maybe maybe a
few beyond that fourteen to twenty but
if you take the mathematics of the
number of chartered architects versus
the number of master builders the
possibility of you becoming one and
there isn't a case of you percolating up
like the royal family you will never be
part of them unless you're born into it
is one in 3,000 it's not a very good
statistic I'm hoping that the demise of
Karelian and the death of management
contracting may see the return of the
wider architectural community within the
construction process and that's where I
think a lot of skills and a lot of
previous architects have had creative
and meaningful employment and at the
moment
and many architects are merely part of a
supply chain who will take them for a
few hours and as Jack quite likely says
promised them the earth and then tossed
them aside as they move on I really do
feel we are at a watershed the death of
me Brown and a generation that built at
that scale with that conviction
hopefully might happen again but let's
just see what happens to the death of
management contracting I think that
might see the traditional route of
contracting come forward and architects
as teams actually acknowledging that not
everybody can build like the master
craftsman but that we can have a real
positive influence on the amenity and
the value of our environment which is
the post-war on written gospel thank you
thank you for your point does anybody
else wish to make one yeah I think that
there is a danger of basically dragging
each other into a mentality of a small
kind of village parish cancer where we
kind of we know the place we know how it
works we know who are the players and
then we kind of we retail kind of
similar stories but actually we don't
address the reality we kind of get stuck
in this kind of in the past and
revisiting actually what what happened
and how it happened but actually yeah I
remember a few years ago and I I went to
see JG Ballard when he was still alive
and he gave a talk and he said one
sentence which I it kind of stuck to me
and it was actually probably ten well
more than ten years ago but it's that
one must create reality because you're
already living in a fictional world and
we are now already in the fictional
world and I don't know who these 10 or
15 Master architects are but none of
them has the solution nowadays none of
them actually has the solution when you
bring the economy the environment
resources migration none of them has
Ellucian and and yet we kind of very
easily kind of refer to them or kind of
seek comfort in in kind of the
achievements but the reality is far more
challenging and then actually yeah just
mentioning those names so I mean I can
see that there is a lot of experience on
the table and I I don't take this away
from from the table but I would like us
for the benefit of everybody in that
room to just kind of pose that question
is actually today and what does how does
one tackle the issue that I mean
architecture can cease to exist as a
profession in twenty twenty-five years
maybe even less than that I mean when
you bring in technology when you bring
in audio the kind of factor is the fact
that actually clients now kind of drift
away from the authority or the knowledge
of a professional so the challenges are
far greater than kind of dropping few
names and kind of expecting a reaction
and I answer that before I answer it
could I just find out in the room how
many people want to design buildings and
their future lives and of those people
we are on the table this was billed as
architects he had not taken a
conventional route or not working as
combined as conventional architects I
actually think I am working as a
conventional architect so much so now
we've had a slightly securities route so
is anyone looking for life as an
architect in a conventional sense or
hands up who is seeking a different kind
of life having gone through architecture
school so about a third that's
interesting combining the first question
I asked with those who want to build
buildings with the number of hands that
have just gone up in answer to your
second question every 75 or 80 percent
want to design build buildings and
there's probably 30% who want to do so
but not in a conventional way and I
think that's really interesting the
first thing is really interesting is
that the majority of people here want to
design buildings and your question it
was very very broad and I
think as architects we want to design
buildings we have to understand what the
limitations of desire not not our
possible in influence but our desire
what the limitations of that are so we
are acting within a system to do what we
want to do so the second part of your
question or sense of despair is that in
contrast to this idea from there being
master builders doing projects in a way
that we wish we could do them and in
answer to your common that we exist in
you know say a fictional world we we
exist you know in a world which is
populated by a construction and
procurement industry which is not the
same as it was 30 or 40 years ago and
it's not I really don't think to the
questioner over there that he's going to
revert to something that it was 30 years
ago it's going to if anything continue
on the path that is that if architects
we want to build buildings and be in
control of them we have to embrace that
way of building so if there is a
technical challenge architects have to
be trained up they have to be some
architects that take on that technical
challenge if it becomes in the hands of
project managers and quantity surveyors
architects have to become project
managers and quantity surveyors if
that's the way that buildings are
procured and we want to be in charge
then it can't be left to someone else
and for us to be the service industry
that provides the design bits which is
where increasingly we're getting
marginalised too so I think it's in the
hands of architects to accept that it's
a changing world and bring in to our
businesses people that can offer the
service that's required I think the the
the word I'd like to use is control and
I I think that when I when I stepped
away from architecture moved to
development then I took control of the
project I took all the risks on my own
bad I
how to kind of I didn't wouldn't say I
was was any kind of perfect plan but
it's it's it's not a decision that it's
quite a color carbon drive decision
you're moving from not being in control
to being in control as far as you can
and we don't we don't talk much about
collaboration collaboration is a very
interesting I think not just a skill set
but it's a state of mind so actually
when I when I say I moved to control I
don't move to control a virtual control
of a project but only through the
collaborative process it's only when I
can kind of work with my architects will
work with my funders work with the my
investors work with the planning
authority work with the landowner work
with the supply chain that I can
actually create that project but but if
you look at in in a career that is a
long spanning career you give up the
number of projects you do is that you do
with a but fewer number of projects
because you're engaged with them we've
just finished a you know a relatively
small house we they don't eat for five
minutes you know it's it's you're you're
measuring and you
years it's not there the every every day
of my that five years I worked on the
house is gone every day that the
Meredith thing but it is that actually
it's much more like film production
you're much more effectively able then
to take the kind of the total control of
the creative project and ensure that
that major project is actually delivered
but at the same time when she crossed
that Rubicon you then have to ensure
that your projects that you make are
actually going to be financially viable
so you actually now have to measure and
start to work in terms of risk which is
a whole other aspect which I'm always
very amazed surprised and frustrated is
not part of the opportunities it doesn't
anticipate the fact that we engage
directly with the changing world we
start to look for solutions that can
potentially tackle these issues so
that's why I guess I wanted to say with
my previous comment is that it's this is
the heartbeat it's the stark attacks the
stark attacks and the kind of the pseudo
avant-garde it's that this is think I
mean nowadays with the technology with
the drawing equipment it's easy to be
avant-garde actually it's not it's it's
not a big deal it's it's it's actually
how you tackle these other complex
matrix of issues I think I think I think
you're right but I think that the thing
you you're missing is a notion of scale
and that actually to be truthful the the
larger the scale which is where the kind
of architectural imagination says if we
flick through any magazine than the
sexiest projects of the biggest projects
as they display was in reality if you
stand any chance of controlling a
project the money that you're
controlling is not in billions it's
actually much more amounts of money
therefore your opportunity is
in the small scale now for myself I
think the small scale has a huge
influence on the way in which thought in
the city evolves and it's in reality
it's by working on the small scale you
do have an opportunity to your
controller look at this slightly
different angle I mean our arts
historian that's why I didn't put my
hand up xx ISA an architectural
historian now I think that architectural
historians have not done very well on
this I don't know very many books no
very few in fact I've written histories
of careers and the typology of careers
it's always been a bit of a mystery to
me and so how young architects famous
have become famous how they actually got
going if you look at the very early work
let's say the Incan a Beulah or let's
say look abused you miss funder or Frank
Lloyd Wright they're very very different
when I visited Oak Park
I saw how is it that this guy just got
one job after another and enabled him to
do a masterpiece every damn time how is
it that Corbusier kind of goes to work
with Behrens then ends up in Paris does
a magazines and so on how is it the Mies
funder or followed this path and that
path and I don't think very much work
has been done by historians on on the
conditions of production of architecture
indeed the proposition the architecture
is not only designed but produced seems
to be very often overlooked and it's not
just a matter of impact of the patronage
in the old sense scarcely exists they
used to be historians of patronage you
know 16th 17th century and the clients
of the patron was in some sense the
co-designer of many many famous projects
but I was saying to Jack earlier outside
that I've always been puzzled as to how
a young architect directs their own
career artists come out of art school
and if they can get a studio and produce
a body of work the next thought is can I
get a dealer I kind of get to show
accesses and actions come out and they
what they need is an agent and often so
why don't architects have agents yeah
I've always thought that's a huge gap in
the market and architectural agency and
if I were not preoccupied with other
things so there's there's some kind of
structural picture that needs to be
developed about the the cultivation and
the procurement of Architects go ahead I
was gonna make a similar command but
actually from another point of view that
then we have the huge advantage that we
get to do things that people pays for
you don't have to produce it and then
sell it and so I mean I always found it
a bit sad that usually when we have
these discussions around the profession
and practice there is usually a general
mood of like how hard it is and how much
harder it is now than it used to be and
what it's actually I think we have
potential for new paths that were not
available before that are gonna open up
for new places and and also I still in
my very short experience see it always
as like oh my god I'm gonna get to do
this and someone's gonna pay for it
which is I guess on this very like if
you remained for a bit longer in this
kind of grateful mood then things seem
to be a lot better even though you're
struggling and it's tough I want to
follow up on on both these points on the
point that was made before and but
before I do I want to give very very
microscopic biographies of me symposia
because I find these guys really typify
let's say 20th century ideas about how
to create and in fact it's a tradition
which themselves they copied from the
15th 16th century and actually even he
took someone like REM he's very aware of
this is a strategy eyes
aware of it as a strategy it's a very
banal kind of way but basically kibou za
of course you know his parents I think
his mother taught English and his father
was a craftsman he made boxes like
wooden boxes and not sure what the
purpose of these boxes was but you know
caboose ei basically dropped out of high
school and went to what we would now
consider to be like community arts
college he never really had any formal
training and miraculously managed to end
up in in Behrens office and he
reinvented himself of course you know he
realized that control of the media was
gonna be the way that he would promote
himself he adopted the pen name of Kabul
because no one would ever write in
letters to his own magazine and
eventually people started writing in
saying we prefer this kabuki a guy he
seems to be better than this genre so he
changed his name permanently but there's
a kind of act of reinvention and also an
ambiguity of class which allows them to
suddenly operate in different
environments Mies was like a total
bastard I mean really terrible guy maybe
greatest architect that I in my opinion
but really terrible guy he you know came
from very common stock and also
reinvented himself by changing his name
he couldn't change his name to like nice
von robe because von was a protected
title so he made it van der in order to
give the implication of being let's say
pseudo Dutch German nobility and he
married the daughter of a wealthy
industrialist who he slept around with
other people all the time including
fathering an illegitimate son on the
Romanian front during World War one and
then he divorced his wife after having a
couple of kids kept all of her money
kicked her out of the family apartment
and turned it into his own office you
know he treated Lily Reich a woman who
basically invented the freestanding wall
extremely badly after the war she was
like maybe I could come to Chicago maybe
we could be together he was like now
beat it
I mean basically what I'm trying to
describe is both of these figures were
extremely ambitious extremely ruthless
and understood that the way to they
understood first of all that media and
writing and books and publications was
an excellent way to promote yourself
read mine and and you know they really
wanted to be famous people and I think
that and they were willing to do pretty
much whatever it took in order to
achieve that so there's no great mystery
for me in that in that lineage sooner or
later you have to do a villa and that's
it can I had a couple more biographies
mmm short biographies say when I was a
teenager and was discovering
architecture I I discovered festival
mackintoshes a hill house I came from
that you know a little town will town so
it was taken a fantastic thing for me to
discover real architecture in books and
the other one was the Charles and Ray
Eames house in California and that has
stayed with me for long time and I did
it did talks for par three course at the
Bartlett and I was talking about
collaboration and went back to look at
my is what inspired me to be coming up
architects and what's interesting is to
discover that Mackintosh I had never
realized because Mackintosh was works
for a big company could get us be
something in something which eventually
didn't quite get les to be news bliss
Hanuman Hanuman kepi Hanuman kepi and
they made him an associate of the
adventure became Hanuman Kevin Macintosh
but his main buildings were all done
under the umbrella of Hanuman kepi and
you look at the other way they're doing
and they these over you know bloated
Victorian building there's nothing like
his work and when he fell out with them
because he wanted them to really go for
this new secessionist architect that he
opted she was loving he went on his own
and actually is you know his work
disappeared you didn't manage it so what
did he take to become an architect you
know what happened to his career I took
his career always with the collaboration
of
existing set of people who knew how to
new how to run the business can work
what kind of stuff and I had to see him
he started off painting watercolors did
furniture did interiors built up to
these fantastic work it was the opposite
way around they ended up a drunk in
Suffolk painting watercolors and the
other one was chosen waves I thought
where all the Charles array in sizes all
very interesting but you saw them missed
one the points of trying to make the
buildings are produced as well as design
yeah and I just finished teaching a
course on filming and architecture I'm
gonna have a symposium here 27th of
April we're gonna have one but one of
the points I made was that there's a
great similarity of some levels between
making films and making buildings
because you have a designer or a
director they've got an idea but then
does the money meant the men in suits
and they often have the final cut now as
a critic when I started writing for
magazines I was an art critic and I was
an architecture critic you go to an art
show are you assume that what you see on
the walls is pretty much what the artist
could do wanted to do I go onto a
building and I find all kinds of if
spots and qualifications because the
architect didn't have full control I
assume that you went into
entrepreneurship in order to try to
bring together the producer and the
director now until we can be confident
that we have a good culture of
production and adults and we do
procurement and all the rest of it I
think it's very difficult to talk about
young careers controlling I'm steering
themselves what I wanted to say before
is that there are three spheres of
design that the architect has opened to
them they have the sphere of the design
of the firm and the social figure of the
architect themselves which has to do
with whether you design your company as
a sole practitioner I mean we use all
these words studio offers at ali-a we
don't really understand what they all
mean
partnership and so on but each one has a
specific structure associated to it it
can be a collective it can be a
collaborative and so on and so forth
there is the possibility for designing
the way and
Architects present themselves to the
world and so on the second sphere of
design is what I would call procedural
design which has to do with the
structure of how we manage projects the
types of procurement we have the types
of project finance we have how let's say
the building itself unfolds as a process
and the third of course is the design of
architecture as a built form and you can
innovate then as a response to the needs
of everyday life and so on and they
should ideally all be interconnect and I
think in the best cases they are but
they can also be divergent and you can
decide to focus your entire career on
redefining the structure of the
architectural office or redefining the
model of procurement and model of
procedure for how buildings be executed
or you're not interested in those you're
only interested in designing a very
specific type of form you know they seem
to me to be the main possibilities and
in a sense what sort of bridges across
all of us at this table which is that I
think we're all interested in to greater
or lesser extents all three of those I
think it's also kind of there's the fear
of compromise so I think that when I set
out when I may when I made the pathway
to come to to try and control the
projects it's because I felt that in the
in the stricter potential sentence the
projects I was involved were very
compromised by the clients client
advisers Charles Affairs whoever happen
to be and that compromised disturbed
with deeply disturbing because they
undermined the essence of what the
project was about and I think that that
in a way in contemporary practice it
gets because of budgetary bigger there
is almost you feel in some of these very
big projects there is no idea there is a
there is a kind of you know there's a
billion a billion pounds of sterling or
two billion pounds of sterling to be
paid to be I mean on them and I
understand that as of tonight I see
Power Station just was sold - was it the
Malaysian government I mean in you know
say you're and then you know
you go back to Cedric prices idea
Battersea Power Station which is the
table with the chimneys and nothing
underneath it and so you said that the
kind of the idea the idea behind the
project which is what we all crave for
what what we have - well it begins with
we have to sustain and the only way we
can sustain it is if we have in my mind
more kind of active control that doesn't
mean that we have control in every
essence we just have to have influence
and I think that Brian's point is a very
interesting one which is I agree that
they that you look at the film world and
there's much more involvement in
creativity and much more benefit to
creativity
whereas in the development world
creativity is something you buy
shamelessly
and put it on the front of a badge while
you get a planning consent and then
immediately wash your hands of it so
it's so I think we've somehow allowed
the world to do to disfigure that could
the creativity that we break now
Meredith can it can I am sorry yeah just
about creativity but I think some of the
limitations that we're talking about
actually can have very creative
responses and like so for example we
work often in existing sites so in
heritage conditions and existing
buildings
so you there are many limitations that
come with the site you know before you
even get to the client but you know then
it's about learning how to respond
created to creatively to those
limitations and that challenge for me is
is the most interesting one actually in
practice yeah so and I think every
project brings different challenges
sometimes you have a client that's
fantastic but you have a site that's
very difficult and so if you have a
difficult client and a fantastic site
and you know it I don't think there's a
formula for it necessarily but it's
learning how to respond to it with the
kind of imaginative and creative
response that you develop over time and
become
something that maybe you can approach
with some type of consistency Thursday
yeah yeah Meredith can I be on some of
the themes that have Brian and r-rajim
I'm and Dean and Jack have been talking
about can you expand a little bit on
your your role is that rather crude term
executive architect I'm really
fascinated by that because in this room
in October last year Antoine and Ariadna
gave a really good talk on there were
they're a young practice and they are
getting projects going by almost being
an executive architect developing up
projects not as nas as a developer I
hasten to add but realize the
realization of other people's ideas and
can you just explain a little bit about
your work there and what benefits it
brings to your to your practice as a
field of operation well we took it as an
opportunity that arose like we were
talking earlier this is something that
came up I've met Alain de Botton he
wanted to start this living architecture
and so I was advising him how it might
be done and when it over the years it
assumed the the character he wanted to
have with quite big-name architects
there was a realization that in order to
make it work someone is gonna have to do
the UK and a side of it and I I simply
thought it would be interesting I
wondered what would happen if I found
out one of my mates was working with a
Vinny massive MV RDV and I thought I'd
probably be envious so I thought I
should do it and it's turned out to be
really fascinating and my I've always
been interested in building things
actually in some sense is more than the
idea of and of course to build the idea
that you want is the goal but actually
if I'm gonna just have ideas or just
build I prefer to build so one of the
things that had happened just before
that is that at that point in my
practice had I mean people don't employ
you to do what you don't already do
that's that's that's a fact that's a
given it's really really hard so in
order to
I was doing back extensions you know I'd
had enough of back extensions you know
you could tell me what they were doing
this sleep yes you can do this now they
had another book and I thought it's in
order to not do back with exceptions I
needed to you know build a house when no
one would let me build a house so I
built a house and then when people would
let me build houses so as I was
designing houses and we had a
opportunity with a guy came up in some
Aston Martin and he had a fantastic
sight up on the coast and we were one of
three and we did a bit of work and
seemed to get along and we didn't get
the job and the feedback was well you
know you don't you don't do expensive
and up houses house what does it take
you know so that was that was one of the
emphasises behind working as an
executive architect because it would
push my business to work on buildings
that I was so far not getting
Commission's to do so you know three
years five years later with the two of
the architects houses a complete and
finished and we work on the Peters on
Thor helping his office to realize the
one down in in Devon and lo and behold
you know we now get people who wants us
to do expensive houses so that was the
kind of business plan which also had the
happy consequence of discovering the
pleasure of collaboration and where
we're not expecting to be design
architects we don't want to be design
axes we're quite fascinating and how
other people do things can I open it up
to anybody else who wishes to make a
point or ask a question thank you - it's
fascinating discussion um I come from a
development a strange development
background and we do projects from you
know a small house up to a million
square feet in Australia it's an unusual
business because we have a creative
production studio that does everything
from film to publishing I'm this the
question around
creative control and what we've got here
in the development industries globally
in the Western world for me seems to be
in observing practices that I've you
know if engaged from here to Japan is
and the the failure the the reason why
we've got contract management is because
architecture has failed to take the
responsibility actively take the
responsibility of what it means to own a
job so if you you know and what we find
in that nuance play is that the
practices that we work with are the ones
that are actively involved in the
project and that doesn't mean I have to
take all of the risk but they're
certainly participating in every aspect
of that project from graphic design to
tenancy leasing strategies not just
sitting in the office designing you know
on paper they're there with you you know
if you need to find a tenant they're
helping you do that and for me that is
the difference between the capacity of a
great practice whether that's three
people or five hundred and the quality
of the work because to develop good
build form you can't it's not just about
design I mean that's just part of it
that's only part of the solution the
other parts of the solution are
complicated in or in arrangements to do
with how humans into face what sort of
kind of curatorial programs you have how
you you know build that program out and
you know our involvement you know we've
realized the same thing you know if we
want to be developers and that's an
unusual term for us because we don't
even see ourselves that way despite
ostensibly being there we've decided
that we are going to build a creative
production studio to assist in the
notion of creative making whether that's
publishing film design making you know
growing food whatever it is
I mean what's so fascinating is the
fulfillment that you get from that so
that so actually the more the more you
can engage in every aspect of that I
think that in my career I've found that
that has been an entirely creative
process so I kind of coin in that book
that I've written which is a very good
investment by the way it's now it's a
printer it's where five times according
to the eBay but they well that's it's
another that's a way of having a
basement but I think that that that
create the I call it development is are
so there isn't any there should not be
any kind of rule making that sort of
says the process of production actually
is a lesser creative element and I think
there's an arrogance fundamental in the
kind of notion of the way architecture
is thought of then actually their
arrogance actually says hang on guys you
can't be involved in this you can't be
involved the commercialization and the
weird thing is if you look at the
history of the profession we've given up
more of these trades we gave up town
planning we gave up project management
we've given up all these things because
it was somehow too complicated too
different and and I think that they're
all we've done is giving that up is we
block we've lost more and more level of
control yeah and doing doesn't just
apply to architecture and development it
applies to the citizen in a city who
complains about the government's
inability to deliver social policies
well then don't complain and absolve
yourself by sitting in this on the
sidelines get actively involved I mean
there is no other solutions because the
world is a messy place and being a messy
place you know you're gonna have you
know the problems aren't you the
solutions are never perfect I mean the
realities that we have a wicked outcomes
and you know they're not binary they're
not either good or bad they're messy
yeah they're not caring them they're not
Karelian they're so definitely Karelian
I mean what's interesting about the
career really in conversation is it it
would be lovely to think it was a
watershed but
in reality just seems to me it's another
it's another part of the reality to
demonstrate that actually all these
people that think they know don't know
and that actually we just live in this
kind of weird world which I agree with
actually where everybody pretends they
know and actually there is no and
therefore you god is this ridiculous
contractual massive corporation engaged
in some competitive process because
that's thought of to give best value for
money and all you've got is a is is a
fight to the bottom said actually you're
not getting any value-added all you're
getting is a kind of derivative costs
which get less and their skills Roger a
I just say my position wasn't one of a
historic one it's actually moving
forward you're absolutely spot-on
what's gonna come out of Karelian is the
fact that we ended up with very
expensive poor quality product and that
most of the money was siphoned off on
management babble which had no positive
impact on the built environment and I
think that things will change and I
think there is there is a mood in the
air and I certainly think there is a
political mood in the air which will
allow on Bose I mean it's not just a
right and left wing debate but if you're
not political if you're not engaged with
your local MP talking about why the
planning process is such an absolute
farce and if you're not involved with
your local community trying to get
schools built which mean that the people
building them aren't creaming off 40% of
the cost then you're absolutely right
you might as well just lock up and go
home but there is a mood in the air I do
think in the last you know in the last
few weeks there is a mood in the air and
things must change to give quality back
to the architect in the construction of
their buildings well I think this III
just add to that story was was we would
we would did a project with a an
architect called Jean Paul Jacquet who's
got an office in in Geneva and
in in Swiss Architects run their own
costs on a project and so we were doing
a project in London we were out to
tender we had the prices and I said to
John Paul do me a favor would you send
the the drawer and the tender documents
to the or to the office and asked them
to price it and the price differential
between Geneva which is not known as a
cheap town was 40 percent less and we
bought in in the UK and this kind of
sits in my head the whole time and took
I mean obviously all I do as a developer
is write checks really I mean
traditionally but you know but that's
that I know lots of people in this room
won't even know what a cheque is so I
have to be careful about that guy but
the interesting thing is I think that
that 40% is entirely risk-free more an
entirely management costs and actually
there's some bizarre notion I don't know
where there Nick us is in the room but
there another they should be strung up
in a column and then I agree that rule
yeah yeah exactly so but the reality is
that we've actually just try to talk to
ourselves into risk-free environment and
building isn't a risk-free by Obama is
challenging and we just got to get on a
do it the best we can but we're paying a
ridiculous premium for but I think going
back to that point about risk I think
that's something that can go back that
and we should be trained a little bit as
architects I think in our education
maybe or I know we're not supposed to go
there but I think to understand those
risks and I think when you start part
three that's the first time that risk is
introduced to you and if we think that
that's actually meant to be two years
into your career I mean if you're just
setting up you've been pretty exposed to
risk for two years now so I think that
those notions of risk and that knowledge
needs to come earlier I mean that would
be the main yeah and I and I actually
think it's really interesting and I
think balancing the budget of a project
is also a creative process so it doesn't
need to be looked at as something that
we don't want to do it's not designed
because I think it is part of your
design and I think the more knowledge
that you have the the more you're able
to be creative actually I think that's
the key point isn't it is becoming going
back to your point over there's what I
think is its architects
designers becoming savvy yeah I mean
really savvy about the whole process
from beginning to end and not just
focusing on a narrow section of that
particular stage called design decisions
don't worry about it the spreadsheets
were a lot of fun there's nothing any of
you that were here in the room here on
Saturday evening Alberto Alessi gave a
fantastic talk on the work of his
factory and the family and so on and at
one moment he but he put up on the on
the screen a spreadsheet it was it was a
matrix of evaluating products before
they go to market and out of 20 if it
got 18 it was a marketable design by a
designer if it was 12 out of 20 it was
touch and go whether it would go to
market and it was suez air although he
claimed that it didn't influence the
decision-making or whether a go to
product to be made it was it was a
fascinating seer of criteria about
design I'm aware that time has rapidly
moved on to to a few mister weight and
there is a free bar in that south jury
room so I got not gonna hold you up for
too much longer but I'd like before I
thank you all
I just like to ask you all whether
you're optimistic are you optimistic
about the next few years
right hugely in my way of thinking I'm
you know I'm a romantic positive if I'm
passionate about what I do and and I
think that the the you know the the the
notion the world has the the increase in
populated the world is going to 9
billion and I'll bet increase between 6
and 9 billion you actually talking about
all of that in an urban condition means
that actually the notion of shelter is a
fundamental and that's our business so
there's a lot to go
are you optimistic and I'm as optimistic
as I've ever been about the ability for
young architects to do extraordinary
things with whatever is that very
disposal
you know people haven't changed and
there's a hell of a lot to go for I'm
not particularly optimistic about the
state of the world or Western politics
but that's the context with working
draft the next three years of your
ten-year plan I I think that we
certainly live in interesting times
potentially with very high levels of
instability
I think but architects I also believe
our intrinsic optimists I would be
surprised if anyone in the room isn't an
optimist because as an architect a
client will come to you and say we have
a very small site with many limitations
we have no budget and you know our
relationship is on the rocks and you
have to turn around and be like you know
what I can do the villa sebuah I'm going
to pull it out of it you know in order
to be able to have that type of
propositional capacity you have to be
inherently optimistic and so that's in
my nature and that's why I'm an
architect I think I'm on Dean I know
you're an opportunist I am an optimist
Anna and I agree I agree with Jack there
but I I think as well like we're talking
about a lot of urban conditions and our
practice isn't you know heading more and
more out into the rural outskirts I
would say but we've just finished our
first project and it's kind of an
exciting place to be in so yeah it's a
very optimistic moment I am too so thank
you very much
I enjoyed that let's leave end on an
optimistic note thank you much Roger
Meredith Jack
I'm coming
[Applause]
