well thanks everyone it's been a long
day I think Jim must be tired but you
have already sampled what Neil can do
and any that he dispelled I just want I
mean I want to say that it's a great
pleasure to hockey and it's great to
have him obviously we always are happy
as well - welcome to our Elden back at
the yang he's been here his lecture
three years ago I think but it's just
before I introduced them I I don't know
I probably don't have any statement to
finish sort of design symposium with
tourists and and I think is to me
something quite important and couple of
years ago there was a meeting here at
the EA about a pedagogical model that we
have to strive to and one of the points
that was may was this implication
between designing histories and theories
which i think is if not crucial well
it's one of the most important thing
know like we need to understand and we
need to kind of get to grips to what's
going on we need to get a the concepts
and the frameworks by which we can
operate and I think this is a great
opportunity to hear what Neil and
Stewart has done in planetary
urbanization in in territory so well
Neil Brenner is a professor of urban
theory at horrible Harvard Graduate
School of Design he's writing and
teaching focus on the theoretical
conceptual and methodological dimension
of urban questions his work builds upon
in seeks to extend the fields of
critical urban and regional studies
comparative geo political economy and
critical social theory and major
research focus include processes of
urban and regional restructuring and
uneven spatial development planetary
urbanization cities and hinterlands
in your historical in war ecological
perspective
the problem is spatial visualization in
urban studies and processes of the state
is partial restructuring with particular
reference to the remaking of urban
governance configurations on the new
liberalizing capitalism
his most recent books are implosions and
explosions there was a study of
planetary urbanization and a critique of
urbanization selected essays there's an
upcoming book also want to mention
afterwards and also we have a steward
Eldon his professor of political theory
in geography at the University of
Warwick UK and Monash Warwick professor
at Monash University Australian his
author of books on territory Michel
Foucault Martin Heidegger and Henry
Experion territories will be published
by University of Chicago Press
imminently and his studies of George can
you can help me with that afterwards by
polity in early it turns out in nineteen
he has been involved in editing several
collections of internal affairs writings
in Haskell did or edit books on can't
Foucault and a slaughter like he's
currently working on a study of the very
early Foucault in the 1950s culminating
in the process of writing the history of
madness a longer term project explores
the concept of train as a way of
thinking about the materiality of
territory which we are very interested
to see where is the outcome and what no
more delays welcome to Neil Brenner
[Applause]
heathered to the podium happy to be here
I've been told that as long as we finish
at 11 o'clock tonight we can talk for as
long as we want just kidding it's been a
long day I got here a little bit late
because I just flew in this morning but
it's been incredible just to listen to
the work that everyone is doing and my
main regret is really that we didn't
have more time particularly during for
the presentations by those of you who
only had 10 minutes I really wanted to
hear more and to discuss more but I just
want to say by way of starting it's been
a very impressive set of set of
conversations I also really appreciate
the opportunity to be on a panel with my
good buddy Stuart Eldon we've been in
dialogue for let's say a very long time
we both been doing this for a while but
we first worked together actually before
we even met in person over 15 years ago
we wrote a little paper together just a
kind of dialogue began through our work
and we've been good friends and close
collaborators ever since but we haven't
cross paths in a while actually so it's
fantastic to be up here with Stuart and
I'm looking forward to the exchange and
I also want to say I've got several
former students in the room but I'm also
very happy to be here with Niko's Katzie
cos as he mentioned he and I are kind of
an ongoing dialogue and collaboration
about urban theory and a lot of what I
want to say Niko's is actually already
said I'll probably say it in a different
way but it makes my task a little bit
easier and and in a certain way it's
part of our ongoing dialogue and
collaboration and then one other thing
by way of just preface or sort of
introduction so this is definitely going
to be a presentation about matters of
theory but I believe like and this is
hope
something we can discuss more generally
together
I view theory as a kind of perspective
through which to politicize life and
I'll just start with that
so so in a certain way even though it's
going to be abstract and it's very much
about how do we conceptualize certain
issues
I view theory as a way to precisely
through the conceptualization Andry
conceptualization of issues that we
really care about to get pretty
political so so whether I accomplished
that in my you know 30 minutes will will
be up to you know we'll see but that's
that's sort of a framing for what I'm
what I'm trying to do both in this
presentation but also for what I try to
do in a lot of my work in dialog with
designers so this is an event on design
and the earth system questions about the
capitalist scene the Anthropocene have
been put forward and those are very
fundamental issues for all of us today
in the world whatever our professional
or political orientation there are many
different ways into those questions I
don't think there's a singular
epistemological or political framework
through which to confront such questions
because they're just too complex and
also because they're political it means
we need some kind of epistemic pluralism
we need a variety of approaches to
confront them so that's also just by way
of way of a starting point into this my
particular way into these questions is
through thinking about urbanization and
it's one way in and it and we'll see how
far we can go with it but the starting
point in adopting or let me let me back
up
in adopting urbanization as a way into
these questions my starting point is
actually the proposition that we need to
almost completely rethink our whole
approach to what urbanization is so that
with a lot of like one of the hallmarks
of a critical approach to theory is the
idea that theory is itself historically
constituted in relationship to a
constantly
world and if you if you view theory in
that particular perspective it means you
have to constantly reinvent your
concepts it's not just about forming a
framework and then applying the
framework mechanically the world
constantly mutates theory is always
racing to catch up with a mutating world
and the hallmark of a critical approach
to theory of almost anything is an
attempt to be reflexive about the
relationship between your theory and the
world that you're trying to understand
and that's once you say that you're
already in the realm of politics so when
we set up the urban Theory lab a couple
years ago at the GSD that was kind of
the starting point was that we're very
interested in urbanization as a way into
fundamental planetary transformations
and all the contestation and structural
violence associated with those
transformations and the inheritance of
urban theory is quite relevant to that
challenge but at the same time there are
all kinds of ways in which the world is
has transformed such that we need to
reinvent our approach to the urban and
that's what I've been trying to do in
some of my work my collaborations with
Christian Schmidt with Nico Scott caecus
and many other colleagues so and that's
kind of what I want to summarize today
and hopefully it provokes a interesting
conversation so the inheritance of urban
theory there are many different
traditions but if I may venture a
possibly dangerous over generalization
but one that I'm prepared to defend the
sort of standard inherited conception of
the urban is basically as a dot it's a
it's a node it's an agglomeration it's a
circle that the spaciality of that dot
can be conceptualized in different ways
that sometimes it's many dots and the
dots are interlinked within a hierarchy
or system but it's basically a dot and
the and what we the language we use to
refer to that dot is the city I'm gonna
have more to say about the word though
in a little while which is why I put it
in quotation marks in contemporary
global urban discourse there are many
different versions of
that particular spatial ontology there's
a demographic one which Niko's already
mentioned the idea that we've crossed a
majority urban world threshold a kind of
population 50% population threshold Rem
Koolhaas uses that but I'm not picking
on REM is pretty much everybody you know
that wants to work on cities in the
urban these days invokes the UN's
putative lis authoritative data that we
live in a majority urban world because
as of 2007 more than 50% of the world's
population now lives within cities my
friends and colleagues at the LSE this
very important book actually uses that
idea as the kind of branding device for
the the cities project and it's
basically a kind of hourglass model of
the urban there's a distribution there's
a redistribution of the world's
population from the rural to the urban
the spacial containers themselves don't
change it's just a redistribution of
people from a relatively statically
conceived rural part of the hourglass to
an equally statically conceived urban
part of the hourglass of course the
world's population is growing so there
are more sands in the hourglass now than
there were 50 years ago
but basically the the container is is
fixed there's also of course an economic
discourse of contemporary urbanization
Miko's also alluded to that the
importance of cities as command and
control nodes and the global economy the
kind of world cities approach of John
Friedman from whom this image is drawn
or Saskia Sassen
or again what Niko's also invoked the
idea that cities are kind of the
clusters of technological innovation and
GDP growth that's where sort of all the
value is produced and there's also I
didn't put it up here but there's also
of course an ecological discourse which
which really should be up here as well
the idea that that cities are kind of at
the front lines of confronting the
effects of climate change in ecological
crisis but also increasingly the the
kind of
modernist framework that was invoked in
one of the presentations or maybe
several this afternoon that cities are
the sites where collective responses to
the crises of climate change can most
effectively be mobilized so in the
general mainstream discourse I mean a
lot more could be said about this but
I'm just trying to make a generalization
the city is kind of taken for granted as
a self-evident empirical site and then
it's about speculating about what its
broader economic political ecological
significance is but I want to argue that
that's actually a deeply misleading way
of conceiving the phenomenon and the
process is associated with the
phenomenon for me the city and therefore
the urban it's a theoretical disposal
atif it's not simply an empirical site a
self-evident a self-evident cluster or
condition but it's actually an
abstraction so anytime we talk about the
city or the urban
we're already in the realm of apps of
abstraction and the challenge is to
unpack what that abstraction refers to
both in theory and in practice and it's
an abstraction to quote well to build
upon a kind of Marxian concept which is
also very important for honouring the
fehb it's a concrete abstraction because
it's an abstraction that's embedded
within ongoing socio spatial processes
and struggles it's not just an
abstraction in my mind your your mind
it's an abstraction that's embedded
within ongoing social spatial
transformations that are grasped maybe
in everyday life maybe by institutions
maybe by theorists as somehow connected
to the city and the urban so again
LaFave I find very helpful here he
doesn't have all the answers but he's
got the questions a lot of the questions
pretty pretty well formulated so this is
from I believe the survival of
capitalism Stuart Stuart will know
better than anyone so but we we have it
it's also a chapter of an important
essay that Stuart and I code translated
called reflections on the politics of
space which is in our volumes that we
edited and partially code translated
state space world so
so this is actually very relevant to a
lot of the issues that we've been
talking about in this conference today
the FEV says he's thinking about space
and ideology which is actually I think
where critical design has to start the
relationship between space and ideology
if space has an air of neutrality and
indifference it's precisely because the
space has already been occupied already
planned already the focus of past
strategies of which we cannot always
find the traces and I think a lot of
spatial ideologies have been under
discussion in today's today's today's
conference and I would argue that the
city in the urban are exactly examples
of that kind of a deeply ideological
terrain precisely when something seems
completely self-evident such that we
don't even need to debate or it seems
like we don't even need to debate about
what it means or what it refers to
ideology is very likely at work I mean
for alphas air one of the great
theorists of ideology it's the very
notion of I yourself as a subject that's
really the ideology for altas air and in
a certain way in the worlds of design
and architecture and urbanism the city
has the same status it's like so
self-evident the same way that when we
say we just take that for granted as a
coherent self subject that you don't
even need to understand its constitution
as such the city is kind of this a
similar sort of thing it's almost
becomes V ideology of modern spatial
discourse but it's an ideology in the
sense that we have to unpack what's
actually actually going on and what is
hidden what is rendered invisible even
though it may be quite operative when we
talk about the city so here's a few
things that are going on i hypothesize
that there are many different concepts
of the city in the urban are that are
out there but this is sort of a
generalization about what I take global
urban discourse mainstream global urban
discourse to presuppose certain
assumptions about the city singularity
as a settlement type that makes cities
even though they may be internally
diverse distinct from all other
settlement types
hounds villages the rural the
countryside so again it's not that all
cities are the same I mean these days we
have lots of very important arguments
about the many different types of cities
global north global South etc and that's
very important but underlying those
descriptions of diversity is a kind of
claim that the city is a particular type
of spatial form and second the this is
very contradictory the idea that the
city is bounded so that it's at some
point there's a separation between the
inside and the outside this is very
contested in the sense that some of the
most sophisticated contemporary
Urbanists are very appropriately
obsessed with the ways to spend the last
really 20 years looking at the ways in
which urban expansion has exploded urban
territories but at the same time he's
constantly interested in bounding the
city figuring out where the city ends
can y'all hear me better now or what's
that Shai rewind I have two minutes left
actually I only have 16 minutes left so
I better watch out are we are we good or
no should I rewind the the previous two
minutes I don't think I can I'm kind of
rolling here anyway the idea that's
bounded and then thirdly and this is
actually very paradoxical in the sense
that these days particularly an urban
geography there's a lot of emphasis on
the speed to reveal the specificity of
different types of cities and
urbanization processes around the world
that's become a very sort of prominent
strand of urban research but amidst all
of the emphasis on the diversity of
types of cities there's a kind of
underlying notion that it's the city
that has been generalized and diffused
so it's like the shell is like a
universal shell and then the content
where the form is a universal form
that's maybe a better way to put it and
the content is always particular but the
form of the city has been diffused and
generalized around the world and this is
one way to encapsulate that this comes
from Kingsley Davis who basically came
up with the formula of urbanization that
I would argue continues to be the
hegemonic fundamental mainstream
assumption in pretty much all approaches
to urbanization even if from Marxist to
main to you know kind of mainstream
demographic ones which is simply the
idea that urbanization is the size of
the population in a territory relative
to the total population a territory
that's Kingsley Davis like in the 1950s
and that's basically what in a in broad
strokes that's what the UN still
presupposes although in fact the census
data upon which the UN is relying when
it declares that we've crossed a 50
percent world urban threshold they're
quite different because every country in
the world has its own particular set of
criteria but there's still the notion
that what we're measuring this is the
point what we're measuring when we talk
about urbanization is the growth of
cities relative to some other part of
the territory that's not a city space
and I'll stand by that statement that is
the widely assumed or generally assumed
taken-for-granted assumption about what
urbanization means so my question is to
what degree is this in here
City centric conception of the urban
adequate for understanding contemporary
transformations and I want to argue that
it's it's radically inadequate and the
claim let me hasten to add is not that
the city doesn't matter or not that
agglomerations don't matter but
precisely the challenge is to think
about and again this goes back to really
Nico's his main argument this morning
the connections between the spaces we
call cities and everything else what is
all that everything else which is really
what a lot of this conference has
actually been about but it puts into
relief the relationship in terms of
analyzing something like the capitalist
scene or the Anthropocene the
problematic that I'm putting forward
with my collaborators is what does it
look like if we try to grasp the
Anthropocene or the capital is seen
specifically in terms of the dialectics
between city building and the
transformation of everything else I've
got some more specific concepts for
getting at that but that's the issue
that we're putting forward so me and
Chris John Schmidt wrote a paper a
couple years ago which was really
critically trying to reflect on and and
supersede this city centric model and
really question the idea we may live in
an age of urbanization whether it's an
urban age or a city age highly dubious
proposition our view is that the notion
of a 50% world urban threshold is
empirically problematic and
theoretically dangerous so if you want
to know why please have a look at our
paper but this the book implosions
explosions that I edited a couple years
back what I want to draw your attention
to in terms of just crystallizing the
politics behind this approach is the the
cover image which hopefully you'll
recognize it's the tar sands in northern
Alberta Canada and what I want to put
forward I don't have the answer to this
but I think this is the challenge we
need an approach to the theory of
urbanization that is as well equipped to
analyze conditions like this industrial
ecocide through you know extraction of
fossil fuels in this case the
connections between these kinds of
conditions of which there are many
and the growth of cities once we bound
the problematic of urban theory to
simply understand to simply focus on the
growth of cities were the concept of
externalize ation has been productively
used all day we're externalizing this
and both intellectually and
cartographically and politically and
that is not possible and that is not
productive if we want to develop an
urban theory that's actually
illuminating and politically oriented so
I'm gonna skip all that so just some
juice so how do we do that so basically
in my remaining time I want to offer
some some steps
they're just offerings about how we can
begin to do that I don't think that me
and Chris John have done that we're
trying to move in that direction so let
me also be clear that the ideas that
we've been offering on planetary
urbanization they're not a complete
framework here's the answer here's the
total theory the urban we do not have
such a thing and if we ever have
something that more closely confronts
this challenge it can only be developed
collectively so me and Chris John
understand ourselves as working as part
of a broader intellectual scholarly
community with social scientists
designers ecologists philosophers to try
to develop such a thing so these are
simply offerings to sort of find a way
to confront the challenge then I also
happen to believe that the design
disciplines and the intelligence the
critical intelligence the radical
intelligence of design is fundamental
with fundamentally relevant for that
task not design alone but designs got to
be part of the kind of collective
project which is why I like teaching in
a design school and being in
conversations like this so here's some
some openings and then some consequences
so first of all the urban is not a unit
I'm basically throwing out the last
hundred years not dismissing but
superseding the idea that the urban is a
settlement type from a governmental
point of view it might look like a
settlement type but that doesn't mean we
should use that assumption as a category
of analysis of critical theory one two
the process unfolds in diverse sites
territories landscapes so the search for
the singular morphology of the urban the
Chicago School the LA school the
whatever school and there's lots of
attempts out there to say here's the new
model of the urban I just don't I think
that that that's not helpful because I
believe that the urban in its essence is
variegated so the notion that there is a
singular urban which then gets
reproduced in variations thereof I think
that's a dubious ontological and
epistemological frame the very nature of
the urban and the process of
urbanization is the production of
spatial differentiation that's a very
Lefevre in concept by the way so there's
no singular morphology we've gotta track
the patterns the variations of
urbanization processes across time and
across space three really the same point
stated more succinctly the spaciality is
in the urban are polymorphic in some of
my other work with Bob Jessup and Martin
Jones and Gordon McCloud we we talk
about different dimensions of socio
spatial relations so acronym TPS n
territory place scale Network and I
don't think that list is complete and I
know I'm gonna get in trouble with
Stewart although we actually agree on a
lot of this this issue but when we wrote
that article me and my colleagues we
understood territory simply as bounded
spaces and places kind of concentration
scale as a vertical hierarchy zation of
space and network its kind of
interconnectedness and Stuart Eldon has
really been at the forefront of helping
us understand that territory is not
simply about bounding space it's more
about kind of a technology of power a
concept that someone else used this
morning so I fully take on board that
idea in this context my point is simply
that urbanization as a process we
shouldn't simplify it to a singular
demand
of space so castells in the network
society talks about nodes and
connections between cities agglomeration
theorists emphasize place political
scientists tend to think of cities and
the urban as a territorial zone of
jurisdictions and and scale you know
there's a whole politics of scale
related to the rescaling of the urban
all of these are relevant but it's an
empirical and historical question how to
combine them in different ways
so that's just one offering for how to
start to open up a more polymorphic
spatialization of the urban for the city
is not a settlement type or a spatial
form but it's part of a broader and
uneven process of urbanization so again
I'm not dismissing or discounting or
even minimizing the importance of cities
agglomerations whatever we mean by that
in the urbanization process but it's one
among many expressions of the
urbanization process so I'm building
here very strongly on on earth earth EV
who makes a fundamental distinction
between the city and the urban and
that's just that's a starting point for
for this approach which is which is the
source of a lot of confusion actually in
the current geography literature there
are many spatial forms of agglomeration
so even agglomeration can't be reduced
simply to any singular notion of the
city so it's again I'm questioning the
idea of in a certain way the real
critique is less of City centrism as
such than the idea of the city the city
is something that's singular and
Universal urban net urban agglomeration
is intertwined with any number of
transformations of land-use the key
focus of Niko's presentation earlier and
says his spatial environments beyond the
city centers what we need to look at is
the connections so a couple consequences
this is probably the most fundamental
one and let me just crystallize it as
precisely as I can
so all major definitions of urbanization
defined urbanization as City growth and
they think of that connection between
urbanization and city grow
as basically in the way what
philosophers call an analytic
proposition so an example of an analytic
proposition in philosophy languages a
triangle has three sides or a bachelor
as an unmarried man the subject and the
predicate mutually contain one another
there's you can debate about the social
and cultural construction of
bachelorhood but basically the
proposition the definition of Bachelor
is an unmarried man a triangle by
definition is a shape with with three
sides it's just they're mutually
contained one with one another so all
the major definitions and understandings
of urbanization treat urbanization as
city growth that's just analytically
self-evident you can debate about what a
city is and the mechanisms underlying
city growth and the consequences and
that's what a lot of urban social
science is all about it's all very
interesting but the proposition that
urbanization is City growth it's
understood simply as a self-evident
definitional fact my position on this
matter is the following I do believe
there is an essential intrinsic
connection between urbanization and city
growth but it's not analytically
contained in the definition of
urbanization so what you what we need to
do is explore historically in
theoretical irreflexive terms what is
the connection between urbanization and
city growth and as I've been arguing
urbanization is also connected to many
other spatial arrangements so I'm
questioning the analytic self evidence
of the link between urbanization city
growth rather than the idea that there
is any connection at all urban
restructuring is not simply a mutation
of city space but it's a multi scalar
process of implosion and explosion that
encompasses diverse landscapes scales
and colleges and then thirdly this is
really at the heart of all my my present
work the hinterland question
historically the hinterland question the
transformation of the countryside has
been understood as something sort of
separate from the question of the urban
or the urban question so you have people
in agrarian studies people who study
extraction environmental studies
generally outside the city so these
different disciplinary containers the
urban people do one thing and the other
scholars study the outside
and I'm suggesting that that
disciplinary division of labor which
takes different forms in different
fields is is obsolete and that the
hinterland question is today a central
part the urban question the urban
question is a central part of the
hinterland question so Christian
Schmieder and I developed this concept
this distinction between concentrated
and extended urbanization nikos
introduced it earlier today briefly also
in relation to differential urbanization
but I'll leave differential to one side
for the moment but basically in a
nutshell concentrated urbanization is
the dimension of urbanization that
involves implosion the clustering
together of socio spacial relations an
extent and extended urbanization is
broadly construed the hinterland
question it's the operationalization of
non city spaces to support the growth of
the city and the consequences of the
growth of the city for non city spaces
so it could be agrarian industrial
development it could be resource
extraction it could be logistics it
could be ecosystem services like we
heard in some of the earlier
presentations about various kinds of
financial eyes din vironment Ulm anagen
for me that's definitely part of
extended extended urbanization
differential urbanization simply refers
to the ways in which the socio spatial
configurations that underpin both
concentrate in an extended urbanization
are subjected to waves of creative
destruction historically urban theorists
tend to focus on creative destruction in
big metropolitan regions so David
Harvey's idea that through through
sequences or cycles of crisis induced
restructuring the built environments of
metropolitan regions undergo major waves
of transformation what Christian and I
are suggesting is that hinterland spaces
also undergo parallel waves of systemic
spatial reorganization it's not just the
investment in certain certain
infrastructures to support agriculture
logistics extraction environmental
management but that those very
infrastructures
at a certain moment in the development
of capitalism are also subjected to
waves of creative destruction
so there's a dynamism of both cities and
hinterlands the hinterland is not a
backwater it's not ghost acreage it's a
dynamic site of capitalist development
and the developmental dynamics of cities
and hinterlands particularly in the
current period are closely intertwined
with one another so that's just kind of
a summary of our distinction and I was
just being a little bit playful with
this but since Kingsley Davis had his
formula of urbanization is the
population of cities over the total
population
I think nikos was there when we were
fooling around with this and I made a
little diagram and the double arrow is
of course the universal symbol of a
dialectical relationship so I'm just
kind of joking anyway I've got a bunch
of slides on concentrated extended but
I'm actually gonna going to conclude I'm
just gonna suck in pack it I think
there's a few things to work with here
but let me just I'm gonna have to just
give me one second to go to the very end
in the 45 minute scenario would have
gone through but we're just gonna skip
it all don't worry no problem yeah let's
just go right back there invite me back
and we can go we can go into more detail
but it's the end of the day and and we
want to hear from Stuart so there's a
question about the historical
geographies of urbanization and all the
periodization of urbanization that are
out there again whether it's mainstream
sociology Marxism it's basically the
changing morphology of the city and part
of what I'm interested in and Christian
and I on our collaborative work is how
do you rethink the history of capitalist
urbanization once you open up that that
distinction between concentrated and
extended you need actually a new
periodization only the Fed is helpful on
this but actually not that helpful
he gives us a few hints but this is work
that remains to be done we have to go
back to
literature's that are usually distinct
from urban urban literature's in order
to excavate this to some degree the
debates on the capital is seen in the
Anthropocene provide a way into it but
again I've talked to Jason more a lot
about this very question and I think
he's sympathetic to the to the proposal
the geographies within the capital of
scene literature are in some ways
underdeveloped and we're suggesting
again just one geographical vector which
is the dialectics between concentrated
and extended urbanization as a way to
think about these historical
transformations Jason more of course
would date the capitalist scene back
much earlier than the 1870s but I'm very
interested I think it's a it's
consistent with on real affairs ideas
for better for worse that there's an
intrinsic connection between
urbanization and industrial capitalist
industrialization
so this periodization but this is more
of just posing the question like that
I've got further ideas about this which
I don't have time to share but it's just
sort of opening up precisely in order to
understand the specificity of this
moment in other words something is going
on now in the relationship it's not just
about the importance of cities but for
me it's the relationship between zones
of concentrated urbanization and zones
of extended urbanization in the current
moment by which for me and Chris John
post 1980s that's kind of a moment of
for us fundamental transformation
towards something like a planetary
formation of urbanization so final
propositions which are just invitations
for further debate because again we
don't have the answers we just got some
questions that we need hopefully to work
on collectively with friends and
comrades it's not the world that has
become urban this is a proposition which
I'm also very influenced by some of
Stuart Aldens wonderful essays on the
space of the world so that the idea that
the world has become urban implies that
the world already exists and then you're
just filling up this this shell or this
sphere with urban content rather it's
the urban that's being planets planet
Erised so the urban process is the focal
point and then you've got to look at its
ongoing mutation
to a point where it becomes a planetary
configuration so the urban and the
planetary are co-produced through
historical so suspicion relations and
contestation secondly and again this
connects up with Niko's remarks earlier
the hinterland wasn't always the case
but increasingly with the forward motion
of capitalist development the hinterland
becomes a strategic terrain of
urbanization not because it contains or
might contain cities but because it's
transformed into an operational
landscape again a concept nikos
introduced with his distinction earlier
between agglomeration landscapes and
operational landscapes so it means a
zone of you're not just in mark see in
terms it's not just formal subsumption
that you're producing something in the
hinterland for the world market but real
subsumption you're actually reorganizing
the territory in a way to facilitate
expanded capital accumulation and that
very closely articulates to some as
stuart Eldon's ideas about territory as
a political technology so the hinterland
is very much a territory in that
particular sense or at least it becomes
one and then thirdly and finally on and
I'll leave it I'll leave it here I think
I actually almost succeeded in 30
minutes it'll be thirty five sorry about
that y'all but hopefully you you'll
appreciate that I tried to restrain
myself a little bit from those
intermediary slides but anyway the the
specifies the specificity of planetary
urbanization from for me and Chris John
it's less about the universalization of
the city or the generalized importance
of metropolitan regions as engines of
the global economy as Alan Scott once
put it but rather it's it's related to
the intensified operationalization of
hinterlands and their ecologies to
support the growth and extension of city
building around the world so it's for me
the specificity of this moment really
has a lot to do with what's going on
outside the city so it's a bit of an odd
possibly an odd or even paradoxical
claim for an urban theorists such as
myself to make
the world is being urbanized because of
stuff that's going on in the hinterland
but that's that's where I've landed with
with my work thus far and it leads it
leads me not to simply abandon the the
city as irrelevant as Patrick Schumacher
accused me of doing in an exchange that
we had in AD a couple years back it was
pretty interesting but rather looking at
the hinterland as a way to understand
the city and trying to understand the
ways in which cities and their
developmental dynamics are connected to
transformations of the hinterland so
again I returned to exactly Nico's his
core argument of urbanization as
geographical reorganisation related to
increasing modes of connectivity and
infrastructures to facilitate that that
connectivity between cities and their
erstwhile outsides thank you very much
let's
[Applause]
I came up with a kind of rough framework
for what I wanted to say and I've been
filling in detailing responsible Neil
has said but also some of the other
presentations today so it's sort of a a
half scripted and a half improvised talk
and I'm gonna really try to keep to 15
minutes maximum so you're not gonna get
a big critique of Neil's work as Neil
hinted we've been friends for a long
time we've worked together particularly
around only the PHEVs work so instead of
a kind of critique of kind of what's
wrong with this it's gonna be more kind
of pushing it relating it my work
thinking about how it might connect to
some themes that have been discussed
today and that I've been exploring in my
work I think this concentrated that
urbanization idea is really fertile it's
really productive it's really helped me
in thinking about issues of urban
centers and kind of going beyond that
but particularly the thing I like from
it is this sense of urbanization as
process which is really important to how
I've been trying to think about the
question of territory I do have some
questions in terms of how the extended
urbanization of particular places
whether they're in an early formulation
at Neil and his colleagues use the
extreme territories of urbanization
through to now what's being called
operational landscapes or strategic
terrains of urbanization and for me we
really need to think about how these are
produced as territories or as landscapes
and the concrete material processes that
shape and transform them and the notion
of terrain which is coming in now is
really important to me and I think it's
a really helpful concept but I think
it's one that we need to do a lot of
work with theoretically and as neo
hinted ter
trees been very much the theme of a lot
of what I've been doing and how that
would connect to that TPS n idea that
the Neal published in in society in
space a piece with Martin Jones and Bob
Jess so now I'm going to generalize
enormous Lee here in a historical
transformation there is a book called
the birth of territory that I wrote that
is a very long book that tries to talk
about this in a lot of detail but hear
me out on this very quick a schematic
thing there's a significant moment in
Western thought when the relation
between the urban and territory changed
in antiquity you have what we might call
urban center
have a territory there is a territory or
there is something outside so the Greek
polis has a horror a country or a
countryside or a landscape outside of it
land perhaps so horror here not in the
technical sense that it has in Plato's
Timaeus but the very everyday mundane
sense that has in plato's laws or has in
Aristotle's politics and so on and the
Roman urbis has the only way that the
term territory amiss used in classical
Latin the surrounding lands around the
city so what you have here is that the
urban is not a territory
and the urban is not in a territory but
the urban has a territory that's a crude
way of putting it but that's the
quickest way I can summarize what I
think happened in in antiquity in the
late Middle Ages in Western Europe
I think this changes in that you have
things that are understood as
territorial what we would now call
territories in which there are urban
areas that that seems to me to be an
important moment when that shifts and
that I think forms the model for a lot
of the way that we've thought about
these things in in so-called modernity
and I think it's the inherited kind of
sense that we have of these questions
that Neal and others are kind of pushing
against today and that in a sense what's
happening here is that the old idea of
the hinterland the area outside of a
Greek polish or a Roman urbis the
hinterland is now being thought again in
that relation about how we think about
the urban in its hinterland and I think
we're potentially I mean there is always
that danger of present ISM that we think
that our own present moment is a
significant shift from something that
has happened in the past but that
relation between those terms that I
think there was an antiquity moment and
there was a modernity moment I think we
maybe need to rethink and work through
that question about what is this
relation between the territory in the
urban is it the territory becoming
urbanized or the urban becoming
territorial eyes door even as we go up
even further in scale that the plan
tree or the world but in all of this
however we might conceptualize it I
think it's the territory
and it's the relation between those is
that we need to think of rather than
these somehow static objects I have a
piece in the forthcoming wiley-blackwell
encyclopedia of urban and regional
studies or whatever it's exactly called
I read the piece so long ago and it's
taken so long to come out I thought I
can't even remember the title of the
collection but it's on territory and
territoriality in relation to the urban
and in that I tried to kind of survey
urban work that uses terms around
territory and territorial ization and I
tried to kind of come up with a system
idolization of that and a kind of
critique of it because it seemed to me
that the term territory was used in an
incredibly loose way within a lot of
that work and I think that one of the
problems that urban theory has when it
talks about territory is that it still
thinks of territory as a container or
territory is a bounded space and I think
what Neill is doing with Kristian and
others exploding this idea of the urban
is a bounded space we need to do the
same with the notion of territory so
just as that notion of the dot is
problematic we also need to think about
the problem of thinking of territory as
a straightforward container Anthony
Giddens the state is a bordered power
container as a kind of way of
conceptualizing its territory or the
standard definition you get in
international relations or political
geography a territory is a bounded space
under the control of a group of people
perhaps a state and then we look at the
relations between those bounded spaces
it seems to me that's a really
problematic definition for at least two
reasons one is not all bounded spaces of
territories and equally not all
territories abounded spaces the bounded
space is not sufficient to grasp the
complexity of the notion of territory
and even one of the best theorists of
territory who's also a really
significant theories to the urban John
Gottman the megalopolis book but also
the significance of territory two great
books in urban studies and in territory
studies he still conceives of the urban
territory largely is a container which
gets progressively more urbanized
through through these processes now the
last line of my new book
which I'll say about in a moment the
last line of my book is we need to think
territory beyond the pale a pale is a
geographically bounded delimited area a
jurisdiction the English pale in islands
the pale of Calais a bounded space it
comes from hunting originally it's a
bounded hunting area and which animals
could live and could be hunted in wing
now access in but not access out for
these animals we need to break from the
idea that a territory is a pail and
that's one of the arguments I try and
make in that book so how might we
theorize territory I mean I've written a
lot about territory in a range of works
where I tried to say well there's many
ways that we think about territory on
relation to land we think of it
effectively as a political economic
category and we just scale it up from
individual property of land to estates
property over its territory or we think
about it in kana geostrategic terms
effectively kind of thinking about it in
terms of the power relations and the
Wars and things that are fought over it
those are both absolutely crucial to
understanding the notion of territory
but for me they're not sufficient to
grasp the complexity so in terror and
territory a very political book about
the so called war on terror and really
the the post-cold war world and in the
birth of territories acabou it looks at
the the development of the concept of
territory and Western political thought
I say as well as that kind of political
economic and political strategic we need
to take very seriously the political
legal and the political technical and
they still hold to that as two really
important additional dimensions that we
need to take into account but what I do
in the Shakespearean territories book
which really should be out now I was
hoping I could wave a copy at you but my
publisher University of Chicago Press
tells me that you're short ajiz in the
United States the printing has been
slightly delayed so here's a shain or
something kind of argument about the of
intellectual knowledge so I'm sorry that
I don't have a copy of the Shakespeare
book but he is imminent it should be out
next week if not
it is absolutely yet let me I'm I'm not
gonna say a great deal about that book
what I be in that book is I use readings
of different plays by Shakespeare to
open up different aspects of the
question of territory so I use Richard
ii to talk about the political economies
of land I do a kind of a regional
geopolitics reading of Hamlet the hamlet
himself and the father and the uncles
stories writing to the margins and talk
about the relations that the Denmark has
to Norway and to Poland so reading this
to try and think about these different
aspects of territory but I usually use
Shakespeare to push me beyond simply the
economic strategic legal and technical
that I've done in previous work ru
Shakespeare to force me to account for
the colonial I do a reading of
Coriolanus to think about bodies the
kind of corporeal territories bodies in
places and the one that connects most
other work that I've done is I do a
reading of the first part of Henry the
fourth where I talk about rivers there's
three characters who how they're going
to divide up the kingdom after they've
overthrown the king and they're dividing
up the kingdom by using rivers the river
trends in the river seven and they say
where's rivers form these boundaries and
these will be the portions of the
kingdom that we will take on us we've
defeated the king and one of them goes
hang on a minute this rivers in the
wrong place my share of the land isn't
as big as the others and actually what
we need to do is not choose another line
on the map or even another River we need
to change the course of the river in
order that it flows in a different
channel and it distributes the land more
fairly and evenly between us so I use
this as a way into thinking about the
relation between what I call the
geopolitical and the geophysical in
those terms
now the geophysical is the term that
I've done the most work with since I
wrote the birth of territory book as a
couple of papers that are what I've been
trying to do or I'm drawing on a number
of other people's work and trying to
theorize this geophysical geopolitical
relation one of them is a piece called
secure the volume which came out in 2013
political geography or I connect up work
on urban geopolitics on critical
architecture verticality debates
subterranean work and try and explore
the politics of space in three
dimensions but I'm not simply interested
in another up-down vertical access but
trying to think about things like slopes
surfaces tunneling bridges and trying
complicate the way that we too often
think about territory in terms of a kind
of cartographic imagination if we turn
it into a two-dimensional surface and
preaching to the choir here with
architects of you all know this but I
think political geographers have been
slow to learn about space in those waves
when those three some one where I've
developed some of these themes is in a
piece in the London review of
international law which is around this
notion of terrain as a way of trying to
get at the political materiality of
territory I'm trying to think as that
it's geophysical vs. geopolitical how
these things connect whether it's rivers
whether it's mountains whether it's
deserts whether it's clothes lines
changing these kinds of geophysical
processes in the relation they have to
geopolitical kinds of questions and
these obviously have urban implications
in terms of how we might think about
urban materiality and whether terrain is
is a useful way into thinking about
those questions when I talked about this
I've said I'm not especially listed in
the notion of terrain I think it's the
best concept that we have to make sense
of a problem but terrain has a kind of
an inherited baggage that may be
problematic terrain in geography tends
to be associated either with physical
geography or with military geography and
in physical geography terrain has
traditionally been understood as land
form as opposed to land process so
physical geography is one I've talked
about terrain as a process of gonna know
terrain isn't the process it's something
else is the process to terrain I'm
trying to break from the idea that there
is some kind of static thing to which
things are done I'm trying to get at
this idea of the process in itself and
the military geography well there's a
long-standing
literature and military geography about
how physical terrain conditions what the
army can do can you get your tanks over
this land is this the land to Sandy or
to bogey for the tanks to be supported
on it you should station your troops up
on the hilltop because that's the easier
place to defense there's a long standing
military geography that looks at that
I'm really interested in work by people
like Rachel Woodward who turn it around
and say not look at the impact of the
landscape on the military but look at
the impacts of the military on the
landscape and shine a crew pose done
fantastic work on this in the hot
spotters rapport the kind of military
legacies of industrial and a nuclear
waste in large parts of the Southwest
United States so I'm interested in that
side of military geography or
militarized geographies rather than the
older style version of the geographies
there is a condition that might limit
how the the army can can actually
operate but a thing there's potential
for a huge amount of new work around
this where the terrain is the right
concept I'm not sure I'm not
particularly invested in it yet but I do
think the political materiality of
territory connecting to the urban or
toil outside urban questions would be a
really important thing to explore in
relation to that I'm at 15 minutes so
I'm I'm not going to talk about some of
the other things I thought we might talk
about I just want to raise the question
that Neil and I explored in a piece we
wrote on the fair in 2009 or it came out
in 2009 on oral affair and state space
Territory where we talked about the
notion of the territory effect which we
described as the state's tendency
through its territorial form to
naturalize at once to mask and to
normalize its own transformative effects
on socio spacial relations and a thing
that one of the problems that we have
today make a question of territory is
that if you you work on territory as a
lot of my work has been people think
it's because you like territory with you
think territories even the explanation
territories the problem territories the
issue that I think needs explaining is
know
the thing that I am using to interpret
everything else but I think it's
something that we have there and I think
it's a problem and we need to get out of
it I think we have a fundamentally
impoverished kind of geopolitical
imagination that we cannot seem to
imagine anything other than territory
today and that when we talk about the
problems of borders or we talk about our
opposition to walls people say well
where would you draw the board or where
will you draw the wall and it's but what
if we said that that was itself the
problem and I think the historical
approach Neal hinted at this and other
papers have hinted at this if you look
back and you don't have to look back
that far this was a profoundly alien
what way of structuring and organizing
socio spacial relations and that we we
too often feel trapped by that and for
me that's the sense of the territorial
trap I think John Agnew diagnosis a
problem but I think we can still do more
when we think about the problems of
these kinds of notions people talk about
the violence embedded that came from
that Noam Chomsky worked the violence
embedded in a border the violence
embedded in the infrastructure of the
architecture that is on a border four
meters of violence in the concept of a
border in the concept of a territory and
that might be something that we need to
think about more I was also really
struck by a number of papers today that
connected the bodies in the places to
the place is embodied and for me I think
that and I would certainly include my
work in this most work on territory has
ripped at the geopolitics of territory
I'm kind of interested in whether we can
push further and look at the bio
politics of territory and that might be
a topic for me to think more about I
think it connects to debates on the
urban I think it connects to some of the
debates that have been talked about
today but that's my quick attempt at
throwing out even more questions thank
you for the presentation and we have
like 25 minutes hopefully we have a
shortened compact a but fruitful
conversation
many will start and questions to the
floor
I mean a similar way that now in a
similar way that we tend to imagine more
principally the anal the work of
capitalism like that's the typical
phrase over here nobody is it seems to
be something similar happening with
territory no no why cannot imagine other
ways no let's say to relate ourselves or
relate power with places and and perhaps
planetary urbanization is a way or at
least a way in berliner a needless kind
of posting that to to kind of overcome
that sort of in passing which we are
just one thing which is this is both
response to this point but also we're
Stewart and II territory effect I find
it really weird not to know I just
wanted to say that the the point
Stewart's making about the territory
effect which is the ways in which the
state naturalizes its own effects on the
production of territory this is a really
fundamental challenge for design the
question is so you all are working with
visualizations all the time and the
question is what do you your
visualization are you going to accept
territory or the urban as something
taken for granted and then aestheticized
it or I should say we cuz I'm part of it
too or are we going to use the
intelligence and the methods and the
capacities of design precisely in order
to deconstruct the territory effect or
other kinds of effects the urban effect
as well and I think that's a real
tension within design discourse between
approaches that reproduce dominant
spatial ideologies and their
naturalization of processes and they're
kind of in description in the landscape
versus approaches destabilize those
naturalized assumptions so the territory
effect like when we came up with that
concept we weren't thinking about design
but now that Stuart brings it back in
and a conversation like this it's sort
of striking to me how I mean to some of
the the amazing projects that were
reported on earlier today and just where
1 positions one whether in relation to
the territory effect or other
naturalizations of power that are
inscribed in space and the ways in which
representational techniques might
disrupt or not such naturalizations
I'm happy to throw it open question this
is a question I've tried to I maybe have
raised it to kneel before I don't
remember but to kind of put it on the -
to exaggerate it a lot of the work that
you've been doing the urban Theory lab
is the kind of specialization of
networks of production among other
things and earlier today it was the
moderator I forget the name she brought
up this issue of kind of subjectivity
and geographic representation and I want
to kind of flip that and say that
they're rich activity in the way the
different technologies kind of have a
disposition or a spatial disposition and
that by compounding these processes
under the umbrella or the concept of
urbanization whatever however you
present it it is compounded and if you
are tracing it their effects in space
you're not necessarily looking into the
space realities or the framers in which
they evolve and it's I regret to bring
that reference but it's kind of like
objectory any question like how do you
begin to approach or get closer at what
kind of disposition depths of technology
have on space because we have to I guess
we can all agree that they have you see
as both I mean if they it's whatever it
is that is the momentum within those
system it's not it's not just capsule is
having designs fully conscious designs I
mean there there is momentum in them as
well and I wonder if that's something
that could be when you went when you
asked when you bring up this ambition of
trying to understand the Mikko side or
having a framework that Indiana had as
well as the growth of cities can we get
in on the inside of that whatever drives
that process from the perspective of
some kind of technological evolution or
some kind of Colin
each rated yeah that's a question into
the conversation we'll take the notes
and then maybe just field some questions
and at some point Stewart and I can sort
of see what we want to respond to I'm
just saying that where we get more
conversations my question is is there a
relationship between the ideas of
territory and scale oftentimes you hear
the term territorial scale and I've been
I suppose reflecting on why we say that
in my mind I usually use territorial
scale as somehow to wrapped in
complexity mobility conflicting uses but
I wonder if if there is actually a
territorial scale or could smaller
smaller things also have a territory to
them
thanks very much um you know I always
have a great difficulty in the scripting
language that theoretical geographers
use and find it quite alienating these
days if I might say and trying to
articulate why that is is because it
would appear that matter doesn't matter
in these conversations and I mean I'm
thinking of Bob regards wonderful book
planning with matter in which he sort of
faces up to the fact that planning
theory so often ignores the fact that
these are material processes they're not
just production process they're not just
abstract value production but their
material and I just wondered the extent
to which the sort of physicality which
Stewart started to suggest with the idea
of in starts to kind of fight back it's
not just neutral it's actually quite
active in these processes that you're
discussing I'm just passing this to me -
- I'm gonna pause for a moment before I
give him the microphone um I wanted to
just draw the three conversations - and
ask you a question from that and early
this morning Caroline Knowles mentioned
during masse in part of her presentation
and during Mass um I said obviously she
wrote the book for space where she makes
a claim to space being a process and it
resonated very strongly with many of the
descriptions that Neil you set out for
for the urban during Mass he also
describes place as stories so far and
this is this sort of his association
there between process and stories and
obviously we heard from Rania describing
her approach to exploring very big
issues through storytelling I was
wondering whether you would like
to touch on let's say you know a
potential relationship between
storytelling stories and process and how
that might allow us to elaborate further
some of these issues that you've
mentioned I think that's enough no you
do I can hold questions we have this
one's gonna be completely personal but
something I need to answer for my own
work so lately I've been looking at sort
of this compare territory say pre
Cartesian logic pre sort of colonization
versus post colonization for
specifically India and how India prior
India's a conscious that the name is
invented by the British this and so
specifically like northern India where
I'm from originally how you know I speak
or do I eat I'm more in common with say
Pakistan Ithaca Afghanistan so have you
in your own work looked at sort of
territory pre map breed Cartesian logic
pre-colonization to see because a lot of
things I think we're talking about or
were there you know that the materiality
actually created that there was no good
Roth or Punjab mean there was but the
the movement between culture language
food was so it was so okay or so fluid
right and then the the Cartesian sort of
decolonization India created the other
and that's sort of jog that sort of
territory rates the other and that's
distinction so I was wondering in for
your own work cuz I'm sort of looking
for this sort of research myself is how
have you how's the pre sort of pre
Descartes in map or Territory influenced
your own work
one more question sorry this is from a
conversation that we had together with
Douglas is Spencer in Stuart some months
ago but since you finished with this
idea about the territory effect and this
normalization or naturalization of power
I also want to bring Cosgrove's idea of
landscape as as these aesthetic
apparatus that serves as the
legitimization of the relationship of a
vision on the relationship between
society and nature and that is also like
this form of validation and
naturalization or greenwashing if you
like so I like to ask you how does this
idea of landscape relate to the idea of
the agglomeration landscapes of a golem
and in the hinterland that you mentioned
and maybe I could extend this question
to Stuart and what do you think is the
relationship with Terry Turney
maybe we should try okay it's come to
the back lands now so I'm a bit of an
accidental tourist in your in your field
so I was interested if you could maybe
help me join the dots between ideas some
of them for the old ideas and concepts
which came from Wollaston in his world
systems theory and how them that's kind
of migrated through as we know ideas
travel something stick some things don't
and how it's some of these ideas have
found themselves through Sasson
and her latest work on explosions and
perhaps how your work connects to our
reconceptualization of these uneven
geographies these asymmetries and both
power and process and and where it
leaves us now really you know what do we
draw what do we see and what the hell is
this let me start with with India by
saying I am not qualified to talk about
India but what I tried to do in the
birth of territory book which does as
majority of that book is before de car
they can't comes in in chapter 8 I think
the great surprise to me in in writing
that was how important the Middle Ages
was in Western Europe in terms of
formation some of the categories and the
ideas the idea that there is a kind of a
classical notion around these things and
then it all sort of falls away and then
it gets really introduced in the
Renaissance early modern period I think
that that story doesn't work at least
for what I was and so what was initially
I kind of I didn't want to do that thing
that history of political thought course
is always do a history flaw Aristotle
fast for a day car and then carry on and
I didn't want to do any nor did I want
and a tokenistic you know let's do some
Augustine or Thomas Aquinas and and I I
spent half the book on the Middle's and
learnt an enormous amount in terms of
trying to think about those ideas I do
fundamental happens and Descartes is one
of the emblematic fundamental figures in
Western thought but but I try very hard
not to do the old kind of trap about
those ideas but it is a Western European
story that it-- and the reasons for that
was that I tried to trace every text
that I used back to the original
language because if you read Plato's
laws or Aristotle
politics in an English translation or
Caesar's war in in Gaul you will find
the term territory all over the place
but if you actually check back to the
Greek and the Latin there is no term
that actually equivalent is equivalent
to our modern notion of territory
territory amis never used by any of the
Roman historians that we have still
extant texts Caesar never uses it
Livy Tacitus does not appear they use
other words to talk about something
that's quite close to our notion of
territory but I use the term territorial
when territorial gets used and it's an
incredibly rare world possible Lots in
it's a much more common word in medieval
Latin so I make this argument Neena the
textual it really really significant if
we're looking at this relation between
words and concepts and how they're
designated and then how they relate to
practice and the limits of my ability
mean that Western European languages is
where I can do that work to some
muddling through kind of degree I
couldn't go beyond and do the kind of
global work but but right what I hope
was that something that I did in there
maybe gave some conceptual tools in
terms of an approach or that particular
way I talked about territory is the
political economic strategic legal
technical and so on could that be useful
for somebody else doing that work for
other times as isness on an app that was
the sort of the hope with with some of
the work I was doing so Matthew etnies
book on on mapping an empire would be
the place I'd say if you want to think
about India that would be I think one of
the key places to look
Monica Swami's producing India would be
another one so you know there are works
that do that kind of thinking but that's
not what I've tried to do territory at
all scales come up as a question I mean
some people think a room a building an
area of a city up to a city up to a
nation-state
maybe the globe all of these are
territories and and I kind of have some
sympathy to that but equally I think if
the term if the concept of territory
becomes so diffuse it actually starts to
become fairly meaningless
and so I've been a quite resistant to
the idea that the territory is strictly
movable between different scales or if
it is then we need another concept to
make sense of the kind of a nation-state
Territory question which i think is a
particular notion and so for me
territory has to have some kind of
specificity of ease but that doesn't
mean that it is a narrow and
straightforwardly defined concept a lot
of what I try and do with a conceptual
work is to say these are the kind of
registers that we would need to examine
in order to understand how territory has
been understood conceptualized practiced
in different times in different places
so it's not a definition that is fixed
and a historical but it's said if you
investigate these kinds of themes you
might be able to build up of what that
that is the theme of the outside which
kind of I know connects to Neil's work
and it's something that I've tried to
think about particularly recently in the
Shakespeare book I have a chapter called
and where I try to think about what it
might mean to be outside territory and I
don't mean of a territory by today it's
easy to leave a territory and you end up
in another territory what would it mean
to be outside of territorial logic
territorial orderings
I think Shakespeare still has a glimpse
of what that might be possible but I
think it's fast disappearing at the time
that Shakespeare's writing places
becoming employed in closed places are
becoming incorporated into territorial
logics but I think in some of
Shakespeare's plays there is still a
sense of something that is outside and
still evades those kind of logics but I
think it's something that it's
disappearing at his time I think he
captures it best in some of these
history plays the Roman history plays
were the English history plays but I
think that that outside form question it
connects certainly to some other things
that neil has been been talking about
and I suppose the last thing that I just
say oh no no answering all of the
questions but is this on this question
of matter he trying to push beyond what
I know was a largely textual historical
work that I did say in the birth and to
try to think about territory much more
as a process in a material sense I don't
think I'm very far down that path is yet
but I think it's the problem that I'm
trying to grapple with the physicality
of the kind of the geophysics of
geopolitics and I've been kind of
playing with these ideas and trying to
work them through in different ways is a
project I'm working with the colleagues
that first time Berg at Durham is
leading who the ice law project where
ice from me was do we need a law of ice
like we have a law of the sea in a law
on land and ice has now become
indeterminate and changing environment
so it's an acronym of which ice is
obviously one but so too are rivers
glaciers or deserts or other kind of
geophysical processes if you think about
rivers from in so many of the world's
land boundaries either use rivers or
cross rivers and yet rivers are hardly a
fixed feature of landscapes so you have
all sorts of problems where you put a
geopolitical boundary line through or a
cross or somehow connected to a river
when the river is a material geophysical
process is is mu and all you do things
like the Rio Grande or you put it into
big concrete channels so it can't move
or you have these problems where the
geophysical and the geopolitical lines
start to diverge and then you have
things like Belgium and Holland did
recently where they started to exchange
little peninsulas of land either side of
the river Mercer because the river had
changed course party through physical
process but also partly through dredging
works to make these navigable channels
and so on and you had these bits of land
that were on the kind of wrong side of
the river so they belong to Belgium but
they were on the Dutch side of the river
and so you have these kind of problems
and I'm and thinking about those as kind
of complexities and I'm trying a far
down that route
and for me at the moment terrain is the
best notion I have to think about though
this is awesome these are such great
questions I'm gonna try to be um just
concise I also won't really but just to
give you a sense of how I would deal
with some of the issues so nameks point
there are a lot of issues you raise
Namek but um the thing that I want to
just say something about is the the
issue of dynamism and how you how you
map how you come up with what David
Harvey what's called a moving map and I
think that's something that everyone
here's wrestling with because we saw
that tension in so many of the
incredible visualizations a lot of you
used video and I'm sure stunning one
challenge of doing video animation is it
and this is also some feed but just
critical reaction to the incredible work
that that we saw one thing that I found
also with my students who also use a lot
of video animation and it's incredible
it acquires in my opinion a lot okay so
does a static map actually as we all
know but particularly video animation I
just think that it's very hard to
understand the density of information
that's being visualized when it be when
it's emitted and then to interpret it
and and I say this to all my students as
well we use the video animation you've
got to be more sparing about it
depending on what kind of presentation
you're giving because you need to
allocate time laying otherwise it's the
the danger again a point Manik raised
earlier of it becomes aesthetic and we
appreciate the sort of you know again
people you know all of you they're
beautiful and it's easy whether you're a
designer or not to be dazzled by it but
particularly for the kind of more
dissonant counter ideological context
that so many of you were engagement
you've got a user of capacity your
explanatory capacity to
give the the video animation it's full
power the video animation can't speak
for itself but I think people know that
around you but I'm just saying you know
it won't actually be even more powerful
if you use if you offer less sometimes
if you offer less visual and then unpack
it because then we really have to make
sense of it and furthermore that will
reveal the degree to which the
visualization is an abstraction rather
than simply a another form of kind of
memetic fetishism you know what I mean
so anyway that wasn't concise but the
the territory scale think is really
interesting interesting Stewart also
spoke to that I just want to connect
that point to the urban same issue
different parallel debate the urban is
often simply viewed as a scale and I'm
guilty some of my writings from 20 years
ago and I also in 20 years ago referred
to the territorial scale and a piece on
the Feb on the barest want to give you
the site because I don't want you to
read it but I was just trying to work
out my own framework and I fully reject
that now territories multi scale or
Stewart Alton I'm saying the same thing
about the urban or urbanization scalar
it's not just local or metropolitan it's
multi scale or and the book that I have
coming out it's also gonna take a while
before it finally emerges I've just been
told by oh you P my publisher May 2019
so whatever you know at some point it
will appear but it's called new urban
spaces urban theory in the scale
question and one of the arguments is the
urban is multi scalar and most perhaps
more interestingly the the scale or
configuration of urbanization mutates in
pattern ways during the geo history of
capitalism and it's being radically be
configured in the context of planetary
urbanization that's basically the
argument of the book and then I try to
offer some some frameworks of analysis
for dealing with that so it's again get
together different socio spatial
categories the point about Doreen masse
really glad that tureens
work is is mentioned and invoked here
and that and that people are engaged
fundamental methodological theoretical
foundation she more than anyone else
really pushed the and developed and
elaborated and mobilized a relational
concept of space space is not a process
and it's always constituted through
relations and what three mass he did
with incredible insight and brilliance
is connect the relationality of space to
power and it's easy to say that but to
actually mobilize that proposition in
relation to particular issues that we
care about is complicated and Dorrie
nasty like she elaborated with
incredible eloquence and and power
certainly the ways in which which
christian shmita and i are trying to
think the relationship between
concentrated extended and differential
organization
it's absolutely building on that
methodological foundation the relational
dimensions of space in this case applied
to the particular power geometries to
use one of Doreen's during mass these
concepts the power geometries of her so
absolutely and one of the points about
that was about the storytelling
and a lot needs to be said about that
that connects up with presentations I
think the issue here is again it goes to
the ways in which all of the
visualizations are not just my metic
captures of the real there are always
abstractions they're always
metatheoretical interpretations putting
that into relief and that's certainly
part of what christian and i and our
collaborators were trying to do as well
that a lot of the work we're doing about
urbanization even though it's embedded
within different social scientific
discourses it's intended as a form of
political criticism it's intended to put
into a certain aspects of contemporary
world capitalism that are rendered
invisible and on ideologies so in that
sense it is a particular form of
storytelling even though we have guys
did with the reflexivity and elephants
that radio gaussian earlier
today the point that a number I'm going
to connect a couple different points
that were made so Lindsay's question
about matter and the the question about
world Systems Theory I actually want to
connect so I think this is a really
fundamental point and I'm very
sympathetic to it
I didn't begin with this particular
orientation as my work on these matters
has evolved I've become much more sort
of foundationally focused on
urbanization as metabolism of course
people will know there's a there's a
vast sophisticated Marxian literature on
metabolism early urbanization
a lot of it historically has focused on
the city which is productive I mean I
build on that but Hillary Angelo and
David walks moved to of my wonderful for
more former doctoral students from NYU
have argued that we really need to push
that idea of urban metabolism to think
about many geographies not just the
geographies of the city but one of the
questions that Lindsay's point raises is
what's being metabolized what exactly is
being metabolized and I had the
privilege last semester to the course
with my former now former colleague keel
Bo formerly of GSD now at McGill in
Montreal on the energetics of
urbanization and it was like I got to be
keel though his graduate student for a
semester it was incredible he's he's a
architectural theorist and historian and
sort of data scientist two things about
energy and architecture and and his
argument that would be basically that
what's being metabolized his head so we
start with the Sun and the enzyme gets
converted into kinds of spatial
configurations including real spatial
configurations and he builds on the work
of Odum a very brilliant critical
ecologist who talks about not energy but
energy with an M and the idea is that
all material structures are in bajji
that's a process in transformation and
if you apply that to her and just what
we try to do with our students in the
course you end up with a very
matter centric but also simultaneously
processional concept of urbanization and
it leads tour towards another
articulation to Jason Jason Moore's work
and this is the connection to world
Systems Theory from the earlier question
and in jason sense Paul G effectively
you end up trying to develop a
conceptualization based on the work we
did in that seminar of urbanization as a
form of metabolic rift so the very
production of urban space involves a
kind of transformation of energy into
matter and that involves a kind of
particular geography of unequal
ecological exchange which is a big part
of what jason moore's work is all about
and anyway that's under development but
those are just some hints of the
directions that we want to go and maybe
one final comment if i may
Stuart's remark about outside territory
I can end my comments without connecting
that up a little bit with the debates on
the urban theory without outside that's
become a topic of quite a lot of polemic
and misunderstanding and even nastiness
in some of the literature and it's given
me the opportunity reflect on that
formulation but just a few quick things
one is that the idea of urban theory
it's outside in a certain way the the
argument is not an affirmation of the
idea that there's not an outside just as
Stuart was saying about territory that's
exactly what we need to critique the
degree to which urbanization processes
are operation so questions of socio
spatial and ecological relations so the
idea of heard the fact that we're to the
degree that urban theory without not
outside might be something we need to
develop that's that's because of an
ongoing or mental disaster in the world
rather than a kind of imperialism of the
theorists it's actually precisely what
we're trying to criticize I would like
to have a kind of formation of the world
in which a different form of
urbanization existed and thus a
completely
form of urban theory would be required
but to the degree that an urban theory
without an outside might be useful
that's precisely because of the
totalizing or imperialize imperialist
formation of catalyst urbanization that
we need to fight against so a lot more
can be said about the idea without an
outside I'm not trying to argue that
every aspect of social life should be
subsumed or could be subsumed
productively under an urban urban theory
I think the argument at all it's simply
that to develop an approach to urban
theory that illuminates contemporary
conditions the idea of an inside and an
outside binarism is not particularly so
the geographies are uneven variegated
incomplete but nonetheless the
inside-outside sort of cartography is
one that increasingly includes our
ability to understand the phenomenon in
the process and the contestation that we
need to decipher just just one one thing
and it's not about my work it's about a
fantastic project could the Italian
Lemos project which has got a book
coming out which is called a moving
board at Alpine cartography zuv climate
change and it's a really really
wonderful project where they're looking
at high alpine borders that Italy has
with some of its neighbors particularly
these two Italian Austrian border where
the boundary line is the the watershed
line through glacier regions and because
this is now melting and it's melting so
fast because of the products of climate
change the boundary line is becoming
difficult to map and so they're trying
to think about how this might be mapped
they're looking at this historically
conceptually but also through having
sensors up on the glacier and working
out where the border is and yet
Parliament Park Park infinii Moberly a
moving border that the border within
some limits could fluctuate in relation
to this geophysical process and so
talking to the people that are running
this project and thinking with them on
some of these ideas this material comes
in and where this idea of the the fixity
of borders around territories is
something that I think is
to be very questioned and refuel thank
you very much I mean sadly we need to
conclude the room and the cameras but
thank all the speakers a long day but
very fruitful probably have coming out
with more questions and answers but I
think part of it was a objective and and
also I hope that these all percentages
at least served to introduce the work of
certain people like Neil or Rania that
hasn't been here before and I think it's
so necessary to incorporate the thinking
and the question as well what they what
they've been doing so thank you very
much
[Applause]
