so welcome to weapons of choice and this
is the series so the media studies
series that we run each year and this
year we're presenting acts of drawing
over the over today and tomorrow as a
two days series looking at as the name
suggests focusing on drawing and today's
today's sessions were focused around
pencil so it was called act 1 the pencil
focusing around the idea of hand drawing
and tomorrow act 2 code being a kind of
concentration on maybe the emerging
territories of the drawing those
drawings that spring from code and
questioning whether the drawings been
lost or maybe it's merely taken leave of
the paper and ventured into virtual
immersive interactive and generative
territories or perhaps this is no longer
drawing at all even so these are the
questions we will ask tomorrow and these
events coincide with the history and
critical thinking exhibition next door
on the sketch in the a a gallery so
we've been lucky enough to be surrounded
by drawings from the ia archive in there
and also mark and parveen's analysis
series so this seems to be a kind of
strange fresh appetite for discussion
about the drawing happening and I
wondered if maybe this is a morning for
something or perhaps we're witnessing
just a kind of coming of age of digital
technology maybe a an emergency out of
the adolescence or the difficult teenage
years of the digital where maybe ever
more sophisticated in its in its
relationship to the body it edges closer
to the dreams or memories of the hand
roll
not further away and so Tonya kovetz I
couldn't think of a more perfect person
actually to be to invite along for this
for this session to kind of finish off
today's session on looking at hand
drawing I first came across her work
through an installation that was in the
National Natural History Museum there's
about decade ago now
she took a slice from a 200 year old
tree and installed it in this face so
she's most known for her sculptures
large-scale installations and temporal
works about landscape and it's taken me
so long to invite you is actually a
crime I think and in her own practice
but also in her teaching she's concerned
with drawing and through her books on
drawing the drawing book and most
recently drawing water in what drawings
are capable of and in all their magical
diversity so drawing water features
drawings by mapmakers writers
shipbuilders whalers soldiers sailors
artists archaeologists cartographers
scientists here in ographers which i had
to look up as a kind of celestial
cartography that's what wikipedia told
me engineers and dreamers and in her
words a diverse selection united by the
sense that in making the drawing they
are all looking for something so on that
note it's a nice place and please
welcome Tony Cohen
[Applause]
Thank You Kate so I've just got a very
short statement that talks about my kind
of personal relationship with drawing
called something against nothing make a
mark leave a trace
just something against nothing drawing
for me provides the focus something to
rest on a place to drop anchor giving
time and space to the drawing is giving
time to worry away at something until
it's resolved this unique physical
mental activity and creative absorption
allows a space to open in the stream of
thoughts and emotion that clutter my
mind through drawing I access my being
mind over my thinking mind it's a portal
into my intuitive understandings slowing
down with clarity to witness to care
communicate celebrate be curious trust a
dream see the beauty of small things in
ways that help me live and enjoy the
invisible becomes visible and
communicable I understand through
drawing that the process is more
important than the product how the
drawing is made needs to be congruent
with what the drawing means through the
drawing I see the importance of not
judging of compassion and sensing
connectedness I cultivate patience and
wait for the drawing to be what it wants
to be I develop perspective distance and
intimacy I try to be present be playful
and be brave in drawing I appreciate my
thinking hand the knowledge and wisdom
that lives in the body in the mind's eye
a creative courageous liquid self I move
towards what I know and understand and I
move away from what I know and
understand that is my something against
nothing
so my ultimate to be something else
where's the technical part oh there it
is
a ship withdrawing was very personal as
an artist should we dim the lights a
little just realized there's quite a lot
of light actually on the screen can that
one go drawings don't repeat reproduce
that well that would be fighting you
know screen quality okay I try not to
touch anything so I was given the Hemi
more drawing fellowship in 2004 my
practice is mainly in sculpture but I've
always drawn you know since the child I
got bored very easily as kid and drawing
seemed to satisfy that kind of sense of
boredom there was always something to do
and being given the Henry Moore drawing
fellowship acknowledged this kind of
link between scope making things and
making drawings and eijah I do tend to
think that sculptors make drawings
rather than draw drawings it's not
necessarily about making pictures but
during that period of time where I
really focused on my own practice I was
invited by black dog poo blessing to
make a drawing book so my proposition
was that I made a commonplace book which
is the Renaissance novel not model
before people have their own libraries
you would have your own book and you
would go and kind of copy from the text
that you identified with so you ended up
with a book that was full of all the
important bits of writing that you found
meaningful and people will get together
and exchange their commonplace books had
various periods of resurgence as a model
and in our world of hyperlinks and you
know the way we kind of collect things
and pin board things you could argue
it's still a model that's fairly active
and how we kind of keep records
things that we like even if we're not
quite sure why we like them so I propose
that I made a commonplace book of
drawing that celebrated drawing in its
widest form I've never thought that
drawing something just the property of
artists I think it's just a tool of
visual communication a manifestation of
thinking and I love the way drawings
talk very directly to other drawings you
can make kind of relationships across
historical time and across specialism so
I think they're kind of you know they
can cross boundaries much more easily
than lots of other art forms they're a
more kind of subject to connoisseurship
and specific kind of boundaries around
practice so the drawings in the drawing
book were kind of arranged around
certain themes my first theme was
measurement so I had a William Blake
drawing of Isaac Newton kind of an
interesting collision of ways of
thinking just with that kind of starting
off this idea of measuring because you
can't you can't start to draw the world
unless you can kind of measure your
place within it this this was another
Blake drawing of a kind of room within
the room and putting that against a saw
the witch folded paper drawing where
obviously the concept for the drawing is
is in the act of folding rather than
some sort of representation and bringing
in the grid into play included more
performative drawings this is the artist
Paul McCarthy in 1972 dragging himself
through white pain in the studio again
measuring that space around him and this
is an Alfred Wegener drawing from the
origins of the continent trying to kind
of explain how the landmass was one
single their mass that drifted apart
which if you try and verbalize if you
put that into words it takes a lot of
words to make sense of that and no
matter how are you explain it in words
you still haven't proven it but if you
show someone this drawing you
for them proof and I think often our
relationship with truth is is very
visual so I particularly like these
sketches these are John Clark's drawings
from James Hutton's theory of the earth
again a kind of evidencing how the
drawing becomes a kind of proof the
evolution of our thinking so the systems
of showing cross-sections through the
land demonstrated time and different
kind of errors which were kind of
mind-blowing concepts when these
drawings first arrived to discuss our
place in relation to time and human
history and the history of ideas and
then putting that kind of geological
drawing against the drawing that sort of
made itself it's the seismograph and
Caltech so the drawing is of a kind of
catastrophic moment but it's an
incredible drawing as well and
suggesting a kind of more psychological
seismic moment in this Louise Bourgeois
drawing so looking at visual kind of
relationships between drawings that come
from pletely different times completely
different places and just letting them
speak to each other and inviting the
reader of this book to go on that
journey with me and also inviting the
reader to make their own kind of sense
of connection or collection even of
their own drawings that their interest
them another kind of landscape rendering
is Smithson's heap of language so this
is a heap of words about the land and
the mapping process arranged into a
mountain or robert louis stevenson's map
of Treasure Island he writes about this
no child but must remember laying his
head in the grass staring into the
infant estable forest and seeing it grow
populous with fairy armies somewhat in
this way I poured upon my map of
Treasure Island
I believe he made the map before he
wrote the story he needed a kind of
Orient a
the adventure this is drawing by Richard
long again
you know there's challenging the status
of the drawing is that a drawing is it
an action is a sculpture five stones
rolled down a hill in Iceland I
approached him for the work a line made
by drawing which some of you might know
which is just the line left in the grass
and he was absolutely insistent that
that wasn't drawing and that I wasn't
allowed to include it it was definitely
a sculpture but he said this was a
drawing so I'm running with his
definition there I think this is an
extraordinary drawing by Marcel Duchamp
with my tongue in my cheek 1959 pencil
ink plaster on paper and one of my
favorite drawings in the book because I
had I have a head full of water all
times is Auguste Rodin's nude woman
sitting under water and the way the page
is sort of filled with the liquid that
surrounds her and then that I had
talking to this juror drawing which is
him remembering a dream of a deluge so
the words described the dream and then
the dream actually kind of floods the
paper as well so I moved through various
themes in the book the measurement
nature the urban the body and ended with
death because everything ends with death
eventually and that whole incredible
tradition of drawing the dying or making
death mask is quite extraordinary and
came back to me when my father was dying
and I decided to sit in a hospital room
and draw and I've never looked at the
drawing again like many of my drawings
they go securely into plan chests never
to be seen again but yes it's a very
strange thing to want to bear witness to
a moment
that just going to show you a little bit
of the sort sculptural work that I was
doing at this time and so I was
particularly interested in geological
landscapes how landscapes make
themselves so I took kind of landforms
where you could see those kind of
geological forces made those in the
studio in clay and then cast them and
then frame them in plants so rather than
the sculpture sitting on the plinth the
sculpture sat into the plinth and I made
a whole series of these and these are
effectively all landscapes sculpted by
water their canyons their cliff faces
gorgeous and my drawing practice was
fairly neatly an equivalent of the
sculptural purchase the white page of
the paper was an equivalent to the white
cube or the white plinth and sometimes I
drew my sculptures after I finished them
as well just to look at them more for an
artist whose practice is all based in
landscape I am kind of constantly
confronted by the fact I can't draw
landscape in the kind of traditional
sense of sitting down somewhere and
rendering it I can't make a picture of
it I don't think I even want to so I've
kind of made my peace of that but I do
use mapping a lot and cartographic kind
of mechanisms in my drawing practice as
a way of drawing landscape so this is a
map I produced with the British
Geological Survey of an imaginary island
with a fairly kind of testable key that
they helped print up and I've taken
mapping symbols into my sculptural
practice as well this is a work there's
a sister to it on the other side of the
reservoir up and killed in Northumbria
these are sets of drawings there are
frames so each framed work has about ten
different sheets in it and I'm using the
times atlas as a source to draw islands
from different ocean
so try and kind of dissolve the
cartographic certainty with these maps
these are all the islands of the Arctic
Ocean so the island is also a kind of
random ink blot or cataract and they're
shown in various sizes of sets and I
make field drawings as well so drawings
that try and kind of generate themselves
you know your mark that repeats and
fills the page so less about the object
less about trying to draw the thing and
more about kind of thinking about a
surface and a process not really knowing
what's gonna happen when I start these
drawings either I think of this piece
strangely is a drawing even though it's
obviously an object it's the work called
meadow and I brought a wildflower meadow
from Bath to London via the Inland
Waterway system so it's a moving artwork
that asked the question when you move
through a landscape does it move through
you what's that exchange and it felt
like I was tracing this very long watery
line from one place to another with the
work shortly after that work was
complete I was invited to make a work
about this drawing which is a vast chalk
drawing in the Downs near Oxford I was
doing a fellowship for the school of
archaeology Oxford University and they
invited me to respond to the white horse
a tuffington which is the drawing that's
over 2,000 years old and has been in
continuous usage which means people
redraw the drawing and have redrawn the
drawing for over 2,000 years they go on
the hill and they scrape it off so this
kind of local community around this very
very large drawing have kept it in kind
of public the public domain my response
to that drawing was to make my own
Museum of the white horse that traveled
to various locations and clear
embrace courses that had a collection of
the white horse in our material culture
so not looking at it so much our kiala
our killer archeology not looking at the
archeology it can't say the road but
looking at in our kind of current
mythology and archetype use of the white
horse and while I was there I was
trained by the archaeological
draftsperson at the school to learn how
archeologists draw there's a whole some
really interesting drawing systems
around archaeology some of which do with
mapping mapping time and space again a
bit like geological systems but
different and then there are also marks
to describe particular materials so when
you draw an archaeological find you draw
a whole scale so one-to-one scale you
have a particular mark say for Flint or
bone or so I had to develop a mark for a
record of all the white horses or this
little statuette which is in a kind of
polymer that was desert orchid that died
during the making of this piece made
front headlines all over the world so I
this was my mark for paper and I drew
the library that accompanies the white
horse museum I draw books quite a lot I
probably draw books more than I read
them sometimes it's a really hard book I
think if I draw it stare at it hard
enough I'm gonna absorb it but I'm still
working on that I then went traveling
with my partner who's also an artist and
our very long-suffering son and we went
to South America for six months he was
eight and again I was surrounded by the
most incredible landscapes traveling
through but I couldn't draw them but I
drew the guide books to those landscapes
so my road atlas my trekking guide and
my very well thumbed voyage of the
Beagle while I was there
I've been invited like two nights before
I left to make a proposal for the Darwin
bicentenary ceiling which I did from a
camper van in Patagonia and this drawing
was my starting point for my proposal
which is a sketch book very very very
famous page and a darling sketch book it
says at the top of the page I think and
then that thinking breaks down into an
image a kind of tree like coral like
branching form where he visualizes one
of the biggest ideas we've come up with
a theory of evolution so that was my
starting point for my proposal I said
can I take a 200 year old oak tree slice
it through the branches through the
trunk and through the roots and insert
that into the ceiling at the Natural
History Museum
I wouldn't as I had no idea of this was
possible but I kind of lagged it for
their proposal and they went with it so
this was the tree I had to come back
actually from traveling I might still be
there but yes there we we stopped after
about seven months of traveling to come
back this is a tree that came out of a
sustainable forests in longleat and we
planted 200 oak trees to say thank you
to this one it was a huge vast
three-dimensional living object that had
to be chopped up sliced numbered
reassembled because effectively I was
asking the tree to draw itself with this
slice I'd taken this slice through it
turning this vast living 3-dimensional
thing into a two-dimensional thing and
this was the drawing that held it all
together if I'd lost this drawing I
wouldn't have been able to put my pieces
back together it gave me a long life
long probably obsession with wood grain
because you could trace a line from the
root up through the trunk and out
through the branch I mean we all love
wood grain
surfaces but I I didn't realize what a
continuous drawing or a what a line of
kind of autobiography there is in a tree
and that's the permanent peace in the
treasures gallery and it's also the
largest botanical specimen in the museum
as well as an artwork I drew on trees
obsessively from then on I had various
other slices through ancient oak from
the same source and redrew the timelines
and drawing is about time you know the
time you spend with the drawing is not
like any other time and it slows down
time and yet the more time you make for
drawing the better it gets I think that
exchange is a very rich one this was a
piece of if the Cicely Saunders
Institute's Kings hospital again it's
working with trees she set up the
hospice movement and the UK a world
leaders on palliative care care for the
dying so they wanted a piece that kind
of reflected certain elements of her
philosophy and I propose to cast trees
so I cast silver birch trees without
their branches so strip down to the bone
which is how we are when we're dying
there's not a lot of extra you're kind
of down to your core and I redrew the
bark detail in pen and ink on all these
trees again incredibly laborious process
of tracing a lot of the drawing I do I
think he's copying when I'm not kind of
making or process-based I think I'm
copying so I was copying the marks that
were revealed in the tree in pen and ink
I then made a big decision in my
personal life to move out of London and
I now live in the southwest very very
rural II in an old mill so next to a
river so water became a very kind of
much more present for
material in my work and this is one of
the first pieces I made after that move
where I collected water from a hundred
rivers from around the UK and their
house in a boathouse at the art
collection in Scotland called Jupiter
Artland from that water piece I went on
to make a bigger water piece and for the
fruit market gallery it was also noted
bro this is all the Seas and I wanted to
gather water from all the world seas and
bring them to one place and I relied on
the generosity of a global network of
seawater collectors to do this people
sent me water from all around the world
including two guys that were rowing
across the Atlantic sent me a bottle
from somewhere in the middle obviously
not until they got back to the other
side yeah a piece that became about you
know started off about my relationship
with water and my ideas about the liquid
self and identity and water became a
this kind of collective and you know
extremely generous collection of other
people's relationship to the sea whilst
making that work I was making another
kind of collection which is this
collection of drawings about water this
was another kind of wandering journey
that I chose to make through our vast
visual record for sightings of the sea
the book the book became a log of my own
drawing practice and reflection on
others
it's my portal on which is a very
particular sort of drawing a chart drawn
from the sea they're hand drawn by
sailors since medieval times that are
part of kind of navigational aids say
what the land looks like when you're on
on the on the sea looking for the scene
on visual record not just artists during
the sea cartographers explorers people
working the sea the sea is a social
political territory and part of a
colonial kind of expansion plan and also
trying to embrace the idea of drawing
itself
as exploration an open-ended proposition
and its own rich territory so again I
started with Blake I think everything
starts with Blake for me so this
beautiful drawing again of measurement I
think all drawings are about someone
looking for something and something hard
to find or difficult to see or say that
gets put into the language of drawing
communicating beyond the failure of
language this is a very fine
ocean map an illustration for Lewis
Carroll by Henry Holliday for the
hunting of the snark the crew were very
happy with it because there's nothing on
it at all this is a portal on so these
long horizontal drawings the
navigational view of the South foreland
Point and Kent coast from 1840 there
were lots of these in the cook cook
exhibition at British Library of any of
you saw that I was included William
Daniels incredible project he he decided
to sail around the whole of the UK
coastline drawing and writing the things
that he saw he worked out pretty quickly
that he was going to have to do some
sections on Lang's it just stood too
long but this is him setting off from
Lands End
a perfect place to start and this is J M
Turner's a wreck
also of lands and you know a complete
kind of dissolve of sea and sky someone
like via Selman draws the surface of the
sea with exquisite kind of detail and
when she talks about these drawings she
talks about them in a very kind of non
metaphorical non symbolic way it's
literally about the surface of the sea
on the surface of the paper it's quite
kind of brute all the way she talks
about it this is a page from Donald Crow
house logbook the last page of his
logbook actually he was a businessman an
amateur sailor that joined the first
Sunday Times Golden Globe sailing round
the globe yacht race and he was cheating
and I've been a couple of movies come
out about him recently actually so he
had he ran two logbooks one was kind of
trying to make up this full story and
one was trying to kind of deal with sort
of mental deterioration so these
logbooks charts this obviously very
difficult period of time another kind of
form of mapping that cartography below
the surface of the sea this is Mary
thought physiographic diagram of the
North Atlantic Ocean she was an
incredible kind of geologist scientist
mapmaker who lost her position at
Columbia University because the head of
department didn't accept their kind of
emerging theories about continental
drift so she had to take the whole
drawing project home and when you look
at the size and scale that she was
working on and imagined these drawings
kind of just draped all over her house
it's it's a really remarkable
achievement that she finished these
drawings rather fine drawing of a whale
by captain Valentin Barna I mean it was
such a joy to kind of sift through
archives
sift through kind of get worm my way
into various collections and look for
drawing related to the sea because I had
a theme I had a single topic though
there you know so much shoes from but
very pleasurable experience of
collecting had some scrimshaw in there
this beautiful optic turn from odo bonds
birds of America which on elephant folio
size pages so the books about this big
you sort of you know he open like a door
quite a remarkable book and this is you
know ham bears constellation of cancer
from urine no metria so looking at kind
of stellar cartography to match ocean
cartography drawing us installation
this artist burial of a six blown lines
across the floor or drawing as a kind of
event this is a night drawing by Mimi
Gelman black-and-white photograph she
makes her drawings through following GPS
positions and using drone photography so
the snow in the image becomes like marks
on the page or drawing some things
dragged up from the deep as well this is
Charles Thomas he he was an early
Scottish natural historian and he was
one of the people in the HMS challenger
sort of scooping things up it's the
first voyage just to look at the sea
rather than to go find land and he
collected many sea creatures hadn't been
seen before a rather beautiful drawing
by Sigmund Freud he was a really good
drawer it's drawing the section of a
spinal ganglion he had a you know
fantastic passion for marine biology as
a young man and his first job he worked
in an Italian laboratory at the edge of
the Adriatic Sea dissecting eels covered
in slime and looking for sexual organs
which may explain some of how his
thinking evolved William Huell a
mathematician no interested in sea
whatever but became part of a massive
crime admiralty project to chart tides
across the world so massive kind of
coordinated effort to get harbor masters
and sailors and the Navy to keep tidal
records for particular periods of time
and then he translated those into lines
of time on the map of the globe because
you've you controlled the tides you
controlled the ports and you made more
money for the Empire so it was an inch
one of the first kind of uses of big
data that's understood and known about
its it's also one of the first
state-sponsored scientific kind of
endeavors as well as a lot of firsts
represent
nice drawing actually and the idea that
drawings can change the world as well
this plan of a slave ship used to
transport enslaved Africans was an icon
of the anti-slavery movement in Britain
and the drawing shows lines of bodies
black bodies compressed like teeth in a
zip with a cross-section revealing how
there's also vertical storage of this
cargo filling the boat in a brutal
economic exercise and this this drawing
was published across media newspapers
that was the media then and had a
massive impact and strengthened the
anti-slavery movement well beyond
statistics and passionate speeches
drawings are also the idea of the
drawing us witness as well this is from
the 9th century AD it's a hostage stone
in size slate and it's an archaeological
find that details of Viking raid made by
a child you know and children's drawings
are still used or are actively used in
war war crime trials all over the world
because part of kind of recovery for
traumatized children includes kind of
space to draw and visualize things they
have seen as a way of kind of some sort
of catharsis in theory I included
engineering drawings this is a fine
drawing of the Forth Road Bridge which
is actually really really large as a
drawing when handled more Louise
Bourgeois
and obsessional kind of drafts women
from her insomnia series really good
thing to do if you can't sleep is draw
and in Gallaher's choral cities where
she draws on images that pre-exists a
beautiful Joseph Boyce drawing of a seal
and during this period you know I don't
find writing researching that's easier
and then you have a fairly small brain
but
I needed to do something in my own
drawing practice to kind of balance out
the collection so I was making this
drawing series where I was taking out
information so the more I kind of filled
up with research and the drawings of
others and thinking about unraveling
these stories I kind of emptied out
atlases
I mean atlases become redundant fairly
quickly anyway because boundaries
changed so I was sort of taking what
just obsessively filling up atlases page
after page after page and they were all
laid out across the studio and I noticed
that actually I could start reforming a
map of continents and the globe if I
start opening them at the right pages so
I ended up with another kind of world
map as a composite I was also making
another series of drawings whilst
writing drawing water that I was making
with salt and ink and evaporation so
working with things like blotting paper
quite a lot as well so allowing a kind
of tide to come in on the drawing and
then just seeing what happened when when
that tide went out again and working on
sea shots as well I'm also learning to
sail so there's a whole other drawing
convention which is actually about
plotting courses on maps that's another
kind of drawing skill and trying to
acquire quite a useful one as well and
quite their consequences if you get it
wrong and I mean what's back I'm
wondering what's doing that but I'm not
going to wander too hard I made these
drawings repeatedly calling my see mark
like I kind of confessed earlier I don't
really draw landscape and I can't draw
the sea either but what I'm trying to
draw is the kind of movement of energy
or light across water across the surface
and I made these drawings on tiles
because we tile are wet spaces our
bathrooms or kitchens and one day I hope
a swimming pool I'd really like to make
one of these for a swimming pool so if
any of you young architects out there
get commissioned and you think yes that
would work please find me I made a piece
for the National Trust where a caster
Bell on a beach at Lands End and that
Bell was shown in Somerset house and it
was rung at high tide on the river so at
the moment high tide whatever time of
day or night someone would ring the bell
and there was an accompanying digital
drawing which for me was my first kind
of step into digital space which I found
a very just another very exciting kind
of landscape in a way very infinite
landscape so I made it very slow drawing
that lasted a year and it was a drawing
that indicated where high tide was on
the country so stripping out information
from tidal stations around the UK and
that became part of this very very slow
moving animation that moved at the speed
of the tides that was available online
I've entered a period of work
researching James Lovelock and Gaia
theory where again my drawing practice
was kind of translated and the mapping
practice was translated into sculptural
objects so looking at the shape of the
oceans unraveling Globes using the
convention of the globe which is made up
of these things called Gore's they're
kind of canoe shaped things that make up
a globe if you fit them all together but
I just wanted the oceans so I made three
ocean bowls for three largest oceans
these were just this showed closed
yesterday this is that was that not not
Oxford so you've got the Atlantic the
Pacific and Indian but they come from
those kind of Gore drawings of the globe
and this is a sea mark that's currently
on showing X
like I said I make this drawing a lot
and I made it for that base and the
other books I'm drawing at the moment
are Rachel Carson's to see around us you
know she was an incredible writer and
marine biologist and was the person that
kind of started the environmental
movement in the States by being very
outspoken about the use of chemicals in
farming and agriculture and what the
consequences of their use would be the
book she's most well known for is the
Silent Spring which is this
environmental kind of rant but she also
did this incredible trilogy of books
about the sea and the sea around us has
been in print since the early 50s and
I'm drawing every copy I can find and
the other thing I'm just starting to
explore I've always worked in our
education in one way or another
I ran the MA drawing at UA L was based
in Wimbledon for six years and I've just
been appointed professor of drawing at
Bath Spa but I have just starting to
explore whether or not there's another
way of delivering messages about drawing
practice outside of an academic
framework where my own experience is a
kind of lifelong meditator and that how
that crosses over with my drawing
practice can possibly kind of be
exchanged with people so I'm just
looking at that as a possibility as well
so we've kind of a drawing teaching role
that's outside of kind of academic
framework that looks at the kind of
potential for drawing to just make life
a little bit easier
yes and that's that's this this is a
drawing made through breathing so I've
literally just breathed into an ink blot
and allowed that breath to burst on the
page so that was the last drawing I have
so I think I'm right timewise sorry I've
said a lot I don't know if any of you've
got any questions about anything
[Applause]
is that working
yeah I'll just maybe start us off just
with a question about we just heard from
Andrew Holmes you were next door about
his amazing photo realistic pencil
drawings and that each one takes 300
hours and I'm interested in that in time
in the the time embodied within a within
a drawing and you mention it a few times
which i think is fascinating that you
that perhaps you that you what did you
say the book you draw something just to
look at them you talked about your
landscape sculptures you draw them again
just so you can look at them and I
wondered if you could talk a bit more
about drawing as an excuse to spend time
with a subject it also seemed to come
across when you talked about the drawing
of your father
the idea is drawing as an excuse to half
time I mean I did I think that it is a
remarkable kind of characteristic of
drawing how it Dee accelerates or
decelerates which is the right word
decelerates time it just slows things
down
in ways that I think are communicable as
well I think even time spent looking at
drawing I'm saying this I'm slowing down
as I say when you look at a drawing like
really look at someone else's drawing
you slow down as well it's it's just a
kind of resistance to the speed that we
run at and increasingly runner things
are speeding up more and more and more
so I think it's an in during has an
interesting role within that you know
just at the point when you think we just
don't need this this anymore you know
we've learned how to do this we can do
this we can click this and you know I
don't know cut and paste that or
whatever we can do we can render in so
many different ways it's got so many
fancy tools at our disposal that we
think are going to make it all happen
much quicker and more easily but I I'm
just not sure that's true I think the
the kind of easier we think it gets the
worse the drawing gets and I think
spending time waiting for the drawing to
kind of come to be finished to get to
where it needs to go is never wasted you
know the moments of frustration but you
know I think that's such a kind of
valuable experience almost more valuable
than the drawing itself just what that
offers an individual and I do see
drawing as a practice you know I talk
about drawing practice a lot and that
practice also means doing it again again
and again and again you know I think we
we get very quickly frustrated if we
don't get results and drawing teaches
you to be patient and I think that's
quite an important lesson again when
everything else seems to be in page
you know there's an area of your
creative practice that you can say no
actually I've just got to spend the time
with this so I do I do think drawing is
about giving yourself time to make the
drawing to see something and it is you
know that sounds like it's all about
observation like looking at something
which is one aspect of drawing but I
think you can spend as much time kind of
viewing inward as well and seeing seeing
the things you can't see actually
through your drawing practice they kind
of make themselves visible and
communicable and then they communicate
to you as the person doing the drawing
and then beyond that I mean drawings
often very very purposeful you know
people make drawings fruit because they
do something they communicate something
in ways that language doesn't achieve as
well so I think it's a really important
to thing to develop a practice in you
know I think it's wrong to expect
instant kind of results with it you
never know but it takes long - a long
time to find your line to find your mark
to find your own vocabulary and it takes
a long time even to appreciate the
drawings of others I mean I think they
communicate very easily and directly but
you know the longer you time you spend
with the drawing unraveling someone
else's drawing thinking about how they
made it why they made it finding your
way into drawing finding your way out
for drawing you know it's it's it's time
well spent
I'd say do you have any other questions
hi thank you very much that was very
interesting I wanted to ask you about
you mentioned that there's drawings that
you kind of don't look again so and you
also talked about this idea of time and
I I was wondering if you can tell
immediately if you want to look back on
a drawing or what's the relationship to
your drawing if it's something that sort
of changes or if there's a clear
division which is drawings you kind of
don't want to look back on and the ones
you kind of keep coming back to perhaps
it's a little bit misleading to say I
don't look at them again because I think
maybe I would look at them again but no
one else would you know there's a sort
of I think I have a public drawing
practice in a private drawing practice
which I shouldn't keep saying in public
actually yes because there are drawings
that I feel probably probably just
reveal too much about my kind of in a
world that I think you know I'm prone to
over sharing already so you know I draw
the line somewhere for me so yes they
might go away but not necessarily away
from me but I don't consider them public
work you know I it's the idea of the
presentation drawing I know that's kind
of trope of architecture architectural
drawing but I think I think that's true
of my practice as well and it's not to
say I don't make drawing so intimate and
that I share but I there I know there is
a set of drawings that are for me only
okay maybe something following I'm sorry
second question it's in a way your
relationship to your drawings maybe I'm
trying to
understand a bit more if there's
something you've done before go back to
all things you when I move on in a way
this idea after you've done something
for ten years you look back on it and
you actually find something else so you
know what I'm trying to yes I suppose
the the sketchbook it's an important
place for that you know I keep all of
those and that's you know we're writing
and drawing and thinking just manifests
without me judging it at all and I will
certainly revisit things and one of the
things you often see even you know doing
presentation on work you just see how
you go around and hundun kind of various
spirals you don't escape your subject
but it modifies or matures or evolves
hopefully but you you often return you
know it all comes from the same source
so that shouldn't be a surprise but
certainly within my drawing practice I I
do look I do find drawing skin and I'm
shocked by them or surprised by them
that I'd been that honest at that moment
in the drawing or what I then understand
about who I was at that moment I mean
drawing through a diary as well they I
can usually remember lots of artists or
at least I can remember exactly where I
was or what was happening when I made
that drawing you know it doesn't have to
have a date on it which is another kind
of strange characteristic that you kind
of re-enter the space of the drawing
when you made it which is another
interesting thing another reason for
making them and just for yourself as
well they don't have to be for the
people they can can just have that
function I don't know if that art does
answer your question
thank you so much for this presentation
firstly you talked about the
relationship of kind of one
understanding of drawing as proof or
truth or evidence singing and drawings
being used in this way and I think we're
very familiar with that and in the world
of architectural released drawings being
used to make very clear promises but you
also use a very beautiful phrase I think
my head is full of water at all times
which seemed to invite in this idea that
other things might be making drawings
true and other materials and energies
might be allowed to enter into the
process of making drawings and I suppose
I wanted to ask if you could talk some
more about the way you've tried to
embrace that that form of drawing in
your practice which is maybe less about
controlling substances but allowing
substances into the process of making a
drawing which is which is open-ended and
which might be instructive to us around
I think that's very well observed what
you've just said because I would say I
have a number of strategies in terms of
my drawing practice and some I impose a
system on the drawing process like with
the book drawings you know I'm trying to
record signs of usage on an old book
it's very systematic even some of the
mapping drawing series very systematic
and methodical and then there's a whole
other body of work which is process led
that's much more like the studio becomes
more like a laboratory not that
anything's repeatable so it's not really
a scientific but it's all an experiment
and inviting certain processes in and
being curious what's going to happen
when I do this that kind of attitude
being open-ended I mean I think it's you
know drawing the whole kind of
contemporary drawing is of our
open-ended ever-expanding body of
practice where what drawing is is being
redefined constantly which is such an
exciting kind of very specific thing
about the discipline and I I definitely
have a sense at times that I am just
waiting for the drawing or what I have
to do is show up at the studio you know
and get things ready and then see what
happens you know where that I mean it's
not always the case sometimes I'm I
could say very deliberate very focused
and know what I'm going to get at the
end of the day sometimes it's it's like
I'm just I'm here I'm just a tool let's
see what happens catch the drawing from
wherever and embrace that without I'd
you know I don't judge that at all I'm
again they may not work I don't don't
expect every drawing to work I mean
that's another very kind of okay how do
you judge one that's worked against one
that hasn't and these are very
subjective kind of reflections but also
kind of critically honed they there's a
sort of tension or paradox between
knowing when a drawings worked from a
kind of very critically rigorous point
of view but also just because I love it
or yes or you know all that kind of
stuff you know and I find that that's
incredibly it's not you know I I love my
job I love that could be a day in my
life you know deciding right I'm going
to draw today and I don't know what I'm
going to get you know again I really
love drawing and lots of my publications
of full of drawings for a purpose
they're trying to kind of communicate
something something that's going to
happen something that's going to be made
or built or you know something that
needed communicating to someone else
they're very purposeful but I think it's
all
you know an absolute joy to work without
purpose as well and see what happens
hi thank you that was really great I was
just wondering you spoke you spoke about
time and slowing time down when you're
drawing when you're immersed in the
practice and obviously there's the water
so I'm thinking about tide and waves and
also this is the last piece about breath
so I was just wondering with a sound or
music is important and plays a role when
you're immersed or whether you work in
silence whether it's a bedroom or I know
for me personally when I'm drawing I I
need music yeah yes I'm only laughing so
I'm obsessed with house me so yes it is
a bit it does it varies it absolute
varies you know it might be some kind of
beautiful bit of meditative music or
electronica or it might be something
that I'm gonna blow my speakers on or
you know you have to stop drawing to
dance you know it's it's so Japan's if
I'm feeling particularly if I'm sort of
feeling a bit nasty then I usually use
radio for to like get me right back down
to earth but that's just too depressing
these days so I can't tolerate that yeah
it might be the crickets all sorts of
things become the soundtrack to the
drawings but it is it is definitely part
of the landscape of the studio for sure
I also had a really slightly different
experience with the ocean bowls I was
given the opportunity to collaborate
with the remarkable composer Jonathan
dove he's the kind of contemporary quite
kind of interesting really interesting
classical composer and we work with the
northern school of music with these
young singers than they made this
incredible kind of improvised work
around round the bowls where they were
singing into the bowls and I was just
completely overwhelmed by that as an
experience you know it's quite a bit
weeping from me going on I seem to
remember for the first time I heard it's
being performed live and I just I never
want to make a sculpture unless someone
sings to it you know that that just
everything seems so congruent and I'm
currently starting conversation with a
remarkable dancer as well who was a
ballet dancer and is now kind of moving
into this very experimental performative
element and she's starting to draw she
was in the names that Eve must oh it was
a piece of hers in the shows just in at
modern art Oxford called loop and she
works with the vertical trapeze and she
drew with her whole body on with
graphite in this kind of piece that I
thought was completely remarkable I mean
a lot of the time when I'm drawing I
move like this you know and there was
this incredible body doing these
incredible things to make this other
sort of drawing and I'm hoping we might
collaborate in the future so that's
another you know I'm really happy to
expand the practice you know to the idea
of it moving into sound of moving into
dances is just you know thrilling as a
kind of prospect and relinquishing is
it's very half me to relinquish the
solitary nature of my drawing practice
you know with the big Commission's the
public artwork you know there's a lot of
people involved without fabricators
funders stakeholders commissioners you
know I'm just the ringmaster you know I
have this vision that I want to achieve
and I have to push it through and
negotiate with all these other people
and situations because there
often not in the white cube either so
you know there's a whole lot of stuff
negotiate with that but the drawing
practice is is kind of mine and it's my
recovery space and my solitary space you
know I never feel as alone as well as
when I'm drawing so it's quite a
testament to think oh can I actually
kind of do something collaboratively
with drawing yes so that but I like
trying something out you know I drew as
a child because I got bored and I draw
as an adult because I get bored you know
and if it changes how I work then that's
all good can I ask I mean I don't think
you actually kind of touched on it but
it it seems to me I mean when you put
together water and drawing I mean it's
interesting that you know what is one of
the few surfaces that would resist
trying at least if you take the drawing
as like dominated by the pencil seems to
me that somewhere there's another kind
of more buried tradition of in a sense
making drawing well first of all
linguistically using drawing in the
sense of make something appear as in
drawing upon or even drawing up
sometimes drawing out water
I mean so it it kind of you know circles
around something like the well and that
sense of drawing to make something
appear it sort of helps to get you away
I mean one of the problems with pencil
it's not pencil salt I've got no
argument with the pencil but it's like
the problem is that if you look at it I
that way you soon start kind of judging
things on their capacity to represent
and that on that kind of weather you
think it's a good representation and
that ready it seems to me is not a very
useful process to pursue I mean really
in that sense drawing was like a a kind
of subset of old masters and the drawing
techniques that went with it they're
incredible but that's not the problem
here
so it's it's whether there's a space for
a renewal of the tradition that actually
if there is this kind of drawing upon
drawing up making I suppose the crucial
thing is really the sort of specialized
visibility of something I mean you you
both identify it and make it appear in
one eye eye space um yeah this learning
to sail thing I spend a lot of time
looking at the wake
watching the line that is drawn by
moving across water that then goes and I
that chimes with my kind of something
against nothing you know make a mark and
then it's gone that sense of transients
that sense of lack of attachment these
are things I kind of aspire to this
meditator see that that line is aligned
I'm very fond of I just say the horizon
line is my favorite line in the world
particularly on the sea there's another
line in the water that I identify as an
important line for me and the lip the
liquid thing you know making making work
with water
I suppose I kind of identified for me
the idea of the liquid as as being a
kind of a sense of how it experienced
the idea of the self and that the self
is in itself a liquid thing and you know
the difficulty we have in holding on to
liquid you know unless you have a
container you can't just hold it in your
hands you need some sort of container I
use vessels a lot and I think of art
it's one of the most incredible kind of
containers of the self that how how
people kind of are embodied through
their art practice is a kind of
remarkable thing that we've achieved and
I suppose that there's something that
flows nice attention use a lot of water
II was flows through a lot of these
works is kind of exploring that and then
how that might expand into all sorts of
other kind of conversations about our
waters which are very troubled as well
with various social political events or
catastrophes environmental issues
increasingly kind of populating the work
see what month might start is quite a
kind of introspective examination or
self is becoming kind of connected to an
idea of troubled water in in a much more
kind of expansive and inclusive way and
I certainly you know I feel like a
drawing practice and a sculptural
practice me can look at these things in
very different ways
very you know again nonverbal ways but
can kind of witness our times in some
way that I hope will kind of permeate
just in reference to what you just said
in closing to that question I was
wondering if there is therefore
political difference between the line
and the drawing and what would if there
is what is that political difference for
you sorry I'm gonna have to ask a
political difference between the line
yeah and the drawing yeah I mean with
all the words are used to the end I was
thinking of kristina sharp in the week
of thinking of student nirmaan is donna
haraway
sort of the way of of that conversation
of bodies of water yeah I was just
wondering therefore in the effort in the
effort of people working against the
line people trying to say that hey stop
drawing lines I was wondering if if
drawing and lie and the line or
different things I yes I mean the way
you were talking about all the kind of
inflections of the word draw that you
can draw up you can draw towards you can
draw from you know it's it's much more
expansive kind of idea of connection the
line is the boundary you know is a very
political entity and even to think about
membranes for me is more useful than to
think about line you know a line is a
singular hard thing that separates one
thing from another and I have to try and
celebrate connectedness more than the
things that divide us
you know that's my position so yeah I
very much support that that kind of
distinction that you're talking about
it's not that I'm like would never use a
line in a drawing but you know I think
again the line in in water is the most
arbitrary kind of conceptual ridiculous
thing you know the idea that you can
divide one C from another
is seems even more random than dividing
one country from another with a lot you
know at least maybe in a country there
might be a mountain range or something
in the middle but with the sea we do
divide them art there are kind of lines
that separate one ocean from another and
there is only one ocean so how can we
even talk about these different kind of
bodies of water when water is the very
embodiment of connectivity and it is the
connective element in the landscape as
well and then with the hydro cycle how
you think about the atmosphere and the
planet and yeah it's it's everything
about water is about connectivity which
is why I'm kind of drawn to it I think
yeah and then and the line has a very
different kind of position it's it's the
divider it's very useful but
reservations
my pad oh I'm fascinated by these sort
of drawings is that from is that drawing
a printer yeah the I think about iPads
I've liked drawing on iPads my problem
is what do you do then
it's all the printing it's like well I
just want it on the iPad I just would
like a sketchbook of iPads yes it's like
because I like the radiance of the
backlit color and things like that you
know I like all of that and the fact you
can make it sort of through the sort of
haptic slippery's screen and those it
was it's getting it all out of digital
space
I felt I find digital space really
exciting to draw in but I don't want to
take the drawing out of digital space so
because that kind of defeats the spatial
quality of it so yes I've had a go but
it it's not it's not material enough for
me you know I'm a maker I like stuff I
like unexpected things I like reactions
and I suppose you call them curtain in
some way the chemical reactions but all
things changing like evaporation or wet
during drying outs these are all things
I can't make happen in digital space I
mean there are other things you can make
happen
obviously and like I say it was very
exciting making that title drawing for
me but my main like beef with digital
drawing is getting it out and just being
disappointed personally
and perhaps a verb one last question for
me but it seems like I often feel like
the word drawing is too big what it's
trying to describe too many things and I
think you know mark touched on it we
tend to see it especially in
architectural practice as a noun
note the drawing you have to do the
drawing Tudor told you to do the day I
looked up I like I like looking at what
Wikipedia has to say about and about
architectural drawing it says there's a
drawing that falls within the specific
conventions of architecture okay and
then it says digital software has made
manual drawing obsolete Oh which I
enjoyed as a phrase because I think what
that suggests is if if drawing in
architecture is often used as that we
take the drawing to task it's used for
purpose as you point out many of the
drawings you have in your book we're
putting it to work in a very kind of
very direct way as a tool and a lot of
the things you're talking about are the
reverse the drawing is somehow making us
in a way and so I'm hoping that this the
fact that perhaps the putting the
drawing to task is now obsolete in terms
of hand drawing means that it opens up
an opportunity to for it to exist in its
other realms within architecture and I
wonder if if drawing should be reframed
as a state of mind or a space or a or a
process or a transformational space of
time rather than as a thing mm-hmm
that's lovely idea I certainly I would
recommend periods of that it might not
help Mia sorting out the plumbing but
there should be periods of that and I
think you know I had I am i I some of my
favorite drawings are architectural
drawings actually but not necessarily
made that recently and I think some of
the things that I feel so depressed
about in architecture are mirrors in
architectural drawing I think the
drawing does make the drawing make the
building so if if a building is rendered
in a particular way that's the way it
gets made and I think some of the
poorest architecture around is
associated with some really poor drawing
I mean if the drawing works the building
works that you know we can do more than
just make it work and the drawings that
I think of that are just so inspiring
generate the inspirational building so
you know it's I'm really happy to be at
the a a talking about drawing it makes
me think oh this is so exciting
but if drawing has its own kind of
status and value and you know that
attention goes into it it can only lead
to better buildings you know if you can
pour that creativity into the vision and
the rendering that will go all the way
that will travel all the way through
even the plumbing especially the
plumbing
Thank You Tonya it was absolutely
amazing to have you here and it's
absolute pleasure
[Applause]
