okay hi everyone thank you for coming
tonight to the fourth lecture in our
position series which brings together a
graduates graduate program directors and
experts from related disciplines to kind
of talk about or debate their positions
around a common topic
tonight's position is grounded which
looks at how place can actually inform
the making of space or shape different
forms of practice and tonight each of
our panelists will make a brief
statement on how this relates to their
work and then we'll break out into a
general discussion so please all prepare
some questions to ask them
so to briefly introduce tonight's
speakers Emanuel and Martin on the far
end direct the design and make Emma at
Hook Park which is the AA's woodland
campus in Dorset and they'll speak about
the role of the forest and and how it
shapes projects and the development of
the campus James and Alison graduated
from the AAA in 2017 and 2018
respectively and currently run the a is
visiting school in Cambodia through the
foundation project little dream and they
believe that architecture is a
fundamental agent in a developing
context and will speak about how this
unique context of Cambodia has played a
role in defining their individual and
collective forms of practice since 2009
spawned on our next along is the founder
and creative director of t poi a design
studio and brand based between Bangalore
and London which challenges perspectives
of what is considered Indian design
taking into account India's colonial
history and the role it plays in mass
producing crafted products for the West
and her design process is about creating
a new narrative that takes its
inspiration from existing design objects
in everyday life and trying to define a
kind of new set of histories for a kind
of pre and post independent India who
some graduated from the AAA in 2012 he's
the founding partner of studio bound
working on projects between London and
the Gulf and he's also the director of
age at a visiting school that was
launched in 2015 and tonight he'll speak
about the research being gathered
through this platform to study an
archive Makar Eduardo and Alfredo direct
the landscape of
much an MSc and tonight they'll discuss
the role design can play in bringing
together the many sets of economic
policies political decisions
socio-cultural structures and other
forces that shape and define territory
and Kate Davies blocking is the head of
media studies of a and it's not an
architect she's the co-founder of
nomadic design studio unknown fields art
practice liquid factory and field
robotics group Raven tonight she's going
to discuss her site-specific
installations and expedition based work
and I guess all of them will kind of
elaborate more on my very quick bio but
please join me in welcoming them all
today great I'll kick off so I was gonna
give I guess thirty few thoughts on the
topic of grounded related to the
designer make program and then mine will
pick up and give a bit more detail about
specifics of what the what we do what
the students do I think that word is
kind of loaded with meetings I think
there's a sort of interpretation that's
the kind of assumption about what we're
here to discuss you know projects are
kind of grounded in reality in the kind
of physical world in actual kind of
practice in a real place in a real
context you know I think there's sort of
variance on what that word means that
kind of interesting I think for design
and make it's very explicit like we are
you know we're fundamentally kind of
embedded in a physical realm you know
the forest the place a park I think most
of you here probably know the program
you know some master's program you know
its title design and make you know is we
build architectural constructs you know
we're very much about the making being
the the basis for our thinking so
immediately know things are grounded in
sort of physical reality in that world
you know the art of making by necessity
requires you to work with constraints
you know of material and of tool you
know there's a there's a grounding of
the work through that you know rather
than kind of realm of fantasy in words
and
things are now kind of located in the
physical world that we know that we
embody that we work with working with
our bodies adds another layer to that
you know that there's these physical
artifacts give meaning to ideas to words
as kind of analogy maybe with the sort
of hypothesis of physical grounding you
know that artificial intelligence can't
operate purely on kind of formal symbols
you know to really fully understand the
world we operate in we need to have a
grounding now we need to be grounded in
some kind of embodied reality those kind
of themes that I think they're you know
related to what our topic is and there
now it's kind of the intended meaning of
of the title you know I think there's a
couple other meanings to throw out the
sort of the the teenager being grounded
which i think is a you know as a
negative version in a way or the plane
being grounded apps more negatively but
like probably the grounded teenager is
prettier
you know it's maybe a symbol of
something being interesting and creative
going on in that teenager perhaps the
constraint of being bounded actually
your operates as a way to really force
the constraints that really force the
kind of creativity and in a way way
perhaps designed to make students being
you know locked into a weird patch of
dorset operates and that in that kind of
way you know not having the freedom of
London says maybe that kind of access
and I think is a very little one about
the ground itself the geology of that
I'm sure the ELL you guys talk about
that a bit more but there's you know our
material grows out of the ground
you know we're embedded in in a woodland
which is in a way a live extension of
the of the earth we are you know our
location in Dorset is next to the
Jurassic Coast it's kind of part of that
geology like is like you've seen us go
worlds how to decide for its geology in
the fact that there's a such an extreme
meeting of the ground on the clock on
the cliff scape it's kind of exposed you
know the tilt of the ground just shows
these strata of the history of the
ground really explicitly you know in
hook like the the topography inland is a
reflection of that and hook sits on one
those strips you know so the strip which
comes is tilted one way together strip
this exposed in Portland Portland stone
is the error before the strip that Park
sits in London is largely built out of
Portland stone you know the sediments
it's out there you know the next layer
which is more you know it's not so Rocky
it's kind of a clays what parks made of
be the same kind of stuff it is like
historic seabed from 150 million years
ago that those nutrients those dead sea
organisms are the same Nugent's and now
you know the living material of the tree
you know the image the tree root this is
the 3d scan of a between a student
extracted recently like that that is
extracting that material and turning it
into our construction material give
something kind of really really
literally grounded about what we're
doing and maybe the next image sort of
the so as Martin said we work from Park
that's a kind of testing ground to
engage with large-scale one-to-one
fabrication it's our forests but it's
also our studio our workshop our
material library and our material
resource and we use all different kind
of technologies to investigate that
place so as Martin mentioned this is a
lidar scan it takes pretty much a
fingerprint of this root plate of an ash
tree so we try to forensic ly
investigate and interrogate the place
that we inhabit and reveal aspects which
aren't immediately obvious so this is
the raw state of our material that you
guys normally encounter in in DIY stop
and see timber as a commodity we try and
engage it on all all different levels
first of all it's a living entity and
and then it kind of gets harvest and
and we apply we apply all kinds of noise
you apply all kinds of it advanced and
traditional technologies to manipulate
the temperature in advanced fabrication
technique so this for instance is the
steam bending of a vitrine in its
entirety so we kind of hijack existing
and traditional tools to manipulate our
source material we look at more advanced
technologies as well and and and we got
charlie he's a secret weapon that helps
us build the bespoke
end effector so this is a bandsaw we
took apart and and mounted on the robot
so we can have a high level of precision
when we execute and when next slide
please we produce these rather complex
and bespoke components so so this is a
we develop a particular workflow so this
for instance is a glulam beam which is
the stock material is appropriated
approximated and then offered to the
robot in the robot then machines out our
old precision and details next slide
please
and in that way we looking to compose
these elements and build complex and
experimental new architectural
constructs thanks
so I'm Allison and this is James
yes Cambodia but also we run an NGO
based in Cambodia so in a nutshell I
think what grounds us is the place that
we work in for the past ten years we've
been based in the same province called
the cow it's in the southern region of
Cambodia and we design this is our fifth
project that you're seeing and it's the
first project that we actually acquired
this site we are we usually work within
the village context but for this site
it's in confluence of five villages and
what really defines our practice there
is that we don't see that there is a
role of an architect per se as and
there's no prescribed role so our sort
of architecture mission is to see how in
such a context and in in doing our work
we heavily rely on the people we work
with then we use architecture as a the
intersection to sort of bind them
together whether it may be our tuk tuk
driver the translator a carpenter our
local villager we all communicate via
building and making so the projects
we've done so far span from sanitation
facilities that we build for our schools
to places of play or spaces of learning
and in these projects it's a real
collective effort when we first started
building because we're an NGO we've
every Christmas we would invite mainly
students from Hong Kong and they would
come and build it with us so the gabion
wall that you see on the left was
collected from broken tiles found within
the
which is where we worked and it was sort
of stacked according to the de stratas
in which we found so we found three
types of tiles from three different kind
of periods in which the temple besides
us was demolished and in the fourths in
the middle photo perhaps the sort of
layering exists in time when their
school was first built it was sort of
big and barren but as sort of time went
on life also kind of engulfed the school
whether it may be children or whether
may be the flora and fauna and this year
we embarked in a kind of a new challenge
and we started our first visiting school
in which we invited like-minded
individuals to join us to search for in
a position a position of how we should
practice in Cambodia as architects a
client of maker and a contractor and in
this photograph we were having one of
our first sort of sharing sessions we
rented a house for 14 days and in the
house we worked together we had meals we
talked about of course architecture but
we also looked deeply into the Khmer
culture and through food we found a
common ground for us to discuss the
possibilities of what we can do so some
of the outcomes of the 14 day visiting
schools were a series of work the first
one on the left is a birdhouse made by a
student who wanted to mimic the kind of
classroom that we've built previously
and in the middle was a sort of
experimental kitchen that was both a
barbecue pit and sort of a refuge for a
tree and in the last one its it's a door
to nowhere what's sort of missing in
these photos is perhaps the amount of
effort it took
to make these happen in 14 days the sort
of journey that a student had from not
knowing any power tools or or being a
first-year in architecture to being able
to make something of their own and I
think the sort of revision and repeted
process is what we try to aspire in our
work and also what motivates us to
continue further
so I guess Tebow is basically in
background London and does Indian design
what is in design this is a question I
set out to explore that really knowing
where to leave me and the route I took
was kind of quite open so my idea of
Indian has started at a question that
was directed to myself after living in
London for about 15 years but also ideas
be immunised that surrounded me as food
culture objects places the narrative I
saw emerging was a bit bleep it was a
feeling if I could describe it a kind of
comfort and warmth of going to the same
place over and over again because you
knew what was on the menu and if the
menu changed like you're not going to be
happy cinema the market sorry I'm not
talking to Mike
I guess what I'm trying to say is that
at the outset I realized there was a
good amount of unpacking to do when I
was making design here based in London I
think if we're talking about this idea
of being grounded every time I talk
about India was always asked about the
present of craft in my work which I felt
was really conforming a Western idea of
Indian s or Indian design where it could
start and possibly where it could end
but also this kind of visual presence of
craft meant a certain time the visual
language a certain type of visual
storytelling so this for example the
video that you just saw was was a simple
storage jar that I made him like was
made by us in copper and it's kind of
used me by using an industrial spin
English machine pretty much the same way
it would be made anywhere else in the
world and this is another picture of
like an industrial factory in Uttar
Pradesh I guess it's like you know
factory set up for mass manufacture and
it's again an image that you don't see
as much as say images of block printing
or indigo dyeing or kind of like
textile weavers but possibly this this
kind of Factory is making I don't know
half of the world's tea light holders at
this moment so I guess for me it's quite
revealing of what kind of image means
India and what kind of image means
Indian design so I just want to talk
about a textile project that we did
which is called modern Kanta
this is a collaboration we did with the
design studio based in Copenhagen where
we took a very typical embroidery
technique canta which is basically a
running stitch and going up and down and
it kind of quilts pieces of textiles
together and we resolved a new design
inspired by the kind
essence a discounter stitch but I guess
what we did is we kind of used an
industrial quilting machine which was
actually suggested to us by the
craftsman or the colleague or who worked
in the embroidery Factory so it's kind
of where we kind of replaced you know
the presence of the hand by this kind of
you know these stitches that were kind
of made by machine and then another
project which is our most recent one we
kind of worked with concrete so the
images here kind of Nick Jones Garden in
Chandigarh
Sonique Chand was a kind of road
construction supervisor kind of worked
under the Corbusier
regime and he while he was working there
he was kind of secretly building this
garden using broken glass tiles and just
a bunch of unusable things from the
construction so I guess like it's hardly
surprising that everyone in Chandigarh
ended up hanging out in the in this
place instead this place kind of had
5,000 visitors a day and kind of still
does so for me I just want to highlight
how context so this idea of being
grounded is so important anyway so
concrete for example is really not seen
or treated as a sacrosanct modernist
material in India because first the
first use of concrete that India saw was
PWD architecture by the British which
was essentially kind of modern
scaffolding and from then on
since the boom in the 90s concrete
became the material of choice for
everyone like you could go to buy a bag
of concrete like you would go and buy
vegetables and then it's like it go it's
everything from like adverts for
concrete is kind of directed directly to
the public so it's never it's not kind
of like you know it's it's like you as a
consumer consuming country so you're
very very interested in this
use of concrete and how the
functionality of the structure wasn't
kind of good enough where concrete is
always seen as an opportunity for
something else to happen an opportunity
to kind of express and decorate so this
image of the God made out of plaster and
a concrete water tower next to it kind
of summed up a lot of what was happening
on the ground I guess how material is
absorbed into the landscape in a way
that is very kind of unique to place so
this is a flyover structure that for
example has been totally painted over
again it's kind of like reinforced
concrete and then surface is just
appropriated for something that scene is
more useful so it's kind of like you
know this poses a big question about you
know why the chandigarh feel and then I
guess the way we kind of took that story
and made something off of it by the
studio is that we kind of created this
range of products which looked at kind
of secondary users of these structures
so kind of playing with this idea of
design and decoration use and unofficial
use so the functional aspects of the
architecture were rendered into
decorative aspects but also the fact
that you know we kind of created this
collection of planters and vases that
are purely decorative but using concrete
which is kind of industrial material and
then kind of also inviting you to kind
of play and participate so that's like a
bars
and that's a planter and that's it
I'm today I'll be speaking to you in the
capacity of the work that I'm doing with
ADA ADA which was launched in 2015 is in
partnership with the work in alignment
with the work that we're doing with our
own studio-based between London and the
Gulf is a very personal project to me
and my partner's we're looking to
archive and study maca which is in Saudi
Arabia the holiest city regarded to all
Muslims and we're studying Mecca for us
at a time which is actually very
critical both both economically
politically and in terms of the
development that's occurring within the
city Mecca is changing at such a rapid
pace which is quite staggering and
actually quite challenging for the
purposes of our research and with
reference to this notion of of what of
being grounded or what does that
actually mean in the context of the work
we're doing in the mecca for us to be
grounded in many ways is to be humbled
and I say that because Mecca is
considered sacred ground it is holy land
as we regard it so that's one aspect of
the work that we're doing it definitely
has that parameter attributed to it and
the influence of place for us is
inherent and inevitable through the work
and through the research that were
actually doing and in the context of the
work and research that we're doing in
Mecca our work is very much reactive to
the context in which it's working with
it is a place where the shifting
landscapes of its physical formation and
economies are driving a lot of the work
that we're doing constantly and and for
us there's this question again of being
grounding and being rooted in place lies
in this notion of permanence while and
in the context of Mecca actually also
there is rather the lack of permanence
in a context that is actually subject to
constant change and evolution and how
can infer the for us the question is how
can we shape a project in a place that
is constantly changing and in doings and
our position on that is we do not resist
this rapid change but rather we embrace
it one example I will give for example
I mean the authorities call it Islam
this image was taken in 2015 and when we
went to inside into these neighborhood
to study them and to record them we
actually went back four months later to
find that 60% of everything was already
demolished so and this is an area that
we have really started I would say
documenting us in taking photographs
taking measurements talking to the
people and then when we went back again
we could in a way complete a lot of the
work that we set out to do and this is
largely because of the pace of
development that's happening in Mecca so
to also define the impact of a place can
suggest this idea of an absolute place
as a fixed and defined subject in order
for us to measure or assess trauma and
again this is an idea that is challenged
by the alter egos of Mecca and a city
that actually neither belongs to its
citizens or its programs and in many
cases Mecca is a city lost in
translation and for us the question at
lay therefore presents a challenge to
address what Mecca stands for as a place
in itself through a research and in the
context of our work while the physical
landscapes and places of the city
continue to change our sense of space
within Mecca
therefore starts to relate to the
invisible landscapes of the city
prompting us to expand our scope into
the spatial parameters of the city an
integral component form
is it sacred stature and holy
association as the most sacred space for
all Muslims and we look at Mecca as the
city as a mosque Mecca is a city is
sacred ground much like the mosque and
then it is considered sacred ground as
such the urban domain of its metropolis
is one that is spiritually and
consequentially tied to the mosque and
the practice of the religion so by
acknowledging this principle what we do
is we graduate into a looser
interpretation of defining this idea of
what a space is and decipher the
development and the development
happening in Mecca and in turn we can
begin to answer the question of how
space in this case the holiness of a
place can impact the design of a project
or shape a new form of practice of work
that we're doing and this is something
that hopefully we can elaborate on
during the course of conversation and
one thing just I wanted to point out is
a project that we started as part of a
Jeddah and this notion of City as a
mosque and understanding this holiness
of the space how can we document the
holy like a holiness of a space which is
something not very tangible and again we
didn't necessarily want to only look at
the holy mosque because again one of the
reasons we wanted to do a lot of our
research is to also look at Mecca is a
city of a whole so this isn't this is a
snapshot into one exercise that we
started doing in partnership with the
local university in Saudi and it is
basically a catalogue of a sample of the
mosques in Makkah and basically we
managed to do over the course of a year
and a half is actually map and catalog
over 350 mosques within Mecca and what
we did was we went in to we 3d model the
mosque we took photos of this mosque and
again these are just like I suppose
little report cards of again
understanding the sense of space and
place within Makkah
we're gonna talk a bit of what we see
the position of landscape urbanism they
been rounded as you can imagine in
landscape were burning a lot of ground
work with the ground scripting and
actually physical ground tank and the
issue of grounding is actually quite
quite important for there for the
students to be projective with it but
also being critical with it one of the
things that we realize is that sometimes
the word grounding ends up being a way
of neutralizing decisions rendering
something has been inevitable if
something is based on something else or
something is inspired of something else
and we just say it is grounded on in a
way it seems that is better it's kind of
like more solid more sound more
properties because we're using the word
ground and in a way we want students to
have a certain critical distance from
that concept of solidity of properties
of excessive certainty that ground can
actually imply and we want to see ground
as something which is more fluid that
moves the changes that is a place of
negotiation there's a place of of a
certain level of of change we like to
use and work on problems of simulations
on problems of how to treat the ground
and the earth as something that moves we
use quite a lot of either physical and
digital simulations of the morphological
processes and in a way when we talk
about your morphology we like a lot this
image from John Ruskin which is a study
of a nice rock in live in Las Scotland
ignatius this type of mix between
calcareous and and clay materials and
what I like from raw skin is this
romantic obsession with a detail
and at the same time with the process
and the same time with matterr with
quality which in a way came at the
beginning of the birth of geomorphology
were more do morphology geology as a
science before it became a science there
was this amazing mix between those who
actually were simply fascinated by the
depiction of nature before actually the
idea of science and art on this field in
a way God separated it was the sort of
like collaboration between those who
studied geology and those who actually
were illustrating the earth and the
process in the earth that in a way
suddenly got splits no the one hand we
saw those people that went along these
lines of representation and sort of like
using representation and engineering as
a way of controlling these are
illustrations shown in the book of
you'll learn the adventures of the
Russians and three Englishmen in the
South Africa where two teams of
surveyors which go there to survey what
they see in a way of being able to
control it the point that there's a war
between the two countries and they only
get together at the end well sort of
like engineering science dreams and in a
way shows itself above all difficulties
but always from the perspective of
controlling what they see so that's a
way in which the sort of scientific
discourse went on the one side on the
other hand we went know from from
rusting we end up with this sort of like
a rough elite view of of geology and of
nature in this case is people collecting
shells in peckwell a bay by William Dyce
is a painting in a way it talks about
the ending of this marriage between
science and an illustration a minute in
which everything becomes a bit more
gloomy everything becomes a bit more
nostalgic and a bit more worrying with
the guys actually going to pick up the
shells I think we cannot see it very
well here but there is a howl a comet
that is passing in the bar in the back
but in a way it tells about something
that's not quite there not control there
as a way of saying bye-bye to this type
of nice intermingling
which is something we want to get back
onto and we want students to look at
those forms of representing geology
ground morphology as a projected basis
and not so much in terms of optimization
in terms of the sort of like controlling
mechanisms linked to these ideas of
representation thank you
I just also wanted to add on top of this
geomorphological in material approach
that also in the program of landscape
urbanism we are preoccupied on issues
that obviously relate to what it means
to be grounded but from also political
social and economic perspective and the
next slide will show at least will tend
to show examples of how about what I
mean by that so the first image is a
sequence of the desiccation of the
system of lakes in which Mexico City was
grounded or water but it what happens is
that there is a relation which i think
is still ongoing in Mexico City
mentality to control nature to master
nature and in this mentality is an
ongoing kind of condition which end up
in the final sequence which is in 2000
and continues in which lands in as a
commodity in water is seen as a threat
and today in Mexico City
even though it
it seems like in the last image humans
has and they have a triumph over a bird
nature the city lives in big paradox on
the one hand it should be suffers of
shortages of water and droughts and on
the other hand every summer its get
flooded no as if the lakes was
reinstated every every year and any
something that to me also reflects a and
interesting condition that is no
nobody's happening the city like the
last week
Mexico City has been embroiled into a
big polemic about airports one of them
is an airport is being built by a new
post a Norman Foster in one of the last
space if you see the last image of land
rightness of that lake in that era will
cover the majority of the lake and on
the other hand to maintain the actual
airport and just supported by existing
other ones no and I think this is a
discussion that the city's having that
is missing you know a larger pigeon or a
larger kind of perspective of the city
because two airports are again enclosed
or frame but in a perspective or and
mindset that is about controlling nature
that it's about in short time producing
progress and a fuel in economic role my
husband of a fossil fuel economy and and
I think for us at least in landscape
urbanism the question is not about the
electoral objects no in this case
airports but a larger mission that has
actually get us into the condition that
the cities right now the next one the
second image is an image that Andrea
smile at your graphic from Sweden
including his book all the progress of
the system and he uses this image
basically to ground a theory of the
warming planet in which we live now what
he means is that what you see in the
image is hey
painting I was done in the second
quarter of the 19th century where or
when the British Empire and basically
expand the Dominion around the world and
in the image you see two people when
representative let's say of the Royal
Navy and another one which might be
which is the one in the center that may
be the merchant or a Terp linear and
they discover a seam of coal in the
middle of an island coral a burny in
Borneo and what Andres mal suggests by
using this or by saying that his ground
in his theory about a climate change
today is that images like this where in
this case the British Empire discover a
few that was basically fuelling
steamboats in which their expansion and
the colonization is can only be
explained or explained the conditions in
which we live today because this image
is has been repeated endless times in
the last 100 years by literally getting
out of the ground the fossil fuel that
is fueling literally our world today
knowing that we are basically living
right and so one of the question is
whether a or at least I think in in the
program is whether we should be
challenging let's say our profession as
a service provider of a fossil fuel
economy that is actually kind of leading
the way we are with the planet and in
the conditions in which they are and the
last one is as to plates of the alluvial
Valley of the lower Mississippi River I
mean this is only two out of what a
funeral 30 something plates that
describe how the Mississippi River moves
over the millennia and it was this was a
plates as were drawn by Harold Fisk who
was a cartographer from the Army corpse
and what is interesting about these
images is that I what I think is
interesting is the encounter of two
positions which on the one hand which is
the most obvious is the dynamics of a
river know of a landscape that is in
constant move that is constantly
changing in that you see in the image in
the different colors that depicts the
position of the river and its evolution
over centuries but on the other helmet
is less visible it's the grid that kind
of crisscross the whole map because the
map was done not only to understand how
nature works but to control it now
similar to previous images that I've
shown this idea to master nature and
some of you know well attribute
Mississippi has been enclosed in control
in a set of Libya stands and locks know
that basically try to improve navigation
purposes irrigation qualities and also
to control floods which is again similar
to the case of Mexico City seen as a as
a threat so all these issues that
somehow combines geophysical condition
but also geopolitical conditions are
elements that we are trying to one hand
or on bail or rebuild through the
landscape urbanism processes but at the
same time we asked the question of
whether the profession should be looking
at larger visions or larger perspectives
that give us geographical in historical
groundings for the way we practice or in
our case what we call landscape urbanism
all right hi everyone um I'm gonna talk
about unknown fields which I run with
lee myung unknown fields is a nomadic
research studio and art practice we
assemble groups of architecture students
alongside
collaborators from the fields of our
science and technology and venture out
on expeditions to bear witness to
infrastructural landscapes industrial
ecologies and precarious wilderness and
from this we make objects and films from
this expedition work exploring the
dispersed narratives that coalesced to
form a contemporary city so I'd like to
just set out here some of the contexts
and agendas of emmeline fields most
importantly to discuss how the work is
underpinned by a particular approach to
context as a rejection of the site as a
bounded piece of ground for the
architectural object if you like and
also to question how the roles of
Architects in relation to their sites of
operation might be reassessed in an ever
complex more connected more mapable
world experimenting with modes of
practice perhaps that are not restricted
to the idea that the solution must be a
building or the solution might even be
physical so the project of online field
is in its tenth year and we've done
about 14 I think expedition's journeys
to distant places that attempt to reveal
something about the familiar reflected
in the unfamiliar they've taken us out
into the blinding white lithium soaked
landscapes of the bolivian altiplano
across the South China Sea aboard a
container ship
through the Texaco all the fields of
Ecuador and the hallowed beaches of the
Galapagos Islands they've taken us to
conspiracy riddled testing grounds of
area 51 and other US military outposts
to Madagascar's wild west sapphire pits
and the frozen Arctic sea ice of Far
North Alaska and they've taken us to the
irradiated wilderness of Chernobyl and
the vast gold mines of the Australian
outback so some of these like Chernobyl
I guess have been landscapes as villain
others like Galapagos the Arctic or the
Amazon poster boys of purity and
wilderness but many in between are the
unsung spaces of production so our focus
broadly is on exploring a complex
present through existing and emerging
narratives that play out between urban
centers and these kinds of remote
landscapes and typically we trace
stories and objects tangible and
intangible cultural artifacts to the
sources and sites and the locations that
create and incubate them so for instance
the shiny pixel cloud rhetoric of in
material technology of our iPhones and
iPads belies an atlas of very physical
Chinese landscapes from which much of it
springs forth and in the Australian
outback a financial fiction like the
gold price is powerful enough to sculpt
geological scale landforms whilst in
Alaska the statistics of climate change
are calculated in a laboratory landscape
at the top of the world and icy expanse
we are warming simply by googling the
same statistics
so I guess the physical landscapes that
we visit there are an index of bigger
systems and in themselves points of
departure for us proverbial iceberg tips
of deep of a deep and complex array of
sites which slip from material to a
material from mega mine to mineral model
from cargo ship to contain a stacking
algorithm from Mountain to GPS
coordinate so this is a field that
necessitates maybe a different kind of
fieldwork and it offers up rather
strange kinds of sites within which to
operate and we're searching for ways to
address complexity in the collision of
the physical sites with the wide array
of abstract and immaterial sites that
accompany them so in the story of things
supply chains and networks are the
journey narratives of matter and energy
and with this as a spatial structure we
deploy film to narrate the network of
hidden stories that are solidified to
form these sites so we use speculative
scenarios as a critical instruments then
we use these for exploring emerging
conditions and as such deal in reality
but the operational storytelling that
we're looking to deploy through the
films that we make and the objects is
built with a forceful kind of power of
fiction
so peripera fiction like a paramedic as
opposed to a medical doctor miss ER is
related but not quite a member of the
character category of fiction remaining
a bit outside of it not performing its
procedures in the hygienic clinics of
literature but has one foot in the field
of the real and just to conclude so the
stories that we
constructor about faraway places often
but in fact occupy a kind of territory
in between here and there that are cited
within the space of our collective
collective cultural narratives such as
logistical logics and data absurdities
value systems and economic constructs
manufactured desires and imagined fears
stories myth and the machinations of
global media
well thank you all for a very diverse
and also quite fascinating set of
presentations I'm aware that two of our
panelists need to take a train back to
Hook Park so I won't ask that many
questions and I'll open it up to the
audience sooner rather than later but to
kick things off I wanted to pick up on
something that Kate was talking about
about physical landscapes being a kind
of index of a lot much larger system and
I think each of you have touched on kind
of invisible forces of other things that
shape landscapes or territories
sometimes things that are already there
but maybe we don't see like the roots
that design and make presented other
people involved in a site that may be
not a kind of together helping the
architect shape the architecture of that
place responding on when you were
talking about changing the associations
with the material like how do you start
to change people's value systems houssam
what you were talking about the kind of
continual pace of change and how do you
start to intervene in that context or I
guess the last three presentations when
you were talking about these different
ways to reveal these shifts flows and
forces so I was just curious as as
whether we could start the discussion by
talking about what are the tools we can
use to reveal these and how do we use
them in a way to track change when it's
happening so quickly I know you talked
about using film as one method but you
also have used objects in the past and I
was just quite curious to see if there
was different strategies for doing this
but also whether there's some common
ground and how you all operate
since you sitting next to me to maybe
answer a question I'm not sure it was a
long question I guess for us maybe the
most important site of the things that
we do is the site of our collective the
stories that we tell ourselves or our
collective cultural narrative our
collective the force of contemporary
culture so to maybe explain seemingly
frivolous things like trends parked on
social media that create demand for a
certain product say for Christmas can
generate huge changes in the landscapes
and obviously kind of conflict in mining
areas and it's this idea that actually
these tiny many many many tiny acts move
mountains and so that site where those
acts are kind of incubated the site of
our own kind of whims and desires is as
much a geological force as the mining
companies that more so is where it
begins so I suppose we're interested in
trying to get under the hood of that
site and then operate through films and
narrative objects that also come back to
site themselves in that if I continue
yeah I mean first graph is in dynamic
simulations to try to describe and
perhaps some of the landscape that Kate
was describing you know like in many
other cases is I think to reveal to be
aware of how landscapes and territories
are created
how can we create cal about it for
example and there's a lot about
sustainable cities no and in Paris is
like what does it mean to be sustainable
if those cities are basically produced
not by the area within the city which
are enclosed in perhaps you know what is
the food that all the people in cities
are producing needed to be you know to
be in that city or what are the
materials from all the buildings from
where we are designing those sustainable
cities
the cartography is or the simulation
that we produced are trying to rebuild
that set of networks that which we
describe how we are attached to other
parts of the world and to be aware how
we are as you know architects or
designers by doing or drawing specific
lines or proposing specific things
inside maybe or not affecting other
territories and that's how I think one
of the purpose of using cartography or a
simulation to understand larger
perspective now and and see how we can
intervene within those processes that
normally are seen just within the
architecture as a object rather than as
a landscape or as a territory which is
something that we embrace a lot nothing
I think that's quite interesting to just
kind of expand a little bit on the idea
of simulations I think with the design
and make of a physical engagement with
the matter and and the ambition and the
target I we actually want to physically
produce these they remove a lot of
obsolete in a world of kind of digital
design where everything as possible so
it kind of sets these constraints quite
immediately I think the realization
of the embedded energy within the timber
and the material that we use also helps
to counterbalance that you know if you
are physically surrounded by trees there
are forty years old and you have to
physically identify the trees that are
gonna move you know get cut down and all
will be used as as a as a material to
build it removes this disconnect and I
think we could be quite critical of our
architectural practice and there is
there is a humongous disconnect between
the people that design and draw up the
packages draw the data for production
and the people that actually build it so
in many ways we try to reposition and
recalibrate and maybe even offer
opportunities for alternative modes of
practice of architecture I think that's
quite a good way for us to think about
our positions and I think when we talk
about technologies or in tools some
people use chainsaws and CNC machines
someone use films but I guess what we
bring to the site our assess architects
and someone would think that the project
is really the understanding of sight but
I think some other architects will react
as I think the artifact is what
construct space the understanding of it
can only be an understanding and so I
think what I guess what links well I
think can communicate here with one
architect or an architect to another is
how we talk about how we define that
context yes that we look at work our
immediate context we almost define power
by our own limits you know that the
amount of the amount of axles and amount
of timers that we can gather and muster
is what we can do and defined by what we
do and I think it's really interesting
to see how on a table how we put
that limit but it's also interesting I
think to see how we don't push those
limits and see how we interact with
those landscapes I think for us I some I
understand that ground is extremely
fluid liquid process but working with
ground and north-south cells I would I
wouldn't think so
I guess I think about there not being a
specific rule set out where I guess you
kind of are you
what is the are you operating as an
architect so I feel like when I guess
being on the ground like for me meant
there was needed to be a lot of
adaptability and then I guess this kind
of you know where where are you drawing
your boundaries of like who you are and
what are you making so there's there's I
think you end up taking a lot more or
like there are other rules that just
kind of end up emerging where the
designer I guess somewhere like in there
has you know there's there's no rule so
the designer kind of takes on this role
where you kind of become a translator
between you know manufacture and someone
who produces a design where you know the
the engineer would otherwise do that so
I feel like they yeah adaptability is
something that I feel you know I mean I
would also like I mean I think
adaptability even for us is a very apt
term because I mean just to go back to
your question my needs are quite
specifically what are the tools for
example that we used in order to
[Music]
manage with this let's say extremely
rapid change where we literally the
change is outpacing the pace of our own
research and documentation so one of our
approaches is well actually had to
rethink not only how we're doing the
research but who were involving in our
research so we actually I would say part
of our mandate so to speak is that we
actually don't only work with architects
we actually work with for our work in
mecca specifically we work with a lot of
historians we have to work with a lot of
and the apologists before - the writers
people who all come to collectively
engage in this research project in order
to capture this idea of a city from
multiple perspectives and as a reaction
to something that we know is no longer
gonna exist and potentially in let's say
two or three months so I think just yeah
expanding our scope enlarge enlarging
this lens of how we're looking at
something and which which is why for
examining
that's actually in a way to look at the
invisible landscape of the city let's
see the holiness how does one document
this holiness of a place which is not so
much grounded in a physical presence per
se but more and the spiritual
connotations of a space is one of our
tactics to document something actually
because we know this holiness is not
going to go anywhere it's gonna I mean
the holiness of the place is there and
it's grounded although it's not
physically there so are there any
questions from the audience
okay well I have another question so I
keep going
um actually wanted to pick up on
something that um Watson said at the
beginning because I thought those I said
I really liked who expanded the
definition of grounded to include the
teenager being grafted in their room but
I liked how you you interpreted that as
a kind of way to kind of create a
culture of creativity and I think that
was what was really interesting in terms
of how site or context can provide
inspiration for a project or a practice
and that's also what we were thinking
about when bringing all of you together
for this panel but I was wondering kind
of how you each kind of go about that
like if we started by talking about
tools what are the kind of ways in which
place can actually be a driver for a
project or multiple projects as a form
of practice like how did you each start
working on the specific sites that you
or a places that you're working in now I
think for us a lot of it stems from the
fact that we work in education mainly
and an architecture probably comes in
second so the place we ground ourselves
is on the literacy of the children and
that's what we want to improve and in
terms of space because we do provide a
free school so it's sort of a space in
which they don't have to be here and if
they're choosing to come then it should
be something that is sort of beyond what
they see every day and in that sense
that's what inspires us perhaps to then
challenge what is the everyday for them
and how do we from foreign lenses
explore those ideas in an in a
respectful and and but yet curious way
and in terms of sort of making I think
in building anything it's an inherently
slow process and you embark on this task
but then most of the time you're faced
with so many limitations and constraints
that you have to morph and within those
sort of parameters
we we begin to test our own curiosity
whether it's it's possible and I think
it's through understanding one's limits
do you then become more creative and
we've been very lucky to have met a lot
of people within the community in our
province that had the skills to sort of
show us how but then I think the project
in itself is also perhaps slightly
similar to charting an unknown landscape
we don't know what exactly the outcome
of providing us free school would do in
a sense that maybe a child will come
back ten years later and tell us
something happened in their lives that
inspired into something else but we sort
of have to have this faith in what we're
doing
so to hope that maybe one one of these
days it'll provide ground for someone
else I mean for us the what prompted us
to do our work was an urgency for the to
do the work because unfortunately Saudi
being Saudi like it's a very restrictive
country extremely restrictive access and
matka more so because muck is a city
where you can actually only enter it if
you're Muslim so the urgency to document
and record this from let's say in an
academic way and to record the city many
like was purely out of a need because
there was a shortage that we saw in that
and that really was the trigger for us
and the way that I mean it's funny
because in a way like although we're
studying my car like Mecca in a way as a
city obviously it's our testing ground
it facilitates obviously our work but it
also has restricted our working many
ways it's a it's a very double-edged
sword in that context so I think what
I'm trying to say is like our work is
only like this sorry I'm trying to just
to find the word I think because of the
nature of the city
that we're working in I'm sorry I
scratch that excuse me I need to maybe I
think I mean from our point of view will
we it starts actually starts here so
something like this which is a lithium
mine in Bolivia started with a keynote
speech by Elon Musk on future of Tesla
in the house battery sparking a huge
debate over the future of where all the
lithium for all the electric batteries
were going to come from or a project
we've recently done in India looking at
the textiles industry came from a
statement we read that the textile
industry is the second most polluting
industry to oil which came as a
surprising statistic to us so it's it's
then becomes a kind of reverse journey a
journey kind of unmaking something so in
that case we we start at the end and we
end up at the beginning of something and
so it's always a kind of set of
relational steps that will take us on a
trajectory we're not going to one place
we're going on a kind of stream of
events that take you back mostly to raw
material and then so for instance for we
did a project called rare earthenware
which was a film in Reverse from
essentially a mobile phone a laptop and
an electric car battery back through the
spaces of manufacturing manufacturing
mineral processing back to the hole in
the ground and from there we took a load
of radioactive and toxic earth from a
from a toxic lake in northern China
and made a set of vials out of them so
in terms of finding the way to return
that story and build that narrative back
into a stream of cultural narrative and
kind of poke at something we made a set
of vases which were in the silhouette of
precious Ming vases it's a kind of anti
luxury object to display in a museum so
the idea is to try and unpack some kind
of absurdity to poke something with a
stick I guess in for example like
successful project in they typically
start by trying to find intersection
between natural processes and and social
and humanely driven processes and they
try to answer questions which are not
necessarily linked to the site I think
Kate actually quite nicely put before
this rejection of sight is abounded
piece of ground but actually as a more
generalizable condition that can be
depicted in many cases in atlases so we
don't really ask the questions can you
do a master planning
I guess about you and I think in in many
ways all those some of the architecture
and and the constructs that we build are
pretty out there we start fundamentally
from traditional timber technologies so
although we we will attach something
crazy like a chainsaw to a robot it will
start fundamentally looking at Japanese
joinery so so this stuff we start from
from from a basic point of departure and
then this case had we kind of pick apart
methodologies and try and reinvent them
and translate them to words and and with
the help of our digital tools in your
case there's something I don't know to
what extent you could say its context or
not you whatever do you you have some
projects where you looked at the
branches of the trees to actually figure
out which ones had a right angle for the
right object that you would have to cut
those branches would you say that the
product itself is more specific or more
site related to the type of food that
you found that on average sort of a
process where you just cut the wood and
eternity abstract cubes so instead that
would you say that that's a bit of a
more context or not creepy anywhere any
forest but it clearly starts because we
are embodied within within you know it's
our ecosystem that surrounds and I think
we have that kind of weird luxury isn't
there we have that kind of contains of
microcosm all material sourced lamb site
no we kind of inhabit that is kind of
there's a sort of but now I have saying
out like we inhabit our site and
therefore it's kind of a and a direct
body knows that kind of deeper deeper
version of that where you really like
time spent with the forest to it hook is
always only the most highly recommended
thing for
visiting because there's none de
standing there of without the previous
efficient I guess how you kind of what
was your question you know the tools to
reveal and track change I guess in
landscape and Mike the for still lives
that over a kind of lifecycle that's
very different to our kind of design
project cycle and that really opens and
I think there's me on there you kind of
reflected on the the grounded teenager
thing which was kind of a kind of
something about leave a particular kind
of just the narrow down constraint and
the focus of that means about being in
one you know one place and kind of I
don't know should be the the expense
bill I will catch suggesting you know
that you have to be aware of kind of the
you know the corresponding impact that
what you all what you're doing is is
having I think another I don't know
there's something to kind of gather
something in a contradiction of the
title why are we the kind of the
grounded people it was kind of less
shouldn't be you know that we're
actually I don't know there should be a
more extreme I think in a way that I was
being grounded in this place and it
comes with a characteristics but it
allows us to be renegade to kind of it
kind of sets us free to hijack our tools
and stuff which are you know we don't
operate according to the conventions
all right it'd be really easy to build
quite standard timber constructs but we
try to reinvent the way we deal with
with a quite conventional materialist
timber but I think that also applies
also to the nature of fieldwork as well
this notion of having to adapt
I think adaptability is very important
when discussing this notion of being
grounded because for us one thing that
we found is despite the fact for example
for all of our catalog we thought we
would go through the formal channels to
get licenses etc but we what we found
out is actually during our first year
unfortunately
fibers
I've got arrested by the police because
of the very fact that they had cameras
in my documenting a holy site so what
that prompted us to do as a reaction
that thing is we wouldn't say
necessarily invent but you have to kind
of like go around let's say the norm in
like kind of yeah I would say invent
more creative ways to go about doing
stuff and that's something that for us
has really become part of our the nature
of our work like you have to be as
creative as possible when taking a
photograph for example you have to be as
creative as possible when you take your
measurement in the mosque
you can't exactly just come out with the
tape as you know maybe go with the
string or something like stuff like that
so I think I think it's also I think for
me was like feel not feeling grounded
feeling ungrounded in a way which was
kind of like prom to driver to kind of
like pose a question or like kind of
finding you know what does it mean to be
grounded what what does that feel like
so I guess it can be something as you
know as personnel from something that
you eat so it's it's kind of just being
kind of quite open to knowing where that
comes from and then just following it
through I guess because I think for me
it's like I kind of went from being in
Cantabria to like not really being I
don't have a design background but now
I'm like in a studio where I'm corporate
- industrial designers and it just for
me I feel a bit floaty I still like I
just feel ungrounded so I think like I'm
kind of trying to ground myself
constantly by the studio I think I was
we were very careful when writing the
description for this lecture to not use
the word site-specific because I think
that doesn't quite capture what any of
you were doing and actually although a
place or an approach or strategies and
how to approach something is math
this landscape or territory is the
driver maybe for each of for what each
of you do is definitely not the limit of
that I think it the research and the
practices you're all developing go far
beyond that and and I think though even
I spent a very long time brainstorming
what to call each of these positions and
in the end we went with actually
positions that relate to the like that
would relate to a kind of intellectual
position but also a physical position of
your body and I I think this is the
first session where each of you have
actually stated your take on the actual
word grounded and also what that means
in terms of a concept you're struggling
with or interrogating so it's for that
it's been really interesting so that
kind of really unpack that through all
these perspectives and I think I guess
time is running out so but I conclude I
kind of noticed as you were going around
that all of you most of you are involved
in teaching as a kind of form of
practice as a way to kind of broaden
this beyond an individual working with
territory and actually students are
contributing to this and collaborators
and then spawn and I in your case you're
having conversations with all these
different people like when you were just
showing the modern Kanter project
working with a traditional craft in
India versus industrial crafted there
that actually the traditional craftsman
was suggesting you use I thought was
really fascinating back and forth so I
think there's a bigger conversation that
each of you are having that's quite
fascinating and I just wondered whether
everyone could just speak a bit to that
like what role teaching plays in in kind
of working on this like larger project
or this kind of what world conversation
plays yeah I think it's just because
even even though I'm Indian and I kind
of you know because I feel that I I
guess we are kind of constantly
projecting you're projecting on a site
is projecting or on a person you're kind
of projecting on
the scenario and the fact that you kind
of need to do a lot of unlearning along
the way I think that's so I think for me
I've kind of had to unlearn a lot of
what I know and kind of start from the
beginning so being open to that and
having a lot of vulnerability I think
but also just being okay to make
mistakes I mean I think our approach to
teaching I like to doing this work while
teaching number one is you wanted to
learn as well and we're very much
engaged in a back-and-forth with I mean
when I say student it's really more
collaborators and also I mean is the
reality unfortunately like if this was
not an academic project this would not
work would not be possible quite simply
in Saudi the only reason that it's being
accepted we still face a lot of problem
is because it's being presented as let's
say as an academic teaching exercise so
for us the pragmatics of it is something
we cannot but again it is very useful
not maybe for us I mean the issue of
well teaching is almost like a platform
to to speculate other ways in which the
profession can operate or can be
grounded not like - coming back to this
idea and in the sense that what I think
the program is trying to produce is like
a what-if question if we are involved in
other levels of the production of space
that normally architects plan be
involved for example and at the scale
that we work many of the projects can be
seen more like policies and policies
this set of rules or regulations that
somehow produce a space without being
design many of the projects that
students produce are about that no
matter what if design could actually be
part of the conversations that policy
making happen and because we realize
that many large part of space like
landscapes in territory specially
productive landscapes have been produced
by regulation that are written know
without having certain consequences or
knowing the spatial consequences that
this regulation will happen and for us
in the program we use that as an
inspection to see well if these people
are actually written writing this
regulation that have an enormous impact
no means you've seen I mean our work how
many lands could have been produced just
because you know the requirement of
certain energies material that are
required for building are necessary to
do that so that's something that we use
and say well perhaps the role of the
architect and it can actually be not
only in the in the little final product
somehow which i think is very relevant
but at the same time we see design can
be bought in other discussions and
that's how the school allow us to kind
of get involved in couple of I mean
teaching is communication isn't it and
it's it's a two-way thing obviously as
we should be asking the students really
the question but I suppose you know most
of our communication is verbal you know
in words only have meaning with I think
the term is used in linguistics is you
know the word needs to be grounded there
cutting that is the word isn't it
Samuel I just use whatever like it is
you know it is a for for the word I mean
every word that we've described any mean
stuff because there's a kind of context
and an understanding that we've gained
through learning from each other what
that means so there's something kind of
fundamental I think isn't there
we communicate that acquires that
grounding I guess the other thought is
kind of crossed my mind is when I was on
the train up and I'm looking for a good
quote about grounded being grounded
every quite I found was like b-list
celebrities basically saying my family
my kids keep me so grounded and so I
should put on a sort of American pop
star accent by the way but you know is
it was always that it was almost like
the groundedness allowed their extreme
kind of lifestyles to be okay because
there was a sensible side of things and
maybe there's some kind of parallel with
the kind of the tutors kind of holding
things together but allowing the student
to pursue extremes if you know what I
mean I think when we write a briefs it's
very much a provocation you know we kind
of set the ground rules develop as a
team to kind of expand from there it's
not a containment it is just a frame of
reference to to expansion I think for us
um it's quite simple we teach because
it's fun and I think what fun also means
is do you have a space to be humorous to
enjoy to play and that's not always so
easy to come by and I think teaching for
both it's a place for both students and
tutors to have that space in which
nothing is too ridiculous or unspeakable
and it's through that sort of
relationship that makes it enjoyable for
us and hopefully also productive for
everyone great well an inspirational
note to end on I just wanted to thank
all of you for participating and thank
you everyone for coming the last lecture
in the series this term is on the 19th
of November so please join us for that
it's the wood that time is engaged and
it's talking about audience how do we
engage audiences in the creation of
space but for now I invite you all to
have a drink in surgery
and maybe since none of you asked a
question you can ask them some questions
more informally over drinks
[Applause]
