colleagues friends students members of
the audience
welcome to the architectural Association
this is an event that is meant to be
really a convivial event and we are
really happy to host this event but I
wanted to reiterate something that has
been said many times during the
preparations of this meeting and that is
that this is not an event it's not
really just the a a is the a a plus many
other friends guests so many schools
joining us today so we are just playing
here out of the middle ground of Bedford
Square and the spirit of this event is
really one of friendship and welcoming
to all of you so thank you very much for
joining us today
the instigation to come here today that
came from our students
Ava here yeah Jane Kathy
Jack Noah and Angelica and so on was
that we could start thinking together a
radical revision of our education a
radical revision of the curriculum a
radical revision of policies and a
radical revision of outreach of the way
through which we collaborate across
architectural education I think this is
really and the spirit through which we
would like to organize the date the
instigation is also a very simple one
from our side and that is that the
contemporary conditions of practice of
architecture education face for
challenges and these are notes no
jottings yet to be fully developed in
particularly in methodological terms
about what
it means to face a climate a new climate
regime a new form of engagement with the
earth the four elements that I would
like to discuss a little bit more in
detail today are really the elements
that are going to be instructing the
four sessions during the day the first
one as you see is the question how to
think
embedded ecological understanding in
architectural education the second is
question about intersectionality which
is a very big mouthful for and less
understanding that today is no longer
possible to think that the situation's
that we are facing can only be referred
to a particular condition we are always
intersecting multiple forms of
transformation and transformation the
third challenge that we will have to
think through very carefully is what
does it mean to form a new alliance what
does it mean to form a new politics what
does it mean to form a new grouping so
it's a difficult question and we'll see
more in detail and the first one is how
to rethink architectural practices
architectural education from the point
of view of a unsolvable and payable
depth that is the debt of colonization
the debt of slave trades how do you
think that the transformations that we
are about to design about to think and
imagine can surpass that problem so
these are the four elements that I would
like to address today and the four
elements are really connected we'll see
with the recent history of our practice
with the recent conditions of Education
the recent condition of
international organization of
architecture with the recent conditions
of contemporary architecture I am also
very grateful for the possibility to
give this talk today and unfortunately
our childcare didn't allow us to be both
in front of the camera today and the
people must probably have to run off to
fetch our little son the it's also an
opportunity really to start a the first
one of a series of conversation that
will entertain every Monday evening and
we call these conversations planned the
planet the alliteration the sounds plan
and planet hides in reality at this
Junction a distinction in trajectories
the relationship between planning that
is to fix to attain space and time to
set a clear condition and that we want
to reach and the plan planet the
wandering star the conditions of
transient relationship is really a
contradiction but that contradiction and
that inversion of the possibility of
planning the planet is at the very
center of the rise of the International
it's at the very center of the
construction of contemporary
architecture your radical architecture
material structures the way within which
we organize our entire lives so that
planning and the planet apparently
contradictory are sold or resolved in
the 20th century by transforming what
was moving into something static the
planet becomes a fixed object a backdrop
something that we can start
operating on and that inversion makes
planning mobile planning becomes a way
of organizing and managing life a way of
organizing large coalition's large
reorganization of interest and so on at
the center of this for us is a question
that is apparently distant from the key
elements of architecture that is what is
a territory what forms an inside and an
outside what forms the structures of
gravitation in architectural practice
the very act of building is a
territorial practice you keep someone in
you warned not to enter and that
distinction is a complex one we tend to
think that it's mainly led as mainly led
us to think of stability of clear-cut
demarcations of relationships that are
formally established but yet territory
is an entity that mainly refers to a
condition of the terrans
to warn people not to infer not to come
in to what keeps us alive the key
element of this is a meeting that they
had on the high seas on in December 1941
a meeting organized in secret between
President Roosevelt and the prime
minister of her majesty government
Winston Churchill and on the December
night they meet just off the coast of
Nova Scotia and in the morning the image
that you see is the prelude for the
establishment of what was then called
the Atlantic Charter the traffic charter
is a first moment of planning the planet
it is a moment through which the idea of
sovereignty the idea of territory the
idea of articulation of an architecture
is fake
it becomes the United Nations it becomes
the way through which a new institution
needs to be set up for new nations to
participate in it we have to first
decolonize Africa we have to decolonize
large sways of Asia
we have to decolonize big part of
Central America and the Caribbean and
each of those new newly formed nations
then can visit New York can visit this
new assembly to plan to gather together
and imagine a new future and the
imagination of the new future is
interestingly one of architecture at the
very core of the international there's a
market actual project there is not only
Russell's idea of the International
style at the very center of the planning
the of the planet that image that so
much characterizes the latest part of
the 20th century no that is already
individuated much earlier than it was
actually snapped as a picture not that
particular condition comes much much
earlier and interestingly enough it
starts here in this room the way through
which we imagine architecture in the
20th century really begins with a young
woman entering this room as one of the
first graduate students in architecture
in Britain her name is Jacqueline turret
she is a crucial feat figure in the 20th
century she is at the center of every
single turn of modern architecture she
reorganized the work of secret billion
she translated his entire work in
English she organized every single
congress of international modern our
detection she reinvented the career of
Konstantinos doxiadis she reinvented Oh
made a career out of Buckminster Fuller
and also invented Marshall McLuhan out
of an office in Toronto now we have this
figure and yet Jackie is unknown you'll
find her again and again in the
footnotes in the frontispiece of the
most important books about architecture
in the 20th century and there's nothing
that we really know about her was she a
spy for the Germans during the war was
she a spy for the British in Germany
starting to understand how cities could
be built what is interesting about the
figure of Jacquelyn turret and I would
like to really place at the center of an
initiative like this it's not only the
she's an unknown heroic woman that needs
to be reinstated on the pedestal of the
heroes of the 20th century but I think
that the really interesting element in
her life is that she was not considered
exactly like we are no longer
considering the possibilities of
architecture of planning so in a very
sad way her life trajectory starts with
an intersection with the amazing work of
that was being carried out in London at
the time at the moment of rapid
colonization or hyper imperialism of
architecture we're talking about hundred
and two years ago and ends with a
dismantlement of the same structures
ends in the 80s when the conditions
through which architecture could operate
internationally with that scale is
abandoned it's abandoned
interestingly enough in a conference in
Dubrovnik the famous conference number
10 of the Congress of
International architecture know where
Tim ten famously stood up and said no
we're not gonna follow any longer and
the principles of the Athens Charter
we're gonna radically modify what is
usually not looked at in that conference
at the transition between the modern
architecture modernist organization of
the conditions of life is that there was
a huge fight around one term habitat
what is habitat that was the theme of
the 10th Congress is it something simply
more than the cities and the regions
that the Corbusier was imagining was it
something more related to social life
that we had to somehow bring in as the
Smithson would say was it something to
do with the relationship between
architecture modernization and history
that particular word habitat with its
resonance in architectural history but
also in biology also in the organization
of ecology somehow is the moment where
architecture splits and the a a among
other organizations takes a clear
decision we're no longer interested in
chuckling turret we're interested in the
reorganization of a semantic
architecture in the organization of
architecture as much closer condition of
the ambiguities of language and the
ambiguous of living together it's a
particular moment and I would like us to
take the challenge to maybe revisit and
for those of us who are interested in
revision of architectural education
maybe that is a very good moment to
start and I would like to invite you to
look at those conditions jacqueline
turret was a phenomenon she organized
new cities in india news
cities in Africa villages in Asia
reorganize the collaborations she was
the first woman and that was a secretary
of a department of the United Nations
and nothing is known this is an
interesting moment for me to maybe
remind us that some of the elements that
we are discussing today the climatic
regime in the new climatic regime the
environmental catastrophe where somehow
already discussed so we're in a sort of
deja vu we've been here before and this
what our friend and some frankly called
Anthropocene deserve it's a moment of
recognition of something that we've
already seen so it's not something new
we've been here before but something is
at odds with what we thought we would
recognize so the second challenge that
I'm posing here that of imagining a new
form of planning a new form of polity is
really linked to the possibilities of
for instance Konstantinos noxious Akuma
Napoles or the very complex making of
modeling and calculus that is at the
very heart of our understanding of
climate change and the Earth System
science the entire modelling that we use
in everyday computational practices in
design is built right on top of models
developed in the sixties by James
Lovelock by the amazing work of the club
of Roman limits to growth it is at the
very center of course of the entire
practice of someone like Buckminster
Fuller and the world games where you
will gather together to plan the planet
no reorganizing energy systems
reorganizing locations of cities
reorganizing and reallocating actions
and tasks to different populations the
difficulties of those systems of course
are in the desert
these are buckminster fuller graph a
profile of the international revolution
as exposed by the discovery of elements
and you see the graph growing growing
growing growing growing like a quick
hockey stick and this was
enthusiastically endorsed by architects
it was enthusiastically seen as a
possibility of development so right at
the center of that hockey stick is the
entire ethos of contemporary
architecture the possibility of
departure from long-standing
inhabitation tradition the same hockey
stick is today of course discussed in
the intergovernmental panel on climate
change the rise of temperature the rise
of sea levels the rise of energy
consumption the rise of human population
you see we've seen this before we've
endorsed it
we try to plan it we try to design it we
actually built it so to imagine that the
conditions for which we have to imagine
a facing of this reality from
architecture is peculiar because we've
been here before
we've done it on many levels we've
created the problem or at least will
contribute to the problem so maybe we're
not really the right place to start
thinking of the solution but yet that
graph is one that is reverberating with
other lines with other cycles for
instantly amazing discoveries of the
cycles of economy the short business
cycles the slightly longer secular
structures or the contrary of curves of
that so puzzle economists and the
possibilities of governance through
supply of liquidity of
contemporary life the reverberation is
really won in contemporary forms of
disparity and inequality in capitalism
how are the two connected why did we
give up the possibility of shaping large
organizations of life why did we give up
that possibility that Jacqueline turret
started what went wrong I'm not
advocating for a return to it on the
country I want to understand what was
wrong in it how did we get it so wrong
and pretended I'm still pretend that we
are the solution a little graph maybe to
use this opportunity to clarify where we
stand
global energy consumption by humans this
is a graph put together by yasser the
international integrated analysis centre
in Luxembourg just outside then you
start seeing that from the beginning of
the Industrial Revolution a few years
after this school was established
there's a constant rise globally of how
much energy is used by one species today
we are around 600 exigence there's never
been any other species that has had that
rise oh the relationship between our
body mass and the any total energy that
we are using is unprecedented we're
talking about thousandfold difference
between our use of energy in any other
moment in the history of our planet if
we take the same chart and look at it in
percentage we start seeing the tragedy
of the Commons the fact that we go from
one element of energy consumption into
the other and to the other into the
other we move from a structure based on
biomass basically burning wood burning
coal into the reorganization of society
into the deployment of very large
organization
parliamentarian organizations
infrastructure railways Seaways Airways
Airlines in order to organize the supply
and demand of the Empire and that's the
second curve and then the rise of oil
with the simultaneous rise of the
International with the rise of the
possibilities of negotiation of new
territories with a rise of possibilities
of negotiation of new forms of
engagement with an economy that has been
unleashed from the golden standard and
the contemporary forms lead leading to
our realization that the next transition
the next energy transition is going to
be for the first time not one based on
extension we're no longer in a situation
of simply extending our practices you
know and in order to support that
extension we should use more energy we
are for the first time using awareness
in order to change the way that we
operate and this is the difficult part
because the awareness not automatically
will lead to possibility of leading
evolution of guiding evolution of our
planet plan the planet is no longer
possible at the very moment when we
realize that through our technologies
that we can understand the planet that
we can organize the computational model
of how in the earth system operates we
also understand that we are not the
major agents and these are very
interesting inversion I think it's one
of the major challenges in thinking
architecture education at such a
conjunction from city state based on
wood to parliamentary States based on
coal to the International based on oil
globalization again based on oil a
little bit of renewables you might see
that the thickness of the bottom line is
actually the renewables that we are
using
a little thickness of a line how are we
gonna transit out of that the second
challenge that our students poses is
really one of how to think not only I
have to think an embedded ecological
system which i think is a
misunderstanding
you cannot be embedded in an ecology you
can be traversed by the contemporary
condition you can be intruded upon
you're never gonna be finding a piece in
nature it's no longer the condition of
discovering nature in order to somehow
design ourselves into it in a peaceful
way because the conditions of nature are
as problematic as those of society so we
have a situation of double disjunction
what we thought throughout the 20th
century for a good part of the 21st
century was that we should think with
nature in order to be at peace but at
peace in a situation like that is an
impossible condition to be on the
country you discover more and more
conditions of disjunction contrast
upheaval controversy nobody understands
what the others is saying actually if
you do try to understand you don't agree
everybody's disagreeing with one another
what does it mean to think of the
transition in education at the moment
when we don't agree when we can't even
listen to each other
what does it mean to think through dark
cosmopolitan ization processes through
murky evidence of intentions what does
it mean to have an intentionality in a
moment when we understand that we are
part of a system that is self-regulating
of course architecture is a Holocene
practice architecture developed really
during the long stable periods of the
floovio erosions the bricks are made out
of clay that comes from the sedimentary
structures of the large valleys
architectures not
an anthropocentric these monuments are
stable they align and orient instability
in those vast plains but those vast
plains let's not forget about it and not
only the site of experimentation modern
architecture in the last 20th century in
the 20th century they're also the site
of multiple clashes of multiple Wars
it's exactly those long-established
sites and locations of the big floovio
civilizations of the Holocene that we
have conducted the major war fairs in
the second part of the 20th century
after world war ii the wars in the
floovio fields of Korea of Vietnam of
Cambodia the strikes in along the Nile
Valley the reorganisation of politics in
the Amazon it's those very sites that
mark the stability of architecture in
the twenty in the long period of
stability of the other scene that we
have now engaged in drastically
reforming those our kilns you know
that's how you make bricks you take up
the sediment you dry it or you burn it
you cook it and then you build amazing
monuments but those plumes are today the
plumes of air strikes the plumes of
terror the plumes of complete
dismemberment of long-standing
civilization how to think architectural
history in the wake of this how to think
our responsibility in dismantling 11,000
years of human civilization the water of
those sediments sedimentary and
processes is all transformed through
architectures
very complicated structures to contain
the reverse to drain Lakes to establish
hydroelectric plants all part of the
impetus of modern architecture all part
of the impetus to plan the International
to organize the structures that will
sustain independent life this series of
images of the transform radical
transformation in the Mesopotamian
structures in red you see the vegetation
changes and during the 15 years of war
in Iraq new forms of politics new forms
of coalition's is the intimation to
think this afternoon how do we establish
from architecture new forms of
relationships new forms of integrated
access
[Music]
today the IPCC which is the interval
mental panel on climate change is the
location of planning the planet it is
the outcome of that space of the
International it is the very epicenter
of that space is that architecture as
thought as the bureaucratization of life
modernism for one thing did this
transformed politics into bureaucracy in
the IPCC is nothing else than the
epicenter of what we need to surpass and
at the same time it's the only structure
that allows us to understand the complex
condition we're in and this the puzzling
effect the Anthropocene the climatic
destruction the ecological crisis can
only be understood from within that
system it's an industrial understanding
of an industrial destruction it comes
from the structures of remote sensing it
comes from the structures of modeling it
comes from the structures of computation
and also it comes from the structures of
complex intergovernmental agreements and
this is the difficulty how to imagine a
condition of exiting of diversion from
that structures when we are all
implicated when we are all part of it
when there's no innocence in particular
in architecture there's no possibility
of being innocent in this how do we
think and not say attorney
how do we imagine this turning that many
of you are endeavoring to achieve away
from that but without Qualis in it
without reverting to the forms and the
procedures that have started it all how
do we imagine a politics that is not
based on a body politic where there's no
possibility of unifying but rather
transverse that is allowing non-human
actions non-human entities to enter the
coalition's to enter the discussion to
enter the transformations how do we
imagine these conditions from an
architectural point of view what does it
mean to have a space that is open on all
sides not transparent not the glazing of
the transparent idea of democracy how do
we organize a space where there's no
possibility of centrality where we are
no longer the center where we're no
longer the major actor in the rise of
the Anthropocene today negotiations look
like this small groups mainly of men
with a few powerful women around a
coffee table they used to be structured
like that this 1993 today the
negotiations are no longer contained in
space they are radiant we are dealing
with a multiplicity of radical
transformation of our spaces of
inhabitation we're talking about
radiological changes we are talking
about the contamination of our lives the
inspection of the Fukushima plant all
the dismantlement of the architectures
of the atomic in Germany immediately
afterwards our spaces that we cannot
inhabit normally that we cannot
encounter on a database day basis we
need all kinds of equipment we need all
kinds of apparatuses we need protection
shields Geiger counters remote sensing
satellites we need employees we need a
number of practices that are at the same
time the very means for a continuation
of destruction and this is the
difficulty
and this is the difficulty of the energy
transition how do we move away from oil
how do we move away into the renewables
at the moment when there's no enthusiasm
not only there's no in 2004 the energy
system and for the development that we
had but there's also no in 2002 actually
engage in large coalition's on the
country we are splittin individualised
is so difficult to set up
large organizations without remembering
the shadows of the 20th century the same
structures that have led us here
prefigure turnit of pathways towards
energy systems these are four different
pathways that we can quickly look into
we shall need to keep oil in the ground
that's clear it's also clear that we
can't at least I can't unless I change
drastically in my life maybe you should
keep oil in the ground would you keep
all in the ground without the question
is really one of impossibility
apparently or radical rethinking of how
we negotiate and here maybe there's a
little hope about the architecture
because architecture still carries that
little flame it is not very feeble of
establishing cavitation establishing
conviviality it has become less and less
so it has become more and more about the
fertilization of differences about the
extraction of individuality and the
proclamation of individuality and
distinctions rather than inclusivity and
let's say possibility of an ecological
thinking but maybe there's still
something that we can do we could think
of a Low Energy
the Mount in the future that means that
by tomorrow we have to reduce
drastically our energy supply you can
see in the image that means that from
tomorrow we have to reduce all our
energy back to less than 350 extra jobs
a year are we ready
do we have the capacity do you have the
technological capacity to do that who's
gonna give up their energy
oh we can imagine a sustainability
process something that is less demanding
something that is a little bit more
challenging maybe and then a radical
revision of our energy systems or a
radical revision of the efficiency of
our civilization so to say but that
still means that by tomorrow we're to
give up oil or we can have a
middle-of-the-road
approach a little bit of this a little
bit of that and that means that by the
end of the century we will use around
800 extra jobs a year the it's
interesting these are interesting models
they're very complex models run through
large computing systems supercomputers
that use as much energy as a town of ten
fifteen thousand people in order to come
up with these understandings I would
like to point out that the amount of
refuse that is implicated in these
middle-of-the-road would imply a
complete destruction of our atmosphere
with an intrusion in it of carbon that
is been fossil for millions of years
which will then heat the world beyond
our fantastically proclaimed goal of two
degrees and flood areas through sea
level rise that are currently the sites
of
the rapid urbanization of Africa the
rapid of urbanization of the Americas
the rapid urbanization of Asia 1.5
billion people will be underwater around
4 billion people will be directly or
indirectly affected by that all we could
still think that we'll have a fossil
fuel led development that will have to
work with the energy
Moloch's of the oil companies and go
with their idea and have energy from
fossils leads us out through a
technological transformation and you
still see here the basic when you will
need to plateau our oil consumption for
the next 10 years with enormous
consequences on a very foundation of how
energy system operates and that is the
reserve replacement ratio which is the
way through which we have to replenish
our reserves in order to attract further
investment we are not talking about
energy we're talking about an
intersection of issues we are talking
about finance international
organizations of global supply of aid we
are talking about our pension schemes we
are exposed so much to our structures of
extreme consumption of fossil fuels that
even if we think of stopping we are
troubled so we have now a conundrum
because if we go on like this we will be
dead and everything else most probably
will be dead if we stop we have to
change everything many people will be
dead as well so we are now we're stuck
in this condition of planning the planet
the interesting thing is that
contemporary forms of intelligence are
abandoned there's so much intelligence
so the hope is that young people like
you will come up with a solution but I
think that more than that I think that
we really have to hope that
more than a solution there will be a
polyphony of solutions there will be a
multiplicity of forms of creativity
there was there will be a poly creative
moment so to say which is another
challenge for architecture education
which is so much geared with the notion
of the self one planet one architect one
body what does it mean to have Gaia
which is a self-regulating system what
is the self in that structure what is
what are the structures of subjectivity
of Gaia and here's where I think
together with annsofi that the
structures of territory might help us in
particular there is a challenge in
organizing in the notion of territory
away from the notion of land of Terror
territory on the country is really
terrible no to terrorize to scare off
others from what keeps you alive in
material forms you have to scare off
your predator from your food in order to
continue surviving an ecological
thinking today means really a
territorial understanding understanding
of the multiple semantics the Geo
semantics but not only the human
semantics the multi species semantics
how do we interpret how do we decipher
the yellow glyphs of contemporary forms
of life on the planet how do we engage
with this difficulty the reverberations
of territory of terror with contemporary
conditions are of course that again
we've been there we've done it before we
have transformed land into a territory
we've created the enclosures in this
very land we've mobilized huge
populations away from their habitats
that word of chuckling turret in
Dubrovnik we've created an architecture
of mobilization and we could think that
the rise of
the states in Italy the Renaissance this
idea of good governance will lead us
back to a condition of stability we
could go back to the old scene and that
might be an interesting and entertaining
thought for a couple of minutes we could
even imagine that the poor the
construction of a polity needs to
somehow resemble pre-industrial
societies in particular the
hunter-gatherers the so-called first
peoples they might be in that a system
that allows us but very quickly
understand that that condition is gone
the only way through which we can
understand those contemporary forms of
inhabitation are through the industrial
organization of extraction the very same
measurements the satellite images the
scanning the measurement system that are
only possible through the vast machine
of contemporary global advanced
technological societies so it's not an
issue of feeling and sensing local
conditions of the earth it's a condition
of engaging with an intrusion of that
system into our lives
maybe we can imagine pull and political
structures of emphasis of living
together the amazing elements of many of
the European cities but then immediately
we'll have to engage with the long growl
of Imperial structures of the
plantations
maybe we can imagine that those
plantations have no beautiful leaves
beautiful trees under which you can
entertain your holidays but contemporary
forms of upheaval this is Hong Kong I
would like to send a message to some of
our Hong Kong students in this very
difficult moment these are conditions
that have radically changed in the wrong
places we build cities in the last 30
years every single one of them in the
wrong place on the coast how are we
going to retreat
how are we gonna build new structures
for all of these people away moving away
we've never done such a thing we don't
imagine architecture as a retreat we are
imagine architectures a construction
going up not as dismantlement this is a
difficult condition and it implies also
a revision of our aesthetic canons and
usually aesthetics is understood in
architecture in a very simple way that
is something that comes to you and you
have to understand the good and bad of
what comes to you oh if you're a little
bit sophisticated you might imagine that
there's an aesthetics in evaluation but
it's a third way through which we could
understand the statics and that is
through the presentation of all the
gathering capacity the scientific
understanding of aesthetics in the
gathering capacity of those information
because if there's one thing that this
crisis is doing is that it's gathering
and it's gathering many people in very
weird ways we don't agree on many things
but we still have to come together and
this is for me really the major
challenge how do we imagine an
architecture where we can come together
become video without having to agree
without having to be embedded without
having to be integrated without having
to be completely summoned within a
structure how do we do that
at the same time when architecture is a
structure of differentiation of keeping
the others out and to me this is where
the challenge of daylight today really
lies how do we use a moment like this
one to think new forms of coalition that
don't require agreement and consent that
don't require even contraposition how do
we imagine this truck
hardly imagine them away from the
infrastructure away from the unconscious
conditions that lead us always to think
that we have to first build we have to
first destroy the grounds plow them
array them with cables pipes roads when
can we just think of meeting rather than
thinking of building a road to travel to
meet when can we start thinking that the
very lands that we wish to return to are
no longer there
they've dismembered this is a very first
satellite image of the Landsat project
1972 of course it depicts Dallas in
Texas every single one of those blue
marks in 1972 is a man-made water body
every single one of them today there's
not one single river on our planet that
is not controlled by men how do we
imagine planning the planet at the
moment when the very institutional
structures that we think we will need to
engage with in order to plan not
interested on the country are the very
means through which we are told that we
should stop from that engagement these
are the few elements that I wanted to
put forward to you and reminding us that
when we talk about infrastructure we're
not talking about engineers we're
talking about architectures now look at
this amazing bridge dike whatever it is
designed by Cornell is Finister an
amazing architect of the 20th century
with an ambition to form new land that
new land is no longer available we're
not in a situation of a possible new
land to discover the land the new land
that we're discovering today is one that
is shaped by intensity not by extension
intensification of human activity
intensification of extinctions
and intensification of planning of
design this is the challenge I think
that really faces us in a moment like
today I think that we can close it here
for today I would like for we open for
some Q&A to also invite you back every
Monday evening for the continuation of
the sessions they planned the planning
session but today is really a day of the
summit as they through which we can
start thinking the radical revision that
was set forward in the spring by the
letter of architectural education
declares on how to engage with rethink
in our curriculum what does it mean to
live in a series of schools that know so
enthusiastically proclaim that they've
been at the forefront of architecture
for so many decades what does it mean to
establish new coalition's new politics
what does it mean to think an embedded
notion of ecology what are the
aesthetical conditions we cannot any
longer look at seriously at the work of
random banner proclaiming the monumental
ization of concrete structure or the
corbusier's new cities made of concrete
concrete that doesn't exist how do we
radically revised our own understanding
of what we want and how do we establish
new forms of exchange I think these are
the challenges that you will all engage
with in very happy to see many of you
gathered in this amazing room which we
very proudly think it's the most
important room in the history of
architecture I also think this the most
troubled room in the history of the
Anthropocene
thank you
[Applause]
Thank You Jonah me too is it on yes
thank you John and so now we're going to
do the introduction to the different
just before
is there any questions handle it
sorry thank you for your talk today it's
a really interesting lens that you've
presented today I think this is a great
opportunity for all people to start
talking about this specifically in like
architecture and my question kind of I
think relates to the ethics that we
generate because I feel like we focus
mostly on the realm of material culture
rather than the you know the collage
achill the biophysical which relates to
ecosystems in nature do you think that
maybe looking the idea at the idea of
permanence and looking at things that
could either disintegrate or stay
forever maybe like looking at designs or
materials that promotes going back to
nature or staying forever could be a
certain make sense yeah maybe let them
take a couple of questions before are
there other questions it's partly a
question but also comment what came into
my head when you said about the a a
being at the forefront he is a concept
of our society winner-takes-all
strikes me as now entirely irrelevant
and I lived in Papua New Guinea for a
year in 1970 there was a 7.4 earthquake
only 30 people were killed because we
lived in bamboo houses on stilts so
there is something to be learned in the
architect perhaps in conjunction with
the engineer of relearning to work with
what there is I know where we've damaged
it all and all that you know and there
are the thousands of people millions
where are they of course that's right
but I think there are many moves already
yourself included in the other direction
that's it
so the first question is about whether
we can think of more
[Music]
long-term structures offenders correctly
and whether we can engage in a revision
of the distinction between material in a
material condition in order to
understand the biological implications
the second one whether maybe that will
lead to an aesthetics of renovation and
renewal of enthusiasm based on say
knowledge is and societies that we've
overlooked I think that they yes we can
look at the long term and I'm
particularly fond of the notion of
half-life there's a half-life in our
material structures and that is the way
through which radioactive system half
and to think today in long term means
that we are not recycling our activity
if there's one thing that is really
crucial in understanding in the
understanding of contemporary
inhabitation of this planet is that
there's one species that is not
recycling but that you could bypass if
we were small if we were a minor species
the problem is that what we don't
recycle has now become so vast we have a
hobby that very strange hobby we try to
measure how heavy cities are and 30
trillion tons so the problem in thinking
long term is a crucial one
but the problem is agreed that 30
trillion tons is now self-organizing
system it's part of Gaia it's part of
the earth system it's so vast that it
and it uses so much energy and consume
so much but it's not recycling it's not
like a forest forest don't drown in
leaves they recycle their materials they
recycle the energy
our constructions our objects our
materials our technologies don't recycle
we're not talking about recycling paper
plastics and we're talking about 30
trillion tons of rubble of buildings of
cables of technologies of
infrastructures 30 trillion tons just to
give you an idea is around 27
centimeters of gravel everywhere
everywhere so yes I do agree that we
should think long term and the major
issue of thinking long term is one where
we could imagine that the condition like
a meeting like this one will bring
awareness to start modifying Gaia
without ever reverting to the
possibility of thinking that we're gonna
influence Gaia directly and is the
conundrum we are embedded in a
self-organizing planet led by life as
James Lovelock says and yet we're not
the major agent of it we've unleashed a
major condition we are not the major
drivers of it we are driven by that
system so I do think that there's a
major challenge in that and I do think
that it's connected to your comment I'm
very happy to see you back in thinking
different ways of knowledge how do we
organize knowledge how do we produce
knowledge how do we then that's at the
center of the fact that this is an
architectural education alone we're not
talking about how to build and how to
construct we're talking about how to
learn and in that learning being very
clear that there is no master
there's no maestro in that learning we
all have to learn so maybe there's a lot
of intelligence that is already out
there that we have to learn from and I
really do think that but I also I am
very very skeptical of the enthusiasm
for there
aesthetics about that which i think is
mostly a hardening of the idea and it's
a little punk in us that will allow us
to do some good in building a bamboo
skyscraper but in the in reality we all
know that when we're not seeing we'll do
whatever we want no will travel will
have cities will have tubes will have
cars and so on I'm concerned about that
duality so I think it's a major
challenge for an architectural education
not to have one way but to have a
polyphony of ways and I'm really
interested in the condition through
which architectural education could lead
to a poly creative society understanding
that we are not the only one for me what
used to be more and more interconnected
in ways that were not direct and were
more involved with Gaia in in events
that you know could potentially
potentially snowball and that could
potentially kind of drive us into
unexpected feedback loops and how I
would then how then institutions react
to such uncertainties so the question
that we are we've been discussing
internally is also how does an
institution become adaptable how does an
institution take on a challenge like
this to into how it functions on a day
to day basis in terms of its policies
yes thank you say it's a as usually
coming with a big question these are
elements for discussion because we don't
have the capacity to imagine that but
there's one element that maybe we could
contribute and that is the idea that is
in the Anthropocene there's an inherent
instability it's not that instability is
say an exception there's an inherent
instability in the Anthropocene
there's an instability in the concept of
the Anthropocene we don't agree about
the anthropos with maybe it's the ch2
routine
maybe it's the capital scene maybe snow
and the moment that you try to describe
it you immediately cut out the ones that
you don't like I don't like that you
know you prefer the capital C no I'd
really like the implantation scene and
that instability is the really
interesting element that we have so many
notions around the current condition
that we cannot revert only to one but at
the same time we know very well that
uncertainty is the very foundation of
the operation of contemporary politics
and contemporary market it's the very
foundation through which you can imagine
the cutting you know the short cutting
of investment funds or the hedge funds
the entire operation
of contemporary life is based on the
calculus of uncertainty so when we then
try to imagine structures that
inherently need to be adaptable it's
peculiar that the only way that we can
imagine them is that of a market not
that of ecology will have in a few weeks
a manual achacha visiting us for this
series and it talks about the non-human
life within us taking the lead from Lynn
Margulis know the fact that we are
ourselves an ecosystem we are not only
our bodies are an ecosystem but our
societies are an ecosystem so how do we
start really thinking
in terms of energy transitions in terms
of material fluxes in terms of
individuation of without ever reverting
to one to that unification of the body I
think that is the difficult part both
say human body and societal or
institutional body that's where the
challenge for I think this beautiful as
you challenge architecture education not
from within one school but across the
practice I believe this is kind of Lee
will lead us on to a conversation of
ethics and an ethical responsibility
that will I will kind of try and explore
in the next next session so we're going
to have two sessions running parallely
we have a ten-minute break after which
we kind of reconvene for embedded
ecological understanding in this room
John you've problematized that and
perhaps we all kind of just discussed
that in in the conversation and across
the across the corridor in the gallery
we have intersectionality so it's going
to run parallel and then for an hour and
then we have two other conversations of
articulation of the new politics and
decolonization later in the day so we
would kind of like you to join us for
that thank you
you
