okay I think we're just gonna start
thank you all for coming to the open
jury if someone it's an interesting open
jury because it's it's within the a xx
100 conference so which is one of the
events that James is celebrating the
centenary of women being admitted to the
AAA the audience here is a mix of people
who are full-time students or staff at
the a and then people who've been
attending the conference so I'm trying
to manage both at the moment but
basically the reason we we themed the
open jury on beauty was because it came
out of a conversation that actually
melody who's one of our jurors organized
this summer base to tell and one of the
panels which I was a part of was looking
at this idea of beauty and why it's been
so overlooked or forgotten as a kind of
discourse within architecture and the
conversation was really interesting and
stimulated a lot of discussion and I
thought this could be a nice
continuation of that in terms of how a
range of student projects from every
kind of a part of the school are
addressing it in different ways so each
student will speak a bit about how that
relates to their projects and all the
projects are from the past academic year
so from 2016-17 and there's gonna be six
students presenting today and we've
invited a panel of six jurors but of
course everyone in the audience I
encourage you to participate and ask
them questions about their projects so
just to briefly introduce the jurors
starting from the edge there Helen
Solvay is an a graduate and she also
works at David Morris architects and
she's been involved in the ax X project
for many years
Jane Duncan is the immediate past
president of the RBA and she runs her
own architectural practice average or
Akina past council president and
longtime friend of the AAA she designed
the exhibition for the ax x100 project
which I encourage you all to look at if
you have
already melody them from Zaha Hadid
Architects who as I mentioned organized
this amazing conference which is
actually all female participants in the
summer at the Ace Hotel as part of the
case of a part of the architecture
festival and then Mona Tamaki head of
first year and then in the corner
Samantha Harding ham
our ancient director of the AAA who will
join the table and and then to briefly
introduce who will be presenting we're
gonna start off with yes Mina who's
gonna present a book that's why there's
this film set up because we have to be
able to see it in detail and so she was
in diploma unit 9 last year and she's
gonna be followed by James who is gonna
present one of the many projects he did
last year's first year and he's going to
talk about his project in Marfa
following that we're gonna have Gilley
presenting her dissertation through the
history in critical thinking MA and then
we'll have Nev from it sweetie at 12
looking at how Beauty manifests in the
landscape and after that way you have
Talia talking but not her project in
projective cities but an exhibition she
staged in the back members room last
year about the use of gold and trump's
interiors and then we're gonna end with
Josh from diploma for who's going to
present this fascinating object on the
wall that's a mixture of foreign led so
please join me in welcoming them all to
present
hello I'm as Mena I'm a fifth year
student and I'm gonna present my project
of last year and which is called the
black hole I break architecture is about
the juxtaposition of events through
time-space K architects design with ice
establish norms regulation and manage
but our design process consists of ideas
a travel jump pop in your head to
sometimes appear or disappear acting
like black holes constantly destroying
and recreating ideologies but what if we
start thinking further about the
connection and collapse of these
independent elements with which our
time-space scale and narrative the black
library is an apparatus of infinite
stories by juxtaposing them through
seemingly unrelated events and now i
want to invite you to enter the library
the story is not the narrative is not
the story of the project this is not a
black hole
it's his X morning coffee that she has a
drink in her cafe place across the shore
well and if the site decides to have a
common night there on the beach she
walks and isolate yourself underneath
the lighthouse sucked in her book while
listening to the peaceful sound of the
waves she spends already there until
sunset and ching her mind and thoughts
she then goes home has a nice bath and
perfumed herself when is it is having a
calm and nice bath and the exact point
in time in Egypt not too far from the
first stepped pyramid of djoser a shot
is fired and an innocent man lies
underneath the full moon afternoon from
bath Lizette goes to the kitchen and
cook dinner for her and Simon to have
that night they get interrupted by funko
from the investigation office a man has
been shot on the staircases of the
National Theatre School in the middle of
the show on a cosmic crime New Zealand
Sammy being very well reputed detective
rush to the crime scene located in the
National Theatre School where the
investigation starts they track down the
assassins five they go to his flat start
opening up on the covers trying to look
for
until they find his library and they
collect all of his books to gather the
information and build up the case but
little did they know the assassin is
always a step ahead waive the help of
his accomplice he completely destroys
the corpses evidences here you can see
the ashes dumped in the bunker jungle
she also helps him transform some of
these ashes into diamonds
after five years spent on the case with
not even evidences to be found Lisette
and Sammy got start getting sucked into
an unsolvable case that starts growing
while this case grows their memory grows
with it and they start to be losing its
its importance and relevance now this
cave is part of this book and this book
starts growing it keeps growing more and
more and more sucking more information
into a funnel until it crosses its event
horizon reached a singularity the point
of no return sorry 15 years have passed
[Music]
and this is still not a black hole it's
an element that stops time and it's also
exerts morning coffee that should have
at regular cafe place well is that is
having her come caution family is
sitting on a bench in the park reading a
magazine on the play of a cosmic crime
here you can see the desert
assassination change featuring in the
magazine this magazine is part of this
book and this whole visit instances the
threshold that makes you jump from one
thing to another they decide to go to
watch a play on a cosmic crime that took
place at the National Theatre School and
after the play they go to the theater
back entrance staircase and to their
surprise lecture hall on the staircase
they follow it all the way to the
outside of the theater until it just
hovers on top of them at that exact
point in time the hole appears 200,000
years ago to the early humans in Africa
and in US and in Italy and an exhibition
of Anish Kapoor and ascension and in
coyote and the roadrunner Levin anserine
such a shock of the discovery of the
whole decide to turn it into a lab where
a search is conducted for its deeper
meaning they realized that there's
different forms of Nicole's to be in
search of black holes in memory are
Mary's like running water flowing in the
river of the leaf and falling into
violent rune of oblivion black holes in
the web so much information is regiment
lost inside the digital black hole and
black hole the night breeze continued as
undocumented or destroyed knowledge such
as the book burning of the Nazis in 1933
that destroyed all the books considered
on German and more specifically we can
find them in archives I went to have a
chat with the archivist and buttons 60%
of the a archive is not cataloged so
much information is not there and I
asked to catalogue a project for him
it's a it's a project of a first-year
student in 1949 of the National Theatre
School now if I don't give him back this
book the project doesn't exist but it's
not until he is that met with the
brilliant professor one can't live in
London that you fully understood the
reality of the black hole the black hole
is a funnel the fact everything in until
you cross the Russian rages and drink
the event horizon everything can become
a black hole for example if you take
earth crush it to the side of this book
leaving it same it becomes a black hole
the ball gets stronger until you reach
the most conceptual and crucial part
singularity where rotational singularity
is an infinite small space with infinite
large mass where gravity and density are
infinite and where the laws of physics
as we know
cease to operate he then disappear to
reappear somewhere else in different
time space and this also allows the
coexistence of the same thing to exist
in two places one such as these books
there are three different types of black
holes stellar supermassive and miniature
black holes here is the example of a
midsize black hole that contains the
mass of a hundred thousand suns that
it's not but the professor explained
that the black holes aren't as black and
they're painted information does escape
them information never dies it always
transform and regenerates so okay so
back to Lizette after you chanted the
professor she decides to go back to her
library and take the books that she
pushes previously collected from the
assassins it's flat in Egypt she finds a
clue a perfectly crafted paper climate
model inside one of his books now this
led her to open up all of the books
hidden previously open that she
collected from his place a book on
ziggurat architecture and the first flap
and the first pyramids in Egypt a book
on the Greek mythology of the Phoenix
anomaly the bird that cyclically
regenerated the reborn a book on the
camera obscura she flips through it and
there's a through a small hole in a
small dark space the camera obscura
projects the image of the whole universe
this book falls back into her hand after
having read all of the carefully craft
works the next morning is that has her
regular coffee and that specific morning
she decides to create her own book
adapting the assassins carving language
or she can keep track of all the
possible narratives that happen to the
victims corpses now these possible
narratives are some of the possible
narrative that can feature within this
book and this book is not a black hole
it's a fundamental tipping point that
controls time space k and takes you back
to the beginning
it does that morning coffee you did she
had ad regular coffee place oops across
the shore
well is it is nothing I can't finish
then goes home has a nice bath
perfumes herself but she's having a
common nice bath at that exact point in
time in Egypt a shot is fired and moves
it meant that underneath the phone so
there's an SME as being very well
Ritchie to Detective rush to the crime
scene that takes place at the National
Theatre school here the case continues
where they go to the assassins flat and
try to gather more clues they enter his
library and to search for more books
they collect the books to collect more
and more clues potatoes they know the
assassin is always a step ahead with the
help of his accomplice to completely
destroy of the corpses evidences burying
the ashes inside the panga jungle or
even transforming
[Applause]
sounded ashes into diamonds these
diamonds are then crushed to the schwa
radius creating a black hole after 5
years spent on the case and no other
evidence is to be found
Lisette and Sammy start getting sucked
into an unsolvable case where all the
clues exist simultaneously
everywhere and nowhere making it
impossible to construct a linear trace
with our contemporary laws of physics so
they keep looking for clues and then
until they reach the point the
singularity point the point of no return
and all of these books fade back into
the archival library and architects we
have the possibility of complicating our
through the juxtaposition of time-space
scale and narrative and this becomes a
world generator where all of these exist
simultaneously everywhere and everywhere
and using the black hole as a tool with
the only position for all objects to be
perceived at all angles
so I'm going to be presenting a brief I
did about this time last year in first
year and and it's looking at designing a
lifestyle in the context of Martha in
Texas so I'm going to begin with the
final output the brief which is a three
minute leaving behind his past life he's
become detached from the reality across
the open landscape endeavor stop at
every place he comes across the hotel
more than four three onwards in search
of stories and organic experiences these
stories of the educator has physical
ties to one particular place this
point-to-point travel taking each new
place that comes along
[Music]
[Music]
most livable stations this is Kaylee
eight we got within about four or five
miles laplacian and salting swells an
explosion i meani ridges blow a while
and it just went wide and it interested
and it was a still of record of the blow
up there's never been another 12 ohms
big news this one
[Music]
[Music]
they could not say enough good things
about Freeman yesterday enemies I looked
around us to balance all this thing
gushing up over the over the dairy in us
killed my friend but it's a gusher so we
rushed down back to the location it was
basically the discovery well in that
South Texas area
it's 7:30 in Houston time for Kona news
thanks to the big vote in Houston and
Harris County Texans are going to have
liquor by the drink at least on a local
option basis that's the way it went in
the big boat yesterday although it was
not determined until early this morning
he said her alone is brought to you in
part by Texas Commerce Bank headquarters
tonight the primes
that was a film essentially narrating
the lifestyle of this character which
was invented
so taking Marfa as the recite in context
this is my office and out of the tiny
little town just situated in Texas and
we were able to decide on a location
sort of in and around so I decided to
choose highway 67 which is this sort of
south westerly road which connects Marfa
to essentially the rest of civilization
is incredibly credibly isolated and and
took this about six point seven mile
stretch of road to be the site for this
character and so I wasn't going to be
interested in taking looking at
lifestyles which are on the move and
people that used cars especially in
America a society which is obsessed with
the vehicle and it's sort of dependency
on the car in a way and the relationship
that people have with their car and then
also with the radio inside as a form of
communication for information as well
and so this is just a side view of the
piece of the stretch of road a center
that I chose to be having as the base
for this this lifestyle so we began by
creating a series of collages that would
depict depict this character so I was
very very obsessed with this idea of
moving long road to taking the content
of the car and
of the of what the radios are and
looking at different places that this
person could be visiting along the way
so stopping at things like driving
cinemas and motels and drive-through
restaurants and things others and that
relationship that you have with these
kind of quiet than a clear architectures
but then how you can essentially narrate
someone who would be making this journey
so the character that came to be defined
as this sort of drifter I guess which is
a town which could be applied to a few
different types of people I guess in
societies or but mainly the idea of this
this singular character in this project
himself he's left the city and he's
decided to take up a life on the road
he's living essentially from the car and
passing between motels and his whole
premise is that he's going to just go 14
all of these different places and sites
like restaurants diners churches like
campfire kind of cabins as well and just
collected many stories and experiences
as he can and so these some early
iteration models just looking at spaces
and essentially and looking at forms of
what a diner could be and also how you
sort of designing things in isolation
like if you're going to take any of
these forms and pick them out of any
site because where they're situated in
in Mafra in the desert is essentially
nothing around and dictate sort of
borders with limitations of space so
looking at the idea of what would happen
at night as well and as they sort of
light up and become these isolated or
glimpse in the darkness because it's
also seen a sort of artificial light or
street lamps or anything like this out
in that in that landscape and I was
looking a lot kind of Jack Kerouac and I
look at the B generation and I'm kind of
kids that are on the roof and migration
as well and it came down to these kind
of three binoculars that were
illustrated in in the film and so taking
the diner like this campfire in this
motel and taking them out into quite a
like 70s kitsch esque aesthetics I'm
looking at them seeing that and what
happens when this this character goes
and interacts with each of these spaces
this is a cyclone just looking at how
they kind of interact with each other
and so if you imagine this road which is
just completely continuing forever and
there's no anything else around it they
do any sort of drawing points are these
little buildings which he's stopping up
along this route and it becomes like a
commentary as well on the dependency
that people have maybe on the radio and
this breakup of social interactions so
you didn't have it in the space of a car
and then passing into inhabiting these
spaces he continued it on so this is a
mapping drawing just showing these these
vernacular in the landscape and then
from that these spaces at the beginning
one as the fine so I decided to go on
further and look at articulating the
church which was a bit obsessed with in
itself in a bit more entirety so this
church which is design takes the idea of
the square to begin with and this is a
section through it and then just
distorts it by introducing this internal
corridor like opening a corridor in the
middle and then separating two spaces so
you have this more sociable leisure
aspect of what charge could be and on
the left-hand side the actual churches
offer making more multifunctional so
it's not specific to one religion or one
group of people for example and this
sort of session aspect I guess is making
a pool or a bar for example and because
churches in themselves are incredibly
social places when you think about them
and and then this then will become
almost like a drawing point baby view
and people
this is just more cough syrup and then
this is a secondary church building
which is kind of design taken from the
circle and splitting it apart like a fan
and cutting it down to different heights
and just became the oxide to take the
form and separating it from the rest of
the context like in itself
yes me now I want you to ask you do you
read jewelry bulges yes absolutely
because I as you were talking I was
running through the Alif and and the
circular ruins that your circular story
really more reminded me of that actually
I thought the way that you handled it
was extremely beautiful since we're
talking about beauty I thought it was
you kept coming round and round and
round and round and that's that that is
a circular story and that itself is very
it's quite exquisite like I mean I'm
quite apart from the quality of the of
your work which i think is fantastic I
love the fact that you understood
spider's web of things going on and
coming back to it back to itself so my
congratulations I think it was really
interesting I would have liked you to go
on for another half an hour tell me a
bit more about what happened thank you
well I want to thank both of you for
your projects they're both really
exciting and interesting both great
presentations beautiful presentations
and I was thinking a little bit about
the pairing of you two and how I could
kind of draw similarities or and one
thing that I thought of was the to kind
of maybe spaces I don't know the black
hole in the desert he is he's kind of
kind of scary
yeah
that they have similarities and the you
know unknown feel as unknown fields and
how from that there's this idea that it
kind of generates something about
wandering so before you even mentioned
your drifter I was thinking about
wandering through your video and then
even if now you say that it's circular I
was completely lost in your presentation
in a good way
and I was wandering through it so I
think for me it was that that was the
kind of beauties the wandering that come
that isn't valued enough the kind of the
beauty of getting lost in Cupid I should
come back on James as well before I hand
over I was really intrigued at the point
at which you were looking at sort of the
nomads in the car and the the radio
being the communication because I think
that was really important I really liked
the way that you used that through this
film but actually what I saw the common
commonalities were actually yes meanness
time space and scale issues because both
projects in a very very different way
dealt with those issues in the middle of
a desert there is no time you've lost
the sense of scale completely you could
see that by our diagrams I mean you're
placing what we would normally consider
to be I mean I they looked actually
quite urban sort of buildings in the
middle of nowhere I mean oh they could
have been thousands of miles apart
I had no a sense of scale that was it
was really interesting but the idea is
somebody sort of traveling up and down
not relating to them really I mean you
you made them relate but I didn't see
the relationship because I just think
this person was sort of wondering about
the only thing I wanted to ask you about
was your church fascination and and
where that fitted in could you just give
us a little bit more I thought it was
really interesting but it sort of felt
like it was something you and by the way
I'm completely bonkers about churches
and I wanted to look at this
little bit like that it wasn't I don't
it wasn't just me then that's good no in
terms of no baby it's more like I guess
that's words because there's exactly not
you were saying that there's no sorting
defined by desert similarly like a black
hole this just got this kind of complete
extensive list to it so I should let's
keep adding these these types of
buildings if you necklace then keep
designing light past the stage of the
film West Whitewood but one thought
possibly the way when I won that be
incredibly disconnected wouldn't join
inter almost like pit stops it's always
difficult to start adding to what other
people saved for you so but if I am to
say anything so I just observed or the
remarkable difference in way how you
approach the subject you know so and I'm
seeing and talking about beauty but I
see and that beauty was so different in
each project that if silly in kind of
generates much more than them the idea
what really beauty is and how you gem it
and how you express it and just to talk
about the first project it was like
listening to a lecture on quantum
physics you know sodium which is come in
and just disappeared
to be honest I could not follow this
story because I was so fascinated by
beautiful presentation which she puts
together that I was looking at the
craftsmanship the ability to express
yourself in
so many different ways and putting this
together but the story I think I would
have to unlove to you know heal it again
in order to be able to connect it all
but indeed as quantum physics in himself
everybody has got different
interpretation and so my but I got out
of it
is this absolutely enormous amount of
imagination the way how you creative
process you know please those beautiful
not only images things which you
actually which the models I mean it is
absolutely amazing what you managed
together I don't know was it a year
project or how much time it was you know
it was just absolutely astonishing and
in a way I just thought have to ask this
question how much the story was relevant
to what you are doing you know so how
much in you know what came out of your
hands you mind
in intellect you know how much was
actually in fares and the star followed
or was it vice versa because I mean I
think that if you were doing I don't
know a church in the desert would it
look similar
or would it you know because I sing and
that kind of instinctive approach to
what you are doing which I found CA
absolutely astonishing amazing beautiful
congratulations so I think I just of so
what converts you know and how those
things in the collective and if I go to
presentation so again you know I was a
trip of the AAA in 1973 and we never
expected you know just laying smoothness
and I could just imagine you know so
what you are showing the car and that
time you can imagine that the car 1973
the cars look at them so and the
interiors of all of us motels and church
and the journey and this Lord expenses
amassing at me know and the way how you
actually you know led into that project
which you are going to do so if no it
was just amazingly beautiful
and I think if it is a first-year
project so I have to say in answer it is
quite remarkable what you put together
from list it I don't know how long you
spend reading and now it's also about
seeing which you know I would like to
say it's always because having done so
much teaching it's always amazing you
know how much you develop between the
1st and the 5th year
and miss a great day to go deeper and to
kind of fun by the story to find school
dance
so I think that I was really so pleased
to say because I sing it I can see the
chair name you know how it's going to
continue and I can't wait to see
velocities much because so when you
finish church you know to me it's always
this most difficult thing in
architecture is how you actually
transfer the idea in an analysis of
marriages
[Music]
[Music]
which I enjoy the world we keep yep we
can keep going I'm not going to do more
congratulations because you've had lots
there back there but really tremendous
and I just I I suppose I had the thing I
am takeaway from seeing your projects
because I didn't it's really it's more
of a fantastic well done you did all
this last year and I'm sort of curious
to know what you do now but in terms of
what your your tools and your exquisite
economy of memes I have to say in terms
of materially and you produce that work
bit of paper better Minelli
it's a footage but but I think I'm ever
used the word craft and beautifully
crafted and and put together and I think
that's a tremendous achievement to think
about that but then there's the use of
word which is a very difficult thing in
architecture a dangerous thing that it
isn't there to disguise a kind of lack
of some other content there but the word
kind of connects the pieces together or
fills in the part that you can't show
and I just think you you worked with
your tools that in a very economic way
really effectively I suppose I have one
I do have a question which is sort of a
jury question but but this and I think
it was asked also before I'm not sure
was really answered but this use of
character straightaway is that something
that is useful immediately in order to
construct no let me put this another way
I think what was tremendous to try to
try to work with is this in
space and how do you start what kind of
constraints do you put down to work with
infinite space and I would ask both of
you is that a material is that a
character is it is it word to help where
do you start
in order to constrain give yourself some
constraint you can ask together or
individually with me it started with a
book but not the fiction but just
literally the book and we're looking at
it as a as an object if one if if it
operates like a device where one page is
one and the other one is zero and what's
the infinite possibilities you can do if
you operate it and you draw the scenes
black and white and the characters can
be any character and so I think for me I
would say it started with the book and
then the story came in to be able to
create all of these infinite narratives
I would say pages and a knife film
because I feel like inner surface is
quite a big constraint in terms of if
you're trying to display there's only so
much you doing so over a short time
bring social film you've got a certain
amount of space integer and and as well
as that I guess designing
so through the character look what the
character is doing in the space is that
he interacts with mine decided to go for
quite an ocular pieces of architecture
which and in themselves have all really
about predetermined sizes into a
boundaries and things which I guess that
helps to define those spaces a little
adding a big to I think like an altar
maybe point to follow up this quest
because I was I had a similar a very
similar question to think if you focus
as well on the not oh no it's not really
so beautiful a question of the pleasure
of the designer the pleasure of the what
you're trying to create how can you do
it with all to say having a starting
point so I think in your case the
character is the guy that starts to
almost give you some hints on what the
design might look like in your case the
faculty start with the book that was a
like a guideline to then construct this
aesthetic so I think it's important here
to rethink what does it mean to go start
a beauty or the same old what doesn't
mean now to work with aesthetic or with
over the specific type of pleasure so
maybe like if if I look at the church
that's the drift that go to that church
or not really you see that's the drifter
yeah do you imagine the drifter in that
type of space or maybe yeah
because because of the church Ossipee
the heads on and we just lost the tree
store I mean if they just drive off you
know like and in your case like what you
think they there because you started
from the book then he guide quite a lot
us with a static of the the way you
communicated your project yeah
definitely I mean the format really
restrained it in a lot of ways but also
the book was necessary because it's I
told that you can link to to the
universe and knowledge and library it's
like the smaller scale of the universe
and a black hole would be the library
and books so it was also important for
yes it was a balance of aesthetic but
also an importance of the presence of
the argument so I don't think it would
have been reflected as well in another
medium yeah I don't know how much more I
can add but I was definitely very struck
between the two project it's the first
one also being a designer I think in
terms of the multiple scales that you're
approached in your narrative it's also
something that I feel like I've been
drawn into and the story continues
beyond this presentation and I really
appreciate you tackling the idea of the
infinite number of choices that we have
to make whether it's in life or whether
it's as a designer or a project but at
the same time the very controlled
intention that you had behind the way
that you told you story which is kind of
ironic then when you look at the other
project was just very linear but
actually quite aimless and which is also
beautiful but I think that kind of
contrast between the intention and when
there's unlimited number of choices we
can still tell a very intentional story
leaving the space as well for the
unknown
or personal experiences a variety of
perspectives and then also the beauty of
following one very very specific
perspective and taking the time to
consider what what they're perceiving I
mean I've never actually paid so much
attention to the texture of rubble or
gravel on the road because it was really
just you know that's what I saw when
you're presenting your story I think the
church is not an add-on but it's the
beginning I was really struck with the
site plan because of again the scale of
the desert in that line drawing
specifically don't need the satellite
map behind it you really see the kind of
you know there's a beauty and the
abstraction of this long endless road
and then these tiny little vernacular
moments that come up and then when you
go into the church I just see so much
more potential I'm kind of picking up on
what Jane was talking about earlier
it just looks you know a little bit
split between a regular church and a
pool hall I could see so much more
inside that church that's the moment
when this incredible world that you've
built up in this incredible background
could then offer up another world inside
the church where The Drifter then is
either confronted or has it changes
maybe even the direction that he heads
when he comes out of there I also had
this like spiraling Church or yeah so
good luck all the best yeah as he
continued thank you thank you thank you
both and now called Gili for the second
of our perry hi my name is giddy I
recently finished the MA for history and
math grade
thinking here at day a and this is a
research project I'm going to show a
short video
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
merci America but his bestiality for
Managua Rosalind
so the clip that you just saw is from a
film by Paolo Pasolini who arrived to
Israel in 1963 to find locations for his
film the Gospel according to st. Matthew
and what he does is basically goes
around the Bible Lent or the Holy Lands
but he's incredibly disappointed from
everything he sees this is a scene where
he goes to the Jordan River and he said
that he's embarrassed for aesthetic
reasons and this is very similar when he
sees Nazareth he said it's absolutely
useless and this is pretty much his
reaction to the entire land as me and
someone who is coming from there and
usually feels similar reaction decided
to research into other people who have
visited the Holy Land but were mostly
incredibly disappointed and this is
Pasolini must much like these people
were immersed in kind of collective
memory of images and stories which was
of course far far from reality these
books kind of were meant to rectify a
horrible experience that they had are
really kind of immersive disenchantment
people who said lines like it's it's a
hellhole it's completely dried smells
like cheese you know there's no kind of
milk and honey and the Holy Land and
someone who made an entire book about
this is Mark Twain and his book is
called the innocents abroad and he
called it that because he was hoping to
rectify other people's experience by
making him see with innocent eyes what
Palestine actually looked like so his
entire book is telling the reality of
the place through his eyes and how it
really is kind of you know a horrible
kind of degraded place that's far from
holy but actually this really sore
discussion about beauty and what is
beautiful and what is holy and what's
the Western aesthetics as opposed to
what this oriental colony
really like and actually Mark Twain if
you look at the roots that he undertook
they were very similar to the one
recommended by Thomas Cook and Thomas
Cook if you know was the first man to do
organized tours to Israel to Palestine
to the Holy Land
so essentially Mark Twain was a tourist
he wasn't a pilgrim he wasn't an
explorer he went on a very prescribed
route and that's why he was underwhelmed
because he just saw it everybody else
saw before him and Thomas Cook and his
tours were kind of sending people to the
Levant to the Orient so it was the Holy
Land tour along with Athens in Egypt so
it was kind of the moment when traveling
became a commodity and the Holy became
something that you can sell
I discovered a diary from two women from
1888 that went on one of those cook
tours it was never published it's the
great-grandmother of my housemate and it
was really incredible to say what they
saw and unlike Twain they weren't so
disappointed because they had a guide
they had somebody there to show them the
place to show them the landscape through
very particular lens and basically every
piece of stone had a meaning they said
this is the pile where David picked up
Goliath the stone to kill Goliath this
is where Jesus leaned upon so suddenly
everything came to life through the
lines of the person that shows you the
way so this is just one of the stories
that this place holds and I found this
book that kind of does the same thing
but without being there so it was sold
as a delightful tour of Palestine
without leaving home and it was a book
about two and a half feet wide and it
had photographs but every photograph had
a very long caption the caption I saying
was like the guy because it says for
example well it was called sir it was
called earthly footsteps of the man of
Galilee from 1894 and the picture on the
left for example it says the rock upon
which Jesus leaned on so suddenly kind
of a non descriptive sites becomes
completely monumental in this valley
which Mark Twain probably would have
said that it's completely boring in kind
of the plain
suddenly is the value of I alone or
Joshua commanded the Sun and the moon to
stand still so this kind of conjunction
of images and texts is actually what a
travelogue is if you look at the
definition of a travelogue which is a
combination of travel and monologues and
I find it very interesting how a textual
and an image can together create this
representation which creates myth which
then circulates around the world so
these kind of underwhelming sites were
solved by giving them kind of mythic
image but how do you explain for things
like railroads happening in the Holy
Land and people that came and saw this
is a railroad from 1892 in Jerusalem
were completely shocked by the fact that
the Holy Land is infiltrated by this
modern kind of intruder and somebody
said that when the moment that he hears
somebody says all aboard for Jerusalem
that would be the end of everything
because you cannot go on a train to
Jerusalem you need a camel or something
like that and I like previous people
that would write text to kind of rectify
what they feel and kind of erase a
previous image by a representation
people now had to actually remove the
modern abstractions by the practice of
Biblical Archaeology which was just
becoming common so in this way they
would really uh nor dig down to the
truth and find what was beneath the city
and they said this this is a travelogue
which is called buried cities recovered
explorations in bad lines and actually
this guy said that the the real city of
Christ is hidden beneath accumulation of
filth of other nations or layers of
debris which is essentially layers of
others civilization that built there's
like an ottoman city upon it has to be
removed to discover a fantastic
subterranean City which has cisterns and
columns and that's the real city so we
need to start digging to find it and
actually pilgrims believed in it and
they went to pray at ruins because they
seemed as more authentic than
anything else and this became kind of
institutionalized so the Palestinian
exploration fund funded here around the
corner in 1965 under the patronage of
Queen Victoria is sense kind of
missionaries and explorers scientists
and archaeologists to survey the Holy
Land this is an amazing drawing of the
cisterns hidden below Temple Mount by
people from the Palestinian exploration
fund it's actually still active today at
pal X funds and they have a lecture at
the British movement today and they're
still kind of serving but then it was
really a mission of colonizing it was
early ways of learning land for
colonizing it they were also sent
photographers this one was taking only
15 years after photography was invented
this is 1854 it was invented in 1839 and
the amazing thing about this is that it
majors and look like a place with no
people that's just ready to be conquered
but actually photographic technology
only allowed for really long exposures
so no people could be caught on the film
so the medium itself would seem then to
be kind of the only like objective
reality was actually far from it
and it's just another way to show how
representation is actually far from true
so we spoke about the colonizing project
and indeed in 1917 the British entered
Jerusalem and that's when they began
their projects of turning from travelers
into locals and that's when they can
really beautify the city so not just
write about it not just dig deep into
the ground and find it but to really
change the face of the city this is
general Allenby entering Jerusalem in
1973 and the first thing he did was
appoints Sarah no stores who was kind of
a very romantic friends of Lawrence of
Arabia kind of a great Englishman and he
appointed his friends here ashbey who
was William Morris follower and Arts and
Crafts activists to run the New
Jerusalem committee and he appointed Sir
Patrick Geddes the famous Scottish town
planner to design the New Jerusalem and
together what they said is that now in
Jerusalem everything that we associated
with our sense of you
as in western ideals beauty is in danger
landscape unities of streets and sites
embody division of the men that set the
Great Hall together all these things
have to be considered practically now
how do you consider the holiest city in
practical reasons how do you make it
beauty so the first thing they did made
a plan
Jerusalem town planning scheme number
one from 1920 essentially it was a
project of two cities there was the new
city which has to be heavily regulated
and then all City which has to be saved
from the evil of the past and kind of
resurrected in an image of a city that
never existed only in their minds so the
first thing about the new city is
everything had to be built with
Jerusalem stone so this is stone it's
carved from within Jerusalem and until
today is still active this is a picture
I took last year it's the same stone
although I suspect it now it's being
imported from China because there's no
more room I mean there's no more stone
underneath the city but everything is a
hundred years later is still being built
by this is Pedro fight aesthetics of the
Jerusalem stone the second thing they
did is remove all of the ugly things as
they call them so this beautiful Ottoman
clock tower who was removed in 1920 and
lastly was the Jerusalem Park so Patrick
Geddes one in Jerusalem to look like
Edinburgh Castle because that was his
imagine that Jerusalem so basically the
city had to be set in the middle of a
park so following pilgrims will not be
disappointed anymore they would come and
they would see a beautiful city
surrounded by greenery so this is the
part with the holy city in the middle
and this is kind of if it wasn't violent
until now this is when it really becomes
explicit so above is the Jaffa Gate
reconstruction at present and then below
it says the same as suggested when the
unsightly obstructions that hide the
wall line are cleared away so
residential and any other
structures around the walls had to be
cleared away for the sake of beauty of
Jerusalem and actually today I doesn't
look so different so it's a bit boring
but I guess that it works so my argument
is that the city was transformed by
travellers turn settlers whom a
Jerusalem in the image of its
representation designed to be
aesthetically pleasing for the future
visitors by restoring a biblical city
that never existed so to kind of
conclude this thing we all know what
happened next
and this is a topic for a PhD or my PhD
and I will not elaborate on it now but I
did kind of want to undertake one of
these travelogues in my own and as
someone who was born in Jerusalem and
study architecture Jerusalem I couldn't
do the same because I've you know I know
it from a different way so I went to a
place which I've never been before which
is the sights of Christ's baptism on the
Jordan River which is in the buffer zone
between Israel and Jordan so usually you
can't enter there and as I was saying
before you always need a guide you need
someone who knows the place and can
really explain to you at least one of
the sides of the story so I was taking
there by someone who was the head of the
site from the Israeli national parks
Authority which is a body that really
takes care of all the heritage in the
country and his story was really
fascinating of course it's a very
single-sided story it seems really
Authority is a story but he's also has a
lot of hopes for this place which he can
never do and he took me around and I
took the photos and this is spreads from
my thesis which you can see here in
table and essentially he's just showing
me the way he sees this place which is
full of landmines and people baptizing
in a very filthy piece of the Jordan
River yeah and it's really beautiful to
see the kind of passion somebody has for
a plane
like this yeah so thank you my name is
Annette and today I'm gonna present my
project from Nazareth and a little bit
inter truck which I was a third-year
student so I wanna start my research
question that is in the context for
generating income often clashes with
poor environmental initiatives how can
water Ness and beauty provide a
long-term strategy in order to maintain
a threat to landscape so my project is
divided into three phases the first one
is understanding today's context where
economic ah globalization and
environmental globalization are often
interpreted as one is about generating
income and other one by preserving the
environment so my project consists of
finding a balance between these two
phenomena there will be about generating
low income for little maintenance of the
site the second phase is sacrificing
part of this wilderness by generating a
psychopathic part one of the spider
nests on the landscape in order to
attract people generally generate income
and create interest so my introduction
fishes other series on passions on the
island and noticed a luminescent so that
after if after 15 years it would create
a new understanding of landscape
aesthetics in the context of climate
change so here's an idea of how the of
this type of aesthetic image
so my site is well it is okay my site is
Valle Vista Allen is located on the east
coast of the UK it's a flat land or for
a four kilometer by two and a half it
has been suffering from a lot of
flooding because it is two meter below
sea level and today it is used it is it
is just by the RSPB they are trying to
create this new natural reserve because
all of the earth has been taken from
Lagoon Crossrail have been brought to
this land in order to raise it above
ground but today they didn't manage to
finish all of it so at this way I'm
focusing my intervention on the start
part of the landscape so the island is a
series of marshlands wetlands it is very
vast it is very empty and when I went to
visit it it was just me and two or three
other bird watchers so it doesn't have a
lot of interest this type of environment
and I'm trying to create an appreciation
of such of such an answer so today there
are three types of landscape there are
beacons are directly considered valuable
so the first one or the agricultural
land selective farms because generate
income the second ones order culturally
beautiful so the older curated gardens
and the third one the environment that
contains an important biodiversity like
Princeton the Amazonian forest because
it creates some kind of of tourism so
the first aspect of my landscape is that
I'm only using people as an agent to
activate the landscape over time they
are not part of the image anymore only
because the landscape will mainly work
with with it with the wilderness a
second aspect is that I want to maintain
the flatness of the land which for me is
actually a beautiful aspect of this
island so I am doing three type of
intervention onto this island so the
first one is inserting with a wooden
framework within the land that would
fire excavator spaces the second one
adding shallow a man of
in order to create wind shelters around
the different depressions or the third
one subtracting the material in order to
interact with the marine life all of
this from a different different research
and understanding of how the environment
of the site works exactly so mapping
also understanding how water and wind in
today's cases are creating spaces by the
phenomenon of erosion mapping the
element of wind as in it in order to
understand how it could work in an
efficient way for you by design onto the
side of a less water because I would
because the land is mainly soil based
and what would be an important agent in
order to arrange a road and to dedicate
the land where there's like high
turbulence on the south part of the
landscape so this is where I will be
making all of my cuts so out of this
flat landscape the only element that
would come out to be the garden so
looking at Roberto Burle Marx with the
Landscape Architect his strategy
consists of creating a catalogue of card
catalog of plants that he knows exactly
what kind of environment you would
create so I selected 12 plants that I
know that could that can grow in such an
environment because it is poorly drained
it is a salty water so this outer loop
to a plant that could grow in it and so
the garden is contained within the land
and when they are fully grown so this
practice here after 50 years will be the
only element that will come out of the
flatland
[Music]
[Music]
we warned the sources of water in order
to attract birds and to create
[Music]
because objections of 130 conventions
are in
and thirdly because I want to emphasize
with the activities are pretty watching
I'm proposing this type of bird-watching
height there are three quarters embedded
within the ground and I still have a big
opening at the tops of the net so this
so two activity can still be done during
rainy season especially in this part of
this part of the UK where it's peaceful
so it's raining like quite often and the
last type of cut that I'm doing or this
is no party they are located only on the
south part of the island and
[Music]
so here we are in 2015 an agent such as
water when a movement of people will
start avoiding and decaying the land so
water will start reshaping the after the
shape of the of the island whereas wind
will start dispersing sealed over the
land creating wild patches of vegetation
whereas all of the excavated spaces
because of filtration of water and
pressure of people rustic requests are
decaying and fragmented into smaller
pieces so
[Music]
so over time the landscape will start
creating this type of really
uncomfortable environment into something
that is decaying then it's very wet very
muddy very cold so creating this type of
beautiful the conventional
unconventional type of environment that
can only be perceived in the third phase
as as a as an image from for secreting
the sty we're in this rural town of
Burnham encroach so my project is
looking I have to find a balance between
generating income but still proposing
environmental environmental initiatives
so the ink so generating low income
because it still won't attract a lot of
people but enough to maintain it because
all of the intervention requires a lot
of maintenance because they're all
maintained by external factors so this
is an approach that can be applied to
different threatened landscape whether
they are threatened by climate change
like in this case or by economical
purposes in order over time to create a
certain appreciation interest over the
desolate landscape so the conventionally
beautiful
[Music]
and attempts start again to
extraordinary projects the latter I have
a little soft spot for because I my unit
worked at once the island a couple of
years ago so I it was pretty bird really
well there are always birds but it was
pre-designed for birds particularly but
I thought that was you captured it well
and that was free and I suppose there's
just I think the thing that is
interesting about both in terms of just
a theme of interest which is clearly
very present and relevant is the idea of
our wilderness or what we notion is for
wilderness being productive in some form
and how we continued or as human beings
we try to try to draw productivity out
of everything we see or put our hands on
and the different ways that that you've
that that we as human beings approach
that and clearly demonstrated in both
projects which i think is something that
perhaps where we've had a go at a number
of times over civilization we continued
to do that member at a moment in time we
were extremely self-conscious about it
and I wonder about that so I admire your
restraint in particular well in both
different kinds of project you know
there's a design project and then
there's a there's a construction of
project so I think in terms of the
design I think fantastically restrained
and and I think we talked about this
yesterday in terms of the pier that one
the Stirling Prize a couple of days ago
but that idea that you you you just the
when is there too much architecture or
is that a little bit of architecture and
what is that little bit of architecture
and I suppose in one question I would
have for you is you know what is if if
you had to say what the little bit of
architecture is what is it do you think
I think in my case when says here it was
very challenging project because I
always felt like I need to put a wall
somewhere to call it architecture but in
a way I thought architecture could also
be at the scale of how this flower would
relate to the ground and what kind of
effect it would create over time and how
would people interact with it so for me
this was also a kind of architecture
that can be called this way and that we
could also tackle her so formidable
don't be scared
yeah I mean the similarity of the
openness as well on the of the landscape
or the territory now that is same thing
with the project before that start to
construct or give an already a specific
type of aesthetic and I noticed I saw
what you were showing that with all the
Explorer going into travel and then
every time they almost saw a building or
some construction they were disappointed
so there is this always comes the kind
of disappointment of architecture oh you
know like every time that there is this
kind of like a finishing point
especially on the rosante territory is
not easy to then sort of think how do
you intervene and I even went back to
the project that you were showing of the
of the city so a meaningful responding
facility talk topic how do you actually
construct or how do you intervene on
this on this type of landscape look do
you have a bit of fun maybe an idea or
something that will be spare you what
you want to look look at I know it'll be
an open question just because I'm
curious as well on this topic I think
that for me the issue of landscape was
or even landscape theorist was a very
kind of serious thing that I was trying
to look into I think put it in the
presentation because it's a bit too much
but I think that something which is true
what you said it when
so architecture they were disappointed
because it was obstructing literally the
holy land like it was obstructing the
kind of layers of soil themselves in a
way there was this belief among
explorers that the landscape is kind of
God mate so that's why it should be like
cherish but actually we all know that
landscape is man-made and it's kind of a
Western way of seeing nature so I think
that is a very interesting thing how it
was trying to be harnessed into like the
holy thing even like that shrine of the
exterior and actually the obsession with
it is what made it so manipulated and so
loaded until today and I think in my
case before interacting with the
landscape is I was trying to constrain
myself and to define how I can help and
try to defend this beauty that I'm
trying to achieve after death so that
landscape so one must be by maintaining
this flatness so kind of saying that I
cannot really do straight walls onto it
so I need to find another way of
creating architecture to this land and
also it was mainly about the materiality
and how far can I work with it you know
without trial without disturbing it too
much so understanding the enjoy the
movement of tithe as she used it in the
efficient way for me rather than going
against it and to force my design on
twit but actually adapt more to the
external factors and what kind of form
texture would create over time um I
don't know if I mean I'm kind of curious
maybe it's unfair for me to ask is well
it's quite a big question but how
important is truth to your project I
mean for instance even in the first one
when you look out at the desolate
landscape these stories about the
biblical stories about the significance
of this rock or of that view I mean how
important is it that that story is that
whether that story is true or not or
whether it's fiction because it still
has a result yeah I think I think it's a
very good point and I think that the
reason I started with 19th century
travelers not before because I think
that
when kind of science and religion
started to be together she was a period
where like the truth of the Bible could
still be considered as history and they
were trying to authenticate the Bible in
so many different ways so I think that's
the moment when kind of pilgrimage fails
that's when pilgrimage became tourism
and kind of scientifically so for me
when the kind of quest for truth became
an important thing is when it all
started imagination stopped and kind of
creativity and even analogical thinking
which was very big in the Middle Ages
kind of stopped so I think that's a very
kind of interesting thing and I think
it's when it stopped being kind of
really spiritual when you follow the
truth I think even in the second project
you know when you start showing this
dystopian kind of end result of if as a
warning I mean and that's not even
necessary of over developing the site it
might not even necessarily end up in
that direction but it has a effect I
think you had an intention behind it
yeah I'm trying to maintain I don't
think it's kind of like a dystopian
image I think it this type of
environment exists orangie but the not
really like the lot of people would be
interested in it or would say today I
will go and visit it that desolated
fragmented landscape and so I'm trying
just preserve to preserve those and
actually make it in my point back and
aim that I want to achieve and to show
that this environment or or actually
exists today and should be considered
also as some kind something as something
beautiful something that we can
appreciate that we can actually enjoy
because when I went to decide like the
first time I really thought was going to
have a horrible day but I actually
enjoyed it it was just an amazing
experience just to be known in this huge
land and yourself it was something that
I wasn't expecting at all and she was
kind of like this an emotion that I
wanted you to like to focus on in true
I think it I would can stop myself from
starting with the story about what is
architecture or how much architecture is
relevant but I was about I don't know
early twenties I did my MA at the
Academy of Fine Arts and the professor
was I sing at the best professor who I
ever had and once when I was doing an
architectural project which was a very
mundane School of Architecture so in the
evening he just have asked me how about
the doors I said well what about the
doors and he even went so far that he
said how about the door handle and I
said professor that is not architecture
and he left me with a sword he said for
the next meeting come up with three
things which don't concern architecture
and I can only make a comment I'm still
looking because so I've been saying this
time for Chavez if anybody heard it
before on the other hand envelopes to
projects they deal with in two different
ways with some kind of looking at the
history or at the past maybe in the
landscape project in the past in case of
considering the question reconstruction
let it go as it is changing it and icing
it you just update an analytical
assessment of the situation it mmm I
have spent a long time in the
when we were working on a project and I
know Jerusalem and I can't many of your
observations on the other hand I think
it we are kind of all brainwashed by the
fact you know that we all since early
age at least instance Europe on certain
parts of the world we have been
listening to the biblical stories and we
have got this image of beautiful garden
we have got all the images and in films
and you know which surround us and
therefore we have got completely
distorted image of the fact of a town or
Rock and I have to say you know that
when you look at it and when you try to
completely divide yourself from those
images a is something very which is very
beautiful about that part of the bath
and when you travel through the desert
and then you actually had a chance of
going down to the west and just of
looking at the continent for example
looking at the materiality of the old
construction the very have not city grew
up with this big hurry and which
eventually got food is God knows what
and so on so I think that the fact that
you were born there probably is another
element that you haven't got the
distance to be objective about looking
at it but it is beside the point I think
it is it is really a question what we do
with the past because we are constantly
constantly reconstructing the basis
which we don't know what they looked
like
we are constantly you know thinking
about
the idea is how we change the cities
have incorporated past and we have got
very little knowledge when it comes to
it
also you know those places done in the
context of the Society of the climate of
all those changes would happen which
happen between then and now and I see
yet
you know gesture from practical point of
view because I've been constantly
constantly you know struggling this what
you do obesity constructions and icing
it we are so careless you know so how we
stop ourselves on one hand from touching
all those monumental things on the other
hand not I mean going too far in terms
of really changing the fabric and
producing completely you know idiotic
solutions and icing it you didn't
actually offer any solution but it was
so good to listen to you and it was so
great to see all those images you know
so how much damage you know we have all
done and we are still doing places so it
is really nice little old inside as far
as the landscape is concerned again you
know so it is I don't really need any
architecture I think it's a magnificent
idea to look at it and it is I don't see
it's a solution looking at but I think
that the fact that you are actually
thinking about how we could preserve I
was just leaving this morning I was
listening how much insane insects you
know just we have managed to appear so
effectively
no insect Oh which bacteria and god
knows what we have managed in a method
as human beings to completely destroy so
I seen that all of sorts
you know how much successful it might be
at the moment but I was keeping it in
mind and making I saw some really
beautiful things in both of these
projects but completely different like
shine I couldn't really connect them the
only connection I could see is this
historical and and in hidden beauty and
the other one is beauty looking into the
future you know I really loved the way
that your project brought out of you
that actually beauty is in seeing
through other people's eyes and I
thought that was really really
interesting that if you have an
interpreter it's like looking at a
painting if somebody can talk you
through it
you see completely different things it
becomes beautiful to you or maybe not or
maybe you hate it I mean who knows but
actually I think the what I wrote down
there was that you know you don't need
truth to find beauty what you need is in
a passion and if you have in a passion
then you find beauty the beauty I found
in yours in it was very different I like
the way that you described the start of
this project is trying to find a balance
between sort of money and and
conservation and actually I think that
if you get that right that's really
that's pretty beautiful
I loved your presentations I thought
they were absolutely charming so
congratulations for that but I think
there's another sort of potential beauty
here and I think that's even less
intervention
I think delicacy of intervention in
itself in into nature I mean
I loved the fact that you talked about
natural erosion that that to me just is
perfect I don't think we have to go
creating stuff balls I mean I didn't
notice you've got these some rooms for
people to stay in but I was a little bit
worried about them being dug in into a
marshland but the the ID the idea that
you have very little intervention for me
apart from just an ability to have a
look easy enough so I your restraint was
pretty beautiful to me well done and I'd
like to thank you both because I learned
so much it's real real like a lesson in
ten minutes I'm gonna how long it was
and I I had a thought well Gibby was
presenting when you were showing us
those three images of the men that were
involved with redesigning the kind of
urban landscape and one of them was
associated with William Morris which I
thought was interesting because I'm glad
ed bottoms is even correct me but woody
Mars had a an agency or in it called the
anti scraping movement is that what it
and it it was against the removal of
monuments that had that were being
removed because they were being
considered inauthentic in at the same
time in a different context this clock
tower was removed because
authentic so I think that's interesting
the kind of the content had the context
place on you know how we how what
measures are taken and again it wasn't
even considered inauthentic but
surprisingly enough it was too modern
for them so they said it kind of
destroys the biblical city so that's why
you need to remove it because yeah it
was Ottoman was equal to modern and it
was ugly that was the word in the
ashbey's report and that's why they
removed it so I mean I think that the
question of authenticity came a bit
later but I actually didn't know about
this movement so it's interesting but
the the visibly they were able to
appreciate the layers of something in
say London but in this context maybe
none tonight
I was thinking maybe it'd be interesting
if you two collaborated maybe as in ever
was in in the shoes of these men and how
delicately she would approach request
thank you thank you both my name is
Tania I'm a recent graduate from the
city's program here at the LA I was
invited to talk about the small
exhibition I initiated and curated last
year at the back members room it was
called because you're involved and it
was essentially a spontaneous reaction
to Trump's election in the United States
it was composed of this photo that you
see here and taken by someone and a
series of materials from the archive
kindly donated by a buttons and
and the whole idea behind this
exhibition was to analyze Trump's
apartment as a base to understanding the
ideas the stuff that stand behind him so
if this panel is about beauty or the
lack of duty in this case you can say by
thinking whether it's beautiful or not
it actually covers up very important
ideas that are that stand behind design
decisions that were made in his
apartment and when you look at it in
comparison to materials that were made
in the 1920s for example that were kind
of like an extension of the Basel School
in Paris and back then was even a bit
outdated you can start looking at the
different details that were made in this
apartment in 1985 and find very similar
comparisons with 18th century French
water fountain for example or an
excessive amount of God used said that
it's 24 karat gold and the Palace of
Versailles that is a symbol of louis xiv
renovate of france and he was known i
mean this this palace is kind of like a
symbol of his absolute reign in france
and taking himself away from the center
of paris and and the people that is
actually raining you know in a similar
way to Trump being at the top of his
tower in his three-story Pandavas
covered with gold and so you kind of
wonder water the
what's basically Trump's and conscience
is trying to tell us
because essentially he was he was chosen
by his new politics audience he
presented himself as being the
antithesis of Hillary Clinton which is
the old establishment but when you
actually analyze his apartment you
understand that he actually sees himself
as a king all of the language the
architectural language that he uses in
this apartment is first of all European
it's either Italian frescoes or or
Corinthian three columns covered with
marble European materials royal royal
seems so it kind of makes you wonder
what is it trying to tell us and this is
the this is from the second season of
Fargo I think it's kind of sad or when
Mike Milligan says do you know what's
the definition of the word serenity
serenity is absolute power and authority
like a king exactly which is who I am
your king it's America brother
we don't do kids here oh we do we do we
just call them something else so in a
way you don't expect your president to
have good taste or even a knowledge of
design but you do you do have the power
to analyze and understand him through
the decision that it makes especially
when it's as extravagant and conscience
as Trump's and comes as such
distinction from his words and the words
that he uses and what he claims to be
that's it thank you my name is Josh I'm
presenting a project that I completed
last year in diploma for under the kind
of supervision of Hansel Fearon Scott
and John Paul Messina the brief of this
unit is to kind of investigate the coast
of Europe
it's a juridical cultural and kind of
topographic boundaries and maybe to
reimagine Europe not as we know it but
as a settlement on a peninsula of Asia
and this sort of reorientation could
help us understand its contemporary
situation and how far it actually
stretches the project that I want to
present today looks at the outpost which
I believe is the architectural archetype
which was used to create the two largest
nation-states on the planet Earth if we
look at the history of the nation-state
we can see its residue still existing
today through the the leaders of the of
these countries they still intentionally
personify the culture of outposts
embedding themselves in the wilderness
for you know kind of photo opportunities
whenever possible but also sort of
showing underlying capacity violence
sort of ability to protect the boundary
so what where did these boundaries come
from and I think that the outpost
actually provides a way of exploring
this in the circumpolar north there was
at least 30 major language groups that
existed and although contemporary
Russian and Canadian culture would have
you believe that this is a empty
wilderness it was obviously not the case
there would not have been any sort of
mercantile imperative to get into the
circumpolar North North if it wasn't
occupied already so if we look at this
300 year expansion what we actually see
is the complete use of centralized
capital in London and in Moscow to fund
expedition after
tradition through the the river systems
of the circumpolar north until these two
kind of centralized political entities
ended up on the northern coast of
California and aside essentially called
it a draw
and decided to reinforce each other
supply chains with the kind of produce
of Northern California so this is a very
long kind of story but it actually is
still playing out today if we're looking
at the contemporary lands that have been
given to these people that were already
there the pink is designates official
treaties that have been signed with
these nation states so in Russia you can
see there's actually not treaty signed
but in Canada there is a few so to
understand the architecture of the
outpost we should go to the main
outposts I think we should go to York
factory in Canada which actually sits on
the edge of Hudson Bay the York Fork
factory outpost with the de facto
capital of Canada for about a hundred
and fifty years it was rebuilt several
times and it was a permeable
architecture where people could come in
and out and trade it was used to extract
first from the people that were living
in this area and throughout the
tributaries of the Hayes River although
this river system was basically used to
access all of the interior of Canada to
the west coast of California going back
where did this kind of output was come
from and we can look to the Hanseatic
League specifically to the London
contour again this is an exchange of
goods through a kind of permeable
architecture existing in the city it's
an urban space you can almost argue a
space of hibbert hybridity sorry what
happened okay
the expansion into the into the Seine to
Siberia was something that you will it
has been called the conquest and this is
a this is a painting sort of glorifying
the the conquest of your Mac who is kind
of instrumental in setting up the first
steps over the Ural Mountains which led
to the expansion of the of the Russian
fur trade
so unlike the the sort of Canadian
counterparts in the in North America the
texture of the Kremlin was used as an
outpost whereby existing kind of systems
of tribute that were under the control
of the Khanate were basically used so in
the top left corner you can see this
sort of mercantile quarter whereby the
people that were already living there
were subjected to kind of come and pay
tribute to these these systems so it's a
very kind of robust almost let's say
militaristic kind of situation and the
entire city is kind of involved in this
even though you could see outside of the
walls that there would be something
happening
so to summarize kind of the mercantile
outpost you had merchants who was a more
or less the money behind the the
operation a very unfavorable kind of
figure in medieval European culture the
factor who was a person that basically
ran these particular outposts on behalf
of the merchants matey which is a hybrid
person who understood let's say the the
language and the topology of the given
area where they're extracting and then
the actual extractor and this kind of
relationship went backwards and forwards
and you could say is sort of a an axis
of mercantile relationships so that's a
key note to make about the mercantile
expansion into these areas in the
outpost of the or the architecture of
the outpost is it it relied let's say on
the system of knowledge exchange that
couldn't have been kind of carried out
otherwise there would be no fur trade if
it wasn't for people that were acting
let's say as matey now in the outpost in
2017 and these are everywhere in the
circumpolar north you actually have the
missing factor in matey so this is sort
of an axis of industrial relation where
people are displaced
according to sort of economic forces
into the northern kind of reaches of
this country for extraction so no longer
furs of course but now nickle oil
aluminum copper whatever the market
really demands there'll be a camp set up
in the middle of nowhere and people will
be sent to work or willfully go there
for instance Norilsk in siberia this is
a closed city nobody is able to access
it without permission
by the Russian government it's basically
hell on earth and people they receive
massively high wages to compensate them
for the ill effects to their health
in Canada we have Fort Nelson which is
basically a site of massive kind of
hydroelectric dams and they're kind of
servicing an oil field that's you know
next to Fort McMurray the second largest
tar sands operation in the world and
I've been using these satellite images
and showing them as a false infrared
this is Landsat data and so everything
in red is actually green so it kind of
gives you the idea of the the the
environment that these places are in our
willfully kind of explained by nation
states as wilderness but actually
nothing could be further from the truth
they're actually using wilderness to
mask the extraction so and and then
again you know in Siberia you have I
could go on and have a lot more examples
of this but I'll spare you but you could
say that these kind of architectures are
usually set up by extraction companies
in essence to kind of get people to go
where they would never go normally and
so they could extract and so how do we
save the outpost what is the
contemporary outpost is there something
that we could do maybe to sort of
decentralize the power of the outpost
and break the supply chain so I think we
essentially go back to the mercantile
era again and insert the idea of studium
Generale so this is like the medieval
university which were incredibly
interesting places because they sort of
existed in spite of the the
nation-states that they were kind of in
or city-states and that there was
actually groups of students and teachers
that would have to negotiate the terms
of their you know political existence
let's let's put it so these were kind of
the first outposts of itinerant human
beings in in Western Europe and they
still exist today so for instance you
know we still have Paris
Oxford Bologna and in orange you're
actually seeing the the structures that
are still using university buildings and
so the project is kind of in a sense
just using research to kind of
show again how we could actually look at
the outpost as a kind of a natural
archetype to actually bring back the
this notion of studium Generale a so
this is coming from a French priest who
was a the Paris University he's
describing the students who would come
so from England to to come to Paris to
become University students so no wild
landscapes no steep crags or valley
gorgeous no road filled with dangers or
harassed by bandits was enough to keep
them from hastening to the throngs of
young Englishmen would not be frightened
by the ocean blocking them with its
storms and waves with with its contempt
for all these dangers they have streamed
to the as soon as hearing thy name
spoken now this is the occupation of
Alcatraz by the American Indian Movement
in the nineteenth sorry the 1960s
violent and what was proposed here was a
set up a university
natural how natural the the outpost
could act as a as a university so this
is a point cloud I constructed of
Alcatraz and then more in a more
contemporary time we could see the the
water defenders at Standing Rock as
another kind of form of a studium
Generale a a place where it was actually
an inclusive outpost that included
people in to actually critique and to
challenge the the idea of sovereignty of
the these extractive companies
so now what we're we left now if we if
we think about this and we can kind of
look to the circumpolar North now as the
site of data extraction in a different
sense so this could be a beneficial way
going forward if you're looking at these
red dots on the map I'm sorry it's not
super clear but these are actually sites
where universities are tracking climate
change and they're tracking all
different kinds of information in order
to understand specifically how the
atmosphere is heating up how the
environment is changing and it actually
turns out that people who are nomadic
itinerant sort of people that are in
these areas provide the most kind of
subtle and useful data so in a sense
what I'm proposing is this and why I
made this thing here
is it's meant to be an artifact of the
research because in the sense what I'm
not trying to do is propose a certain
formal University but maybe to suggest
that specifically the forms of
extraction do not necessarily make us
give up the idea of outpost in this
territory but perhaps we could reimagine
what the outpost could be in light of
the university thank you conversation
earlier in the year about beauty as
revolution and Jayne was speaking very
much about appropriateness because we
were trying to talk around what how do
you how do we define what's what's
beautiful what's not oftentimes it's
also in the eye of the beholder and so
this morning I kind of probably someone
can correct me but really quickly on
Wikipedia if you look up beauty in Koine
Greek which is not like classical Greek
there's a the word for it actually means
of its time and so I thought that that
was very much related to the project
that you presented and I think you know
so in that word in Greek someone who was
young but trying to look old or someone
who is old but trying to look young is
also not really it's not this and so if
the meaning of that word and also it
could relate to a fruit maybe that's
right and yes I think for me that
explains a lot also about why it's so
ostentatious and we see all of that gold
and all of these things that are
beautiful when they were first created
but have now been taken completely out
of their context
recently it's a bit unnecessary to
finally find whether it's beautiful
because it's a temporary kind in a way
it it doesn't matter if his apartment is
beautiful or not because it's temporary
that's why it's better to kind of
analyze it to its specific language that
it's trying to to use rather than saying
whether it's good taste or bad taste
whether we like it or not because I mean
that's what that's how I see then I
totally agree yeah I mean you have this
in the funk that the function of it is
completely it's not even just an extra
layer it's an extra ten layers in terms
of not doing what it's not being
structural or not doing what it's
supposed to do yes thank you so much for
that presentation about the outposts I'm
still I think I'm still gonna be
thinking about it while everyone else
makes the comment but it's quite
fascinating you I didn't finish reading
that text when you when they were
talking about how it's also to protect
the students or something like that
yeah so I guess the the thing about the
the medieval university was that it was
actually sort of a political structure
set up by students and teachers in spite
of whatever state what they occupied and
I think that's what's like sort of
fundamental was the degree of
responsibility and and what it meant and
how important it was that people were
willing to sort of risk their lives even
to get into let's say a pretty marginal
situation just for that knowledge
exchange and how important that was for
regenerating kind of European society
you know it's it's quite fast yet the
extent and the importance of doing that
I think especially now and
the importance of being able to make
that possible for education
and do you see that as kind of a an
alternative or how do you what is the
potential of this well I think it's like
yeah as as people that are participating
let's say in a brexit transition at our
institution I think that we need to look
really deeply at what an institution is
and and how it could be organized in a
way that it's not counting to source or
some sort of national agenda which we
think is horrific and damaging in some
ways and and that is actually the idea
of a university being an international
place of knowledge exchange that exists
in spite of a national agenda is what
it's always been or like at least how
I've understood it and so I think this
is like a very important thing for
another another point I find important
in the in the presentation especially
not a comparison I think they're very
different not only projects but also
things you were looking at and how you
are addressing a topic what I think is
very important on what you are showing
is that the visual communication is
essential to make a statement because
sometimes I think you know we were
talking about just about the beauty or
aesthetic and the you know you describe
with say the space of the university by
showing those those representation those
representation are also essential for
everybody to almost go for it
so there is a level of persuasion on the
visual that is very very important I
think as architects we should not forget
about that so I really appreciate the
presentation area appreciate this object
you know that so the fact that is that
this year and we see it is really kind
of make as well it's kind of yeah this
is a is a visual persuasion which i
think is essential and and in your point
i think like what was i think is too
permissive what I find it interesting
it's not too much about the the use of
let us say gold or the use of orifice or
which kind of adjective we could give to
this type of speciality but I think is
more the fact that there is a specific
style and that the style is present you
know like anything for me like the fact
that there are this kind of possible
different style that we can embrace or
not a brace or discuss I think is I
think it's good and so I really
appreciate that also you should have
this kind of almost exhibition in a in
the school by showing it you know like
so I think a really kind of sort of
thank you for both of you for for this
kind of two takes on the on the visual I
I can only try and say that in a
different way but that's exactly that's
exactly what struck me about it and the
importance of well I suppose I was
trying to think you know how architects
useful which I don't quite think of
quite often and and I think they're
really really useful at being able to
show and and well questioned the way we
look at something continue to read
question the way we look at something
and and then we show it and continually
explore new ways of showing it and
that's that just can never be exhausted
actually I just think it will take
different forms and I just think it's
quite interesting there's this moment
where we can look at multiple scales and
relate them immediately know they belong
to the same thing and that's partly
because of your exquisite ability to
construct that argument which is
unbelievably persuasive I don't really I
think in both cases it doesn't matter
whether I I've never and said I don't
mind whether I believe it or not believe
it or agree or disagree I am prepared to
see the world through your eyes and
that's it's a fair
very powerful thing to be able to do and
not to misuse it I suppose that is the
real trick not that I'm suggesting you
would at all but I think it is it is a
very powerful thing to be able to do and
to make those connections so I would I
would just encourage you to do it more
and also to present it to people you are
not like us we will just say we think
you're wonderful and and actually to
really be brave and present it to people
who might not get it straight away
I know particularly in the context of
your unit Josh that you're talking to
politicians and all sorts of different
disciplines and and coming at the same
sorts of questions in quite different
ways so I think it's very very important
that you stay at that table of people
and bring that question
I yeah I to follow from what Samantha's
saying I think you've highlighted things
and you've opened my idea did the last
few presentations were really
eye-opening and I've had this kind of as
the afternoons gone on I don't know if
it's just me simplifying things but I
feel like in the first two presentations
there was something about delight and
wonder and you know I was you know kind
of excited and the second part was about
something a bit more fragile and now I'm
just super worried and and actually I
feel like I can see how beauty can be
all these different things I it can when
it chips into access it's something
really concerning and so yeah I don't
thank you for giving me that you know
I'm looking I find these quite difficult
to talk about what we're actually
looking here is politics in visual form
Tony I thought it was a really
interesting topic to have peeked because
you can apply that your same way of
thinking to many many different
instances but I mean it there's no
question with the Trump Tower it's just
you know money means power so take a
look at this mate
you know it's that that's that's
basically it's a statement isn't it and
we all know what it is but it's quite
interesting that you've now taken that
statement and tore it into pieces and
then put it back together again and we
can actually see what it is I think
Hillary Clinton ought to see that it is
really interesting just I think you're
just almost too much to take in then
then the only thing I think is really is
really nice it's a sort of historical
connection and then you can see what's
happening and and
the hidden politics behind what's what's
being seen here but perhaps there is
some hope I don't see any hope in front
of Trump now what I'm saying but I'd
like the idea that you can do it you can
do more by using outposts for good but I
have to say there's one it was one bit
of knowledge which I was very worried
about which is the the First Nations in
Canada which I know a bit about who are
forgotten struggling not helped suicidal
have very poor environments so what we
need to do is to link the great linking
up of climate change hopefulness if you
like with actually doing good for people
again and their environments so that
would be for me that would make it come
full circle if you can actually do good
things I like the idea of students
taking out of the world and wanting to
do good stuff City so from that
perspective I really like it but I think
you've got to deal with current
situations as well as hidden situations
and there's lots of hidden politics in
that and I found it quite disturbing
actually I'm gonna be thinking about
that for a bit thank you try to be short
everybody is getting tired but
absolutely fascinating boggs
presentations and I just I'm just going
to add what you said about Trump that he
is not going to be permanent that is a
temporary situation his Trump Tower his
apartment is going to disappear so it
doesn't for you well it is what he
actually votes to achieve and what is
after like all the dictators and kings
and everybody else they are about
permanence and about you know gold being
a symbol of permanent everlasting
material
of everlasting quality this is fight
associated with society and internal
life so as yet almost dictators for
discussion school whoever it is or blow
into settings 44 teams they always only
to copulate vermin and so when I sing at
Columbus and Oliver Anthony
next brought America some a used
material just a purely as a functional
material because it lasts it doesn't
corrode and so on and here I think it
it's transferred again into his
absolutely ridiculous you know sign of
powers and of money signed of I can
afford it
the difference between you know what you
are showing using I don't know
Renaissance Baroque in the historic and
time it was done and used by the artist
so is that beauty which from completely
totally misunderstands because he having
godless mental intellectual power to mmm
appreciate what he's doing so he's just
of surrounding himself this material and
you know there's something about the
dream of most people because I know
Burger King this sometimes but it was
people it is always interesting to see
how they you know want to introduce the
dream which somehow is associated this
they use and the aim in a life that
somebody some somehow when they achieve
what they sing they made it in life so
suddenly they just have to achieve the
dream was so I think my first climb when
we did the first but for him he came to
me and he said to me he wanted the
bathroom in pilato marble and I could
not understand where it comes from
because he came from Casablanca
he they lived in a very small flat
somewhere in the middle of the city and
his school friend
in a pretty building ballet have a
bathroom in Pallotta marble so in the
same thing you know from who wants to
introduce the dream of his life you know
so the permanence the richness money so
he just dough has this around
regardless you know but it's the quality
which is absolutely cinema dear but then
I seen that going on too and the second
project I sing it and I was this mean
just text opposition which I sing at in
a very I sing at connect nerves two
stories the power of the education power
of people scientists people the power of
schools power of Education and the
picture which you showed is the church
and people are actually sinking inside a
church and now looking out and lost
outposts and the question I mean your
example of our conscience is the other
way around taking this intellectual
power bring it outside and looking in
and I found that idea in a really
fascinating because I think in the
distance of being able to actually see
what is happening and putting it in
ensemble in a complete isolation and
looking from the outside in as opposed
to looking from the inside out and
struggling in that little yet I mean
across the river or all the other images
of people fighting for the territory so
in a way it is two stories which they
just go to the same point how terribly
dangerous it is falling for the power of
money power of God and use something
which is a pretty basic useful function
material doesn't
just to hold the other people in
impression thank you very much that's um
I actually had one thing I wanted to add
that I saw as a parallel between your
projects which was the idea of context
and I think it worked in the kind of
opposite ways in each so you found that
photograph and then I really loved that
when you staged it as an exhibition you
kind of unpacked all the context of all
the objects in that room and the
significance of them and then how when
brought together they create a different
type of composition and then for you
Josh I mean I selected your projects I
saw that object on the wall at the end
of last year and I'd always wanted to
know more about what it was about and I
actually think it maybe if you'd flipped
your presentation so you started with
the object and use that to kind of tell
us a very complicated story of all the
forces economic political and kind of
got this global scale that led you to
create that object I think that would
have been fascinating as well because I
think that's such a it's such a weird
and wonderful thing in a way but I
thought for both of you that helped me
answer kind of what Samantha's question
was which is what what is the role of
the architect and it's sometimes in the
very complicated world to use your
knowledge and ability to draw these
disparate things together and give them
meaning and I felt like both projects
are trying to take on really complex
situations and help us understand the
context they sit within so that's why I
really enjoyed both of the presentations
anyway we're coming to the close of this
session but I wanted to get all of the
presenters up at the front of the room
in case anyone in the audience had any
questions for you
maybe one down
it is hide really cool does anyone have
any questions about any of the
presentations I don't know if this is
relevant and but I didn't study here and
I wondered how it's amazing to see sort
of I selected for you throughout the
school and I wondered as a school how do
you share information between the years
and are there opportunities to pair up
or to work together or yeah how do you
how do you share that within the sort of
scale of the architectural education
here
sorry
well I also just want to thank all of
you for presenting and I guess I wanted
to ask you a final question because
obviously I made you all frame your
projects in the context of beauty and
and I picked them I think in response to
your question like having just seen them
and passing over the past year and being
intrigued by how they were framed or
what ideas fed into them and I was just
curious I think some of you it was a
factor when you were working on the
project but with others I was wondering
like what was the experience like to
have to think of it through that lens is
[Music]
that difficult I mean it is it easy just
to repackage your project given give it
a title and then you can all make it
I'll make the beauty version that's a
skill what did you have any answer I
guess for me it was less about
go I thought of this seems as like
elegant they expect
I think that's how it was how its framed
and I started chewing
no I just said for me a lot of this
project was about aesthetics and kind of
different conception of what is what is
aesthetic to different kind of and how
representation can then transfer this
and transmit this idea and create
reality so from aesthetic aspirations to
beauty it was a leap which was quite
natural so probably wouldn't be able to
fit it into everything it weren't for me
to be on to be honest it was more of an
ugliness I mean I wanted it to be as
ugly as possible especially because also
I didn't have any budget to put on this
exhibition
so I basically tried instead of painting
the wall called painting the walls in
gold I'd rather to use a foil that costs
one pound and actually makes it even
uglier than it was to begin with
and I think it just suited it perfectly
also in terms of whether it's beautiful
or not or ugly or not or whether it does
even matter if it is I think in my case
for my project which it was actually the
aim of the project he was trying to find
a way to redefine it so I didn't really
have to reshape it or anything because
it was actually the topic and it was the
negative conclusion of what I was trying
to do during my third year project
well I just wanted to say thank you so
much to all six of you and to our six
jurors for taking the time and also
taking on the challenge of trying to
understand a year's worth of work in a
ten minute presentation which isn't
always easy
and yeah just I I think open juries are
a terrific format that they uses to
generate conversation and create links
across different parts of the school and
very different projects and I think part
of today was to show how many different
ways you can view beauty in so many
different projects I mean there's like I
guess six hundred and ninety other ones
in the rest of in this building so this
is just a snapshot but thank you all
