good evening I don't usually introduce
people from the intellection so I'm not
so sure how well I can do that I'm very
privileged to have this opportunity to
introduce old friend of mine with from
the AAA I just wonder what's the most
efficient way we introduce but by the
way also maybe as the same way as either
PETA or me or managers here it's about
product of the educational school and I
think every time I see someone who carry
the air of that time we studied and I
cross the associate and I think my
knowledge I think runner is kind of
sharing similar air we shared in the
school attitude as well
she finally graduate diploma project is
about Beirut where she come from and is
about city about the installation is
about urban transformation and I think
from that graduate project then she
moved on continue what viscosity and
grown together the city I find it's very
very encouraging and that spirit I
really very much shared I'm sure Peter
will join that too so I think the runner
had a few different way of approaching
the architecture joins other educator
currently she teaches in American
University in Beirut working with public
art as a form it's a teaching Harbin
context encouraging students to actually
facing certain conflict or certain
condition recipe particularly working
with Syrian refugees and social context
which is quite amazing developments
through the past how many years quite a
long time
six other practice reform 200 grams yeah
I was asking run about the words that
come from which is actually 200 grams
it's 1970s before Arvind conflict start
which kind of a marketplace sharings
textile in the center Beirut so in order
to exchange or promote she started this
design company which is very to do with
the appropriate some ready-made object
by touch of some tactile or working this
kind of craftsmanship so in the way
that's kind of whether 200grams come
from they don't sell their work by grams
I think those kind of spirits of
thoughts or kind of a platform in which
exchanged some ideas through materials
which actually quite amazing collections
of it too
so I think maybe Rana after finish the
school 1996 she moved back to Beirut and
taught in French Arabic universe
University yeah and then move on to the
2000 start teaching American University
and from 2013 she decided to focus on
teaching position which are currently
fruit I'm an assistant professor from
2013 during all those periods she did
worldwide installation all those cities
as well as teaching position in
different university across Europe and
New Zealand
suppose I just have sorting edges
paragraph I find is quite nice
we grew up in the city that taught us to
live a day at a time and appreciate its
value our products are made in same
manner to allow each person to bond with
every everyday piece and make part of
his or her everyday life simply so I
think that's kind of attitude I think
across her product teaching method and
actually installation she collaborate
with anyone - welcome - thank you for
the cratons introduction I'm going to
try to introduce my route through the
installation works that we've been doing
in the city
so Beirut is a schizophrenic city filled
with various narrative incorporating a
long history of conflict destruction
construction and reconstruction the 15
years of civil war from 1975 until 1990
still holds repercussions that
continuously manifests themselves in our
everyday lives the historical center
Beirut central district has been
undergoing a facelift operation to
efface all its past removing all
previous social existence on the scale
of the BCG so no signs of low-income
users are allowed with indicated
sterilized BCG limits while beyond its
boundaries
the streets are increasingly congested
with beggars as a result of the ever
increasing numbers of Syrian refugees
entering the country whether by legal or
illegal means so here you have a view a
panoramic view on Beirut from one of the
landfill the landfill was about all the
buildings that got destructed by a
leader
and they covered part of our see the
situation is complicated by the fact
that less than ever does the mere
reflection of reality reveals anything
about reality so this building is now to
become the memory of Beirut and they are
still debating how this memory is going
to look like so they restored the
building but the building is still empty
so now we move to some of the
installations so the layout of the
Beirut Beirut theater it was the
previous BMW repair pit where the in
which it was transformed in the 1960s
into the theater and where the Arabic
spoken theater plays thought to take
over the French repertoire and it was
the only experimental place where people
were allowed to say anything about the
social and political issues so in 2001
we received a phone call from the people
that were running the theater to tell us
that actually they have to close the
theater down so there wouldn't be such a
space anymore and they were asking us if
we would like to participate in the last
festival that would take place there so
we went with visited the premise and we
found that there was a chair that was
sitting there for 36 years and not
attached to the other chairs so we
decided to abduct the chair and to use
the window of that theater because it's
the only theater that has a window which
was a very narrow it was a 56 centimeter
width window and we came up with a
structure of a machine that will cut the
chair in two so what was basically
happening is that every day we will have
for one hour and a half the engine
running
chair to be correct and you will see
slowly the action the chair being cut
slowly every day and what was nice is
that you will you will see the public
standing before entering to see the
festival and we had such a big crowd
because they would say to each other
come see what's happening in the window
so suddenly we had a much bigger crowd
than the crowd that had usually come to
the theater and even the people that
used to be intimidated by that place
that always lived in the quarter nearby
would come and look and then we will
encourage them to come in and then they
could see that the theater is actually
as much for them as for anyone else and
the outcome was really very positive in
a way that we had a lot of narratives
were circulating and people were
expressing themselves about thoughts
that they've seen in this machine and in
this chair being cut in two and we were
able to have some money to do a small
publication and full coverage from the
newspaper that allowed us to actually
expand the life of that theater for an
extra 18 months which just due to this
installation and very ironically the we
had a festival called Frank a festival
that takes place in a village the they
came to us and they say we want the
exact same installation for the opening
of the festival there and we were
telling them but it doesn't fit the
context but they really insisted so we
had to find a way to go around it so the
best way was for us to refer to both RIA
concerning the way he was looking at
things lately and we chose to bring the
whole machine to have it in
space and to have it with a sign that
saying out of order and we fixed the
rope so no one can plug it in and our
public was the piggy bank
Mickey Marx looking and watching at this
machine and of course we were
distributing the Flyers to to the people
like we distributed some flyers by by
the sea by the day out of the bay hood
telling the stories of the theatre the
second project is the one of where we
used the tray so this is a picture that
was taken for a project that was
launched by Preveza which was a Swiss
foundation that wanted to do a book that
is called territoire méditerranée so
it's about the Mediterranean territory
so we chose to make use of the book so
we said to them the book will be our
site we need to know the content and
they were saying but you wouldn't have
enough time to come up with something
and we said you have to trust us just
send us the PDF so they sent us the
whole PDF we had to read the whole book
and then we picked up on the main issue
that they were tackling which is
territoriality within that area the
conflicted area and we we chose the tray
because the Train in itself expresses
the dialectics of power between the one
offering and one receiving so here you
will see the series of image that
represent the relationship of false
equality between two parties the
absurdity of the situation in which we
find ourselves facing each other the
situation where we turn our back to each
other in a happy instead of
communicating and where we pretend to be
sharing hypocritically and finally total
absence of effort to communicate and
[Music]
we've put these pages and
in different chapters in relation to the
title of the book then we've been
invited with ProHealth Asia to do the
touring to launch the book so we went
around with them to Algeria to bear and
to I can't remember one more quick story
and back to Beirut with it here it was
in April 2001 specifically on the 18th
of April 2001 where after several
peaceful demonstrations led by Lebanese
students objecting to Syrian military
presence in Lebanon protestors gathered
at the National Museum and because they
refused to disperse when the Lebanese
army officer were trying to tell them to
disperse they were forcible measures
were undertaken by what was later
revealed to be the Syrian second Bureau
so by that time a clash and shoot and
resulting in several injuries and
imprisonment of several demonstrators so
we found we found ourselves with some of
our students in prison and that was
really very annoying so ironically the
same year the French cultural center
announced Beirut to be the cultural city
of the Francophonie so it was under
stressing on the idea of dialogue
between cultures and acceptance so in
response to such a claim we decided to
come up with a set of installation that
will express a repressed and strangled
cry and for freedom and we choose to
call it cultural dialogue and the garden
of deafness so the French Embassy was
very very angry at the title and they
said no this is very pessimistic and
they chose to omit the last two words so
it became the cultural dialogue in the
garden and of course people could tell
that it was in the garden of deafness
and we used the phonetics on purpose to
to critique and to mock the idea of
communication
so the first we did five eight different
installation but I will be showing two
of these the first one which is the
emitting ear we called it the emitting
ear while it was doing the opposite so
we came up with a huge structure as you
can see and I want to always I need to
stress that all the projects are done
with very little means so we couldn't
really have a full shape of what is
closest to in year so we had to do it in
that way so we we have we took it and we
had that you will see we had it
installed facing the French Embassy
within the premise of the of the French
Embassy there is a cafe and we had this
ear placed facing the cafe so and then
we covered it with a thick sponge and
and you if you will come and stand by
the ear you could actually if drop on
the three tables at least across the
cafe and so that was the time where the
fear of being overhead was a common
worry in our daily discourse distressed
by the possible presence of undercover
agent of the Syrian secret police at any
corner so people were really watching
every word they said while here the
purpose of our ear was clear it flashed
visibly from the entrance and made no
effort to conceal its ability to
eavesdrop referring to the
unavoidability of being overheard and
the second project that we want which we
were stressing on with the Loyola rule
is the leading daily French newspaper in
Lebanon and
in normal circumstances lo hago Joe has
a four thousand return journal a day so
we took this four thousand and we
weighed them and people were the owners
of the newspaper and the French Embassy
was definitely sure that they will be
selling more newspapers during the
events of the Francophonie and we wanted
to test that so we came up with a series
of fifteen cecil's
that would be carrying a bag of sand
that has the weight of the four thousand
and use paper with undated so we started
our experiment and day by day it became
apparent that less and less issues were
being sold as each sandbag was lifted
higher on the scale than the day before
so however we were not able to complete
the installation to the fullest of the
fifteen days because destroyed by the
obvious result the Laurel decided to
stop delivering the first half the
unsold papers for big reasons so which
made the outcome of our work even more
obvious so back to the Syrian invasion
now we have a different kind of invasion
because in 2015 the UN HCR report that
more than 45 point 1 million people were
displaced worldwide and the largest
number since 1994 Beirut is at the heart
of this global problem over 2 million
Syrian refugees currently live with in
Lebanon's border Lebanon has become the
country with the highest refugee per
capita ratio in the world
so in reaction to that we chose to do a
a set of installation but that time that
was more that was really addressing a
serious case where when all the
architects were trying to give refuge to
to the Syrians and building shelters
which was to try to empowering them by
giving them a possibility to have a job
so to get some money we have in Beirut
we have the we have a lot of people that
go on collecting waste for recycling but
they don't have the right cards so we
which we challenge our student to find
real clients in the city and to come up
with a design of cards for them for each
one of them so we did a lot of analysis
and they had to take into constraints
the city is narrow streets the various
topography and of course the mechanical
restraints so this is mahmoud one of our
clients he was really very excited that
we will be building a card for him so he
even drew his small sketches and that
was one of the cards that as you can see
can double its volume and we we went and
we gave him the card world coming and
filming the event
[Music]
this is how I'm going to earn my breath
continue all the lights I really want to
thank that what was nice is that with
that card Mahmoud was able to to have
ten times more money per day because I
was able to collect more rubbish and to
have it recycled quicker so he was able
to earn more money and he's already a
dad was for children so he was really
very grateful that he had that card we
got in contact with a lot of NGOs and
we're still hoping that we will be able
to have a mass production and to have
them circulate in the city so the main
question that we tackled during the
studio is that where does design stop
and reality take over and how can we
achieve this with an a limited amount of
time and money the whole thing was done
in 10 days and the cart itself costs two
hundred and fifty dollars and he still
sent us a picture of the cart every year
so it's really nice of him that he does
that the sift the sift is in May 2016
we've been invited to participate in New
York Design Week and the curators were
asking us to reflect on the idea of
transition and migration and since we
were going to the US we thought that we
really need to present the case of the
refugee and what it means to have two
million Syrians on a border so we chose
the sift and
we took a shift and we we put in at 2
million pins and what happened is that
once you put the pins in it part of the
pins will hang down because they they
try to cross and as you can see on the
corner it's very hard to to go across
and the number that would be lucky
enough to cross that border will be as
little as this so public space in Beirut
is something that is very very scarce
and despite the fact that we have a
stretch which is the corniche even the
corniche is is being straightened so the
corniche is a three-kilometer strip
along the seashore at place where city
dwellers come for a walk and two-on-one
nearly the last public place in Beirut
today it's a place that keeps on
avoiding to become part of the quarter
nearby where gentrification is taking
over a latent conflict of appropriation
is slowly taking place a fight with an
uncertain outcome so in 1999 Ashkelon
one organization announced a call for
ideas whereby the artists were invited
to intervene on the corniche in a
temporal or permanent way so the project
generation generated an intense public
debate on the meaning of public space in
Beirut and here for us intervening on
the corniche and injecting cultural sign
might jeopardize the ego eggwin
equalitarian play that is taking place
on site therefore reinserting the
Frances and we didn't want that at all
so we start looking at what is common on
the Cornish days and of course it was
the foot and we took the foot as our
common denominator to all passerby and
we started we started from there so we
had some wooden planks and we start
writing in Arabic on it with a yellow
powder so if there is any wind it will
just take it away so and we decided to
call it my foot in art because this is
what basically was happening and with
all the declinations so this one says
rollers in art and some others were like
madness in art so in Arabic it makes
sense because it's a declination from
the same word and again what was very
nice is that I would go since 6 o'clock
in the morning till 6:00 at night just
doing that and having people coming
around and watching and asking
especially these gentlemen here was just
standing by me and asking what are you
doing what what do you think I'm doing
and he said it's this art and I said
what do you think and then he says yes
it is that's like ok what so it is art
so he said but then why are you
insulting your work I said why and he
said because you're calling it your foot
in art isn't it an insult and I say
where are you standing now and then
suddenly they realized that there's much
not much to art if it is if they take it
in a much lighter way and they were able
to actually interact afterwards with all
the other installation that was set by
Ashkelon 1 even though our installation
created a big debate and art galleries
were not really supportive of the work
so this is how people were looking
always at
and we had all the children coming with
their bikes jumping on it and then the
skateboarders playing around
and then we came back in 2012 to that
same Cornish wondering how public is our
public space and we call the public
Beirut so here we did five different
installations along the seashore along
the Cornish questioning specifically
that publicness I will share with you
two of them the first one is called
Cornish extended so this is where our
students stumbled upon a pier that was
funded by public money but was
surprisingly off-limits to members of
the public so we started wondering and
asking around why is it the case so we
discovered that the pier was controlled
by a single religious sect that
monopolized the space so the fishermen
on sight denied public access on ground
that the pier was simply unsafe for the
public to walk on so we needed to really
convince them that we need to do a
project there so their condition was
that no one can step on the pier and we
said we will abide by that so they were
very happy no one can step on the pig so
we decided to come with rails and with a
hand car and we installed a mini
corney's as an extension on that pier
and so what happened is that now that
the mini Cornish was ready people will
even though they will look at the
restricted area sign they will trespass
that barbed wire and we had the three
steps ready for them to go on the mini
Cornish and while we take them up and
down will tell them the story so we had
all the papers signed so we can have the
Cornish for three weeks at least during
summer break but of course after one
week we've been author we've been
ordered to dismantle the Cornish our
mini :
again it was covered by newspapers and
it was covered by the TV so this is one
of the extract covered by the TV but
unlike the chair installation in the
theater this one we can I don't know if
we can say if we failed or not failed
but what happened is that after such an
installation instead of letting people
go on the pier they actually built a
wall where they used to be the barbed
wire and now people cannot access it at
all so again it says it all which is a
bit sad so all the side is now a
concrete tool
a different kind of chair so this is the
second one on the corniche so we
stumbled on a huge fit and we wanted to
do something in the pit we were hoping
that we would be able to do something
for the children but of course the
minute we approached the pit and we
tried to look through
we had some security people coming that
telling us that no cameras are allowed
and that this is a secret a security
zone so we asked where does the security
zone ends so they gave us first of all
the limits of the security zone and then
they told us that if you have to move
five meters from that line so we moved
five meters from that line and we found
ourselves on an electric pole so the
electric pole became our site so what
can we do with an electric pole so this
is where the idea of era it came about
because debating the right in our city
so the actually they were telling us
that we cannot look through the fence
and the fence is of one meter and a half
high in height so we chose to come up
with a chair that actually if there is
assembly the sensor if no one is on the
chair it will go six meter high on the
pole and if there is someone seated on
the fence on the chair the chair will
simply stop at the height of the fence
so people will come very excited put the
security everything and push the button
to go
and get disappointed so some people were
really very very frustrated and of
course we were telling them the story
why we cannot take them higher because
the the authority won't allow us to take
them higher so they would really try to
look and try to look better but they
wouldn't see anything above the fence
but then there was a car always
patrolling making sure that we don't
cheat but what we did is that we timed
for how long the car needs to come back
and some people were really very happy
even at one point five meter it we chose
to cheat we chose to cheat and to go all
the way up the six meter and I can tell
you that view from up there is really
breathtaking
so some we're lucky enough to have the
opportunity to go all the way
and again for that installation we had
to have 18 signature for one day only
they gave us or those the authority to
have the chair mounted for only one day
and this is one of the our engineer and
in the American University of Beirut
that when we went to consult him about
the project he told us that it needs two
months to be built and at least $10,000
so we had it built in seven days with
three hundred and ninety five dollars so
when he came we only gave him a right of
one meter and a half but he was very
proud of us and as you can see October 7
2012 the chair was still enjoying its
air right so they didn't ask us to
dismantle it they just asked us to turn
off the engine and to take the engine
off this is the absurdity of our city so
a refuge for all out of mind it was the
title of our contribution to a call for
ideas that was launched in June 2005 by
the Domus magazine the issue was what
could be done for the completion and
functional redefinition of the building
of the jung-hyun hotel at Pyongyang the
capital of North Korea so the hotel is a
330 meter height pyramid whose
construction began in 1987 as was
interrupted as a roughcast stage so we
chose to pick up on Samuel Beckett's
poem a refuge for all out of mind and on
the historical fact that the famine that
started in North Korea and that took the
life of an estimated two million people
so we our proposition was a 300 meter
long copper Gong suspended from the top
of the elevator shaft all the way down
the building and the staircase was
therefore going around
the gong has one of its face covered
with two million edges while the other
side is was plain white thus
commemorating also the Oblivion of this
event so when one hits the gong all the
people's soul would be stirred and the
gong hanging from the top down expressed
the relationship between heaven and
earth
our entry to that competition will get
selected and it was exhibited in New
York than in Milan now back to Beirut
and Italy a public space a place of
action is again a curated work from
Italian curators where there are some
Lebanese and Italian artists too to have
two installations one in village called
the fishery in Beirut in Lebanon and
another one rocket lorry OSA in Italy
and their statement was about how by
means of public installation art can aim
to raise awareness among citizens and
especially young people in smaller
places towards the conservation
repossession and the wise use of public
spaces in favour of a sustainable
culture and economic development so
we'll go to these places for only one
week so we had two we two days to choose
what we want to do in the in the village
and three days to actually come up with
the work and here in in Bashara which
was to call the installation between
heaven and earth so we discovered that
there is this huge land land of six
acres that is really in the village and
that is that is that overlooks the
a Sacred Valley that and and we were
will we aimed to actually fill that
space so people can see it at a distance
and at the same time use the wind
because the wind over there is really
amazing as a field so we chose to plant
363 stick of four meters each to which
we've attached a small strip of white
fabric and we had all the all the
children of the village coming and
helping us out and we were able to cover
the whole surface in only three days
where we were working on till 1:00 a.m.
every night but we were able to cover
the whole site and all the village
around Bashara were able to see the
installation and people were curious to
come over and to see it and what was
nice is that after that installation the
year after the Boy Scouts decided to
repeat the installation again and the
people of the village start making use
of that place so they're going for
picnics they're going even for weddings
and and some activities with the with
the Scouts are taking place now on this
land so somehow we can say that it it
was a success
well in raqqa clorium we after 12 hours
of traveling we stumbled on the san
giovanni nice procession it was the same
night of our arrival so every household
will come will put out their table with
with a tablecloth on it to put on it the
Virgin Mary statue with San Giovanni
needs to be blessed by the procession so
we really had in mind to collect objects
from people but we never thought that we
would be ending up collecting tables
with their tablecloths
so the first thing that we had to do is
to go through the people and to ask them
to give us their table to trust us
enough to give us the table without our
standing them what we intend to do with
it and the site that we chose is the
castle which is the the castle that was
birthed to define the limits of the
Africa gloriosa and again it was done
with very little means so we had to come
up with a way of attaching them and we
had a very small ladder so it was quite
a dangerous way to go about it
and what was nice is that when people
came to see what happened to their
tables and so the power first of all
they were surprised secondly they were
all arguing why my table isn't it on top
no but again it's it it really created a
debate and it got people to come back to
the castle which is which was a place
where no one would go anymore and they
came in a very friendly way bringing
food and we had quite a banquet by by
the side
so this is the vertical procession not
naturally perfectly which is it's a
again we were invited by him wash it WA
which means my place your place another
curated installation where we had to do
we were French and Lebanese artists we
had to do an installation in Beirut and
another one in France I would only share
with you the one that we did in France
so here when you arrive to the valve oh
hey you will you definitely the first
thing you see is that the limit is very
well defined
and it's where the algerian settlement
in france are so these people are very
frustrated and they really are near and
neither algerian nor french because the
french are not allowing them to be
French
so we after meeting with them and
talking with them we wrote a text and as
you can see on these papers it's either
we printed a full text or we printed
some words where we left them and where
they are in the text on the paper on
purpose and we were able to have a 91
different declination that would address
91 different cases we were able to stick
on 16 and a half metre long table 51
texts and we had a banquet of words and
we invited the people from the
settlement and from the French side to
come to the banquet and
again one of the encounters was that the
so this is the table before the opening
this lady this Algerian lady came and
read one of the texts and obviously it
wasn't the right one so she got really
angry she had fallen pack of books in
her hand that she threw on the floor and
she started yelling it was like who are
you to write such texts who do you think
you are to tell me where I am because we
called it was at ICI which means you are
here and we were saying but it is not if
please go around perhaps this is not the
right text for you so she went around
and then she found her text and this is
where she was ah yes this is more like
it so again it was a way to generate a
conversation because the some people
were really they didn't expect that
someone will be so affected by what what
was written and some conversation took
place and we could feel that people when
they talk things works better instead of
all the wars that they've been building
between each other
now it's last year in actually 2016 I
chose to do a project that investigates
the noise pollution in Beirut so here
again we did five different installation
I will be sharing some three of them
with you so the first one we called it
radio silence which was in her shui
route heart Beirut was a pine tree
forest so what was left of that forest
in Beirut and it was bombarded in 1982
and was totally burned so the horse was
totally closed to the public
until 2016 when they decided to open it
but with the fence separating the two
sides of the
of the harsh and we discovered that that
fence is of a sectarian segregation and
part of the playground was behind the
fence while the from the other side the
children from the other side were
deprived from the playground so we chose
to bring the syste which is usually a
common a common object that you will
find in a in a public garden and to have
it on the gate by the by the lock and by
doing so the children from both sides
will start to call each other so they
can actually play on the seesaw and when
the children you know it's the best way
because children know nothing of
segregation and then it will get people
to talk together so this big fence
suddenly could disappear due to that
seesaw and that is what was supposed to
stay in the garden but of course after
two weeks we had a phone call again that
says you have to come and dismantle the
season so unfortunately we had to
dismantle the seesaw but what was nice
is that we could see the children even
jumping the fence the limits were really
became invisible and here on the lighter
note we were addressing the role of an
urban tree so what is and what is the
role of an urban tree in relation to
silence and a buffer area so the urban
tree doesn't the urban tree cannot
fulfill its full potential because it
when it is trimmed it cannot work in a
way that it's supposed to work so here
is a plaza near a center called ravine
or that we have in the midst of a very
crowded and very noisy area that is
surrounded with a set of trees but these
trees they get to be trimmed by the
municipality even though we asked them
not to trim them for our installation
they ignored our request and they chose
to trim the tree so we had in mind
an installation per tree but once when
we came and we saw that they trimmed the
tree we realized that it was only the
in-between that did not endure such cuts
so it shows within ten days to change
the whole set and to have the
installation in between the two trees
where people can go up and be immersed
in the greens and have some silent time
in the middle of the city
so this is where we're trying some
models the actual one-to-one
and we had a run that takes people all
the way up to the tree where they can
sit and flip and be immersed with the
paper with the leaves and what was nice
is that on this platter
every Wednesday there is a market and
people in the market would make use of
that run they will buy their food and go
up eat there their food there and come
down again inest
Tom how listen to observe is a more
serious matter let's say it's it's about
a noisy bridge and that is very
uncomfortable because that bridge
crosses the highway without really
giving the adequate access to the
pedestrian to reach the bus stop that is
fundamental for getting around the city
so our students were trying to see how
they can help the community so everyone
start to complain and to say that they
cannot they don't have the staircase to
go down and and that this high this
bridge is useless at the same time it's
a very very noisy bridge so of course we
couldn't we couldn't really go by
building a staircase for them but the
student chose to try to have a kind of
an awareness for these people so how by
introducing 22 different boxes all over
the bridge and by the on the benches
around the bridge where they can have
their head in the box
for two to three minutes that where the
sound is nearly cut in half
so that's noisy and where they have a
phrase that they can reflect on so some
of the phrases would read there is hope
other phrases would read there is no
escape and some of them would read your
voice can be heard and more of these but
at the same time in some of the boxes
you will have a mirror that reflects the
sky others that reflects a specific
point on the pavement where there was
something to to be read and everyone was
sure that no one will put his head in a
box and we were so surprised to see that
nearly everyone on the bridge wanted to
have his box his head in a box so they
all looked like ostrich for a while
hiding from the reality of the bridge
and reflecting on it what was nice is
that we were sure that with the Pendle
ISM the boxes will be totally destroyed
but it took them two months and a half
to disappear which i think is great for
a city like me
so for us the war is not over because we
if I just treat the phrase that is on
the poster a bird that has lost its
feathers can no longer say it through
the skies and a person who has lost her
memories can no longer find her way
through the world she once called home
but still I keep my face and this is
signed by an idiot spanner and we
thought that this really is how we feel
about where roots nowadays because we
are gasping constantly we try and we
gasp so that was a project that we did
with Beirut Art Center which is so we
refuse to be in the center which was to
be on a parking lot on purpose because
on that parking lot used to be a
building from the 50s a very nice
modernist building that shouldn't have
been put down and which now is already a
site for skyscraper to be and so we live
in a country where we have over than two
million Syrian refugees on our borders
while we are 4.5 million Lebanese only
where our streets are flooded by bags of
garbage since August where its histories
been erased slowly but surely and where
the electricity is very seldom and where
our politicians inherit their position
from a family member to another
so we're gasping and well by putting
these two machines which I mean the
absurdity of the dimension of the
machine in relation to the feather
dusters while they go up and they start
vibrating so you've seen out
woman very subtle movement and what was
nice is that this lady came across and
she doesn't know that I was filming her
and she start interacting with the
installation
and to sum it all on the same wavelength
is you know in 1992 when solid air start
to started to destroy all the buildings
and the city and to to change the look
of of Beirut and erasing all the
memories we are finding that the solid
airs effect is reaching out now to the
other part of the city which is the
daily which is one of our last open
access shared space in Beirut the last
free entry point to the sea along the
seat in the city calls so it is just
after the carnage that I showed you
before the daily is unique landscape and
ecological features or our the most
favourite hangout place for families and
fishermen and the fishermen settlement
used to be where you see the destruction
over there because they are pushing them
to leave the area by moving the Accra
pods and daily is threatened and a
subject of dubious and corrupt
privatization its future is uncertain
the image of renderings of luxury resort
overlooking overlooking this sea are
already in circulation so we're trying
with the daily campaign and save Beirut
heritage to try to put a stop to the
project and in May 2017 they invited
people to participate in the event and
to try to save it so we we tried to just
say how we feel about being washed away
and about again
finding ourselves in this recurrent
circle of destruction and privatization
with a very simple gesture
and what was really very nice is that we
really needed to say a world people just
understood it with it with all its
absurdity we just understood what we
meant by it and hearin want to thank you
by finishing with this amazing phrase
that Peter sawara shared with me and I
owe him so much and I owe the a a so
much so thank you very much for having
me
I mean me thank you for sharing 20 years
every sort of partially raised projects
in a sense I mean every single one has
been interrupted I'll leave you to
decide whether they're good but there
was a an emerging sense that success was
the for you and I think I get a sense
when regardless of the project itself in
its particular formality
the shift is in the populace afterwards
to change to to push into public being
public together in spaces where they
would otherwise be discouraged yeah put
that piece yes there are there are two
things about it the first thing is to
engage to people so they would know
about their rights and what is missing
and to by just giving them such an
awareness they were they are reacting
differently and the the minute the
installation disappears and this is
where it's marvelous the people keep it
in mind much better than if it was
around and this is where I would like to
cite michel de certeau and he says
whenever the the maps disappears the
discourse cuts through so it it is the
bridging and this is where every
installation is about having to create
and to to have a conversation with the
people and to make sure that the
narrative stays and even if it's
the installation is temporary the effect
of it stays with the people so for how
long
who knows what to charge a mile at a
residual question language seems quite
key in the formation of a project or and
and others and I'm sort of struggling in
my head in that the language is seen in
the X in the various pieces are either
Arabic or French or English is there do
you find a particular language is more
important for a particular site in a
particular project or repairing yeah
languages is that part at the site they
say yes of course whenever we go public
and we are on site we have to have
Arabic we have it as because not
everyone nowadays in Lebanon can speak
another language before it was it was
nearly everyone that could speak for
sure French because we came from a
French mandate and English because the
trend after the war turns into more
international language which is English
but Arabic is always on all projects
then the choice of French Open or
English as a second language is very
much related to sight so when we were in
the theatre the way hood and we were
collecting all the stories from the area
a lot of them came in French because it
was very heavily loaded with French
repertoire and when we did our
publication everything that what came to
us in French was kept with a state in
French and everything that was given to
us in Arabic state in Arabic on purpose
to reflect what our
what we are about because this is our
culture whether we like that or we don't
and so yes it is related it is actually
hated anyone yeah in the instruction
Shin mentioned that the ingredients for
your diploma project are still very much
the ones that you're working with today
in terms of the context you're working
with in but also the the tools you're
using but also the conversations you're
trying to have about the city and I was
wondering if you could talk a bit about
your project and kind of how that set
you up for our kind of the 20 years but
I followed yeah I can very briefly Tim
remember is that I think I I did my
diploma with with Rome and we got to a
point where I needed to act because it
was about Beirut and it was about the
city so this is where it was very
important to explain him to any tutor at
the a why it was important to to go all
the way when when when we were start
seeing the city's being raised and not
taking into consideration the memories
and and and how important this is for a
continuation in the city so I've been
asked to actually go see all the tutors
and I've seen 12 tutors for six weeks
and every tutor would see that there's a
lot of potential in the work but that
they could not help me so I turned to
Tim and Tim was very supportive and he
encouraged me to go independent and I
went independent but to make sure that
my jury would be okay I did my first
installation in the basement where I had
all my drawings on the floor and asked
all the tutors to step on it and by the
end of the room I sat on a table and I
had two books and I did what I just did
for you today
I I was reading the story of very slow
model of a book that would transform
into three-dimensional shapes and how
this started in my room and finished in
the city with all the memory of the city
and yeah so this is how installation
started the need of finding a way to
share for everyone to be able to follow
and to grasp the intensity of the city
was the only way for me to do that I'm
really glad I asked a question because I
think that's actually really fascinating
also in how your final project as a
student can set you up for a kind of
very different type of career in
architecture that's kind of creating
these platforms for conversation through
objects and installations within the
city and I quite like the fact that it
couldn't be tutored by any one person or
situated within any one unit it was kind
of an independent project a lot of
choices because I've seen all the tutors
and no one one could really help so I
had to write the letter asking to go
independent it cost me an honor title
because they told me that I cannot have
done I cannot be on an honor list if I
am independent but it's okay even if I
deserve it I won't have it and such a
nice thing to see everything you've done
since then continuity as Peter said of a
battle my goodness I mean
I kind of thing do you ever feel like
going somewhere else or I mean you you
you you're in the front line and and
seem to have been in the front line
ever since you returned do you feel more
optimistic we'll miss a mistake you know
ya know with everything that's happening
now you know yeah
it's it's getting harder to tell you the
truth thing it's getting much harder the
the I think I'm optimistic by Nature
so I always want to see the right bright
side of things but lately it's becoming
very very hard to find that well this
year in 2018 again I'm set for a new set
of installations and I really have to be
careful this year so um I don't know
what the city is hiding for us are you
getting some fuel support from
University it depends and some some
places no in some places yes and what
because we are in a university framework
I have to be very careful and make sure
that we have all the papers needed so
sometimes we have to apply for 18
different signatures sometimes we have
to to the last minute we don't know if
we will be able to install and have to
work done or not this is why a lot of
the work you could see are done in
between 24 to 72 hours where we have
overnights because we don't have a paper
and we could we wouldn't dare to go on
the street if you don't have that paper
and despite that we had some quite I
mean and we were in such serious
situation where I was going to go to
jail and where some of my students was
going to go to jail and we really have
to get a lawyer and make sure that this
won't happen when you say we as a young
the students are our students but me and
my colleagues sometimes I do some
installation with the Pascal Hashem that
probably you read his name on some of
the posters or sometimes I did an
installation with bahar Boutrous oh dear
these are some of my colleagues that
wanted to be part of the work so yes
it's always a we because I can never do
it alone anyway
ya know the weed of the we had had
momentum in defense innocent different
tweeze different we yeah extraordinary
as I say it throat any battle that year
where you're fighting I remember you
asked me I mean you asked me to come to
talk in Beirut and it was just to the
point where I think there was a little
bit of trouble what was always a little
bit of trouble for there was a little
bit of a flare-up between there and
Israel and I feel quite cowardly saying
no but as I said no because I was sort
of thinking oh you know don't want to go
into a situation with that level of
tension and I've thought about it since
in terms of you going back there knows I
always thought it was it was some like
courageous thing to you know you were
dead you
we were absolutely clear that that was
your mission I still believe that Beirut
made me if it wasn't for for I mean I
grew up during the war fair the effect
of the war got me to do that it's a
reaction it's a kind of a resistance
yeah yeah absolutely I mean I remember
it when you were doing the project
that's the extraordinary sense of as
you've talked about tonight as history
being this wonderful history I mean you
always describe the soul of this history
and then what it meant and I always
wanted to come and see that but now I
will tell you wait a bit but then you
can I know I wouldn't dare to say to
anyone to come now but yes the moment
was is that the side a moment yes yeah
thank you thank you
[Music]
probably not really amazing work I'm
also a Lebanese student at the a and I
did the visiting schools Shin this this
summer and I wanted to ask you there's
this idea of the erasure of memory in in
the history that you're somehow trying
to always represent or provoke or do you
think in terms of like I don't know like
the the national problem of like writing
it down or people to actually do you
think your installation can also have a
larger message of how to engrave or like
reproduce memory
erased memory you know and it's it's
always ongoing so I never really had the
time to stop and reflect on it but
probably if I am it might be the case
but again as I was saying we are a
production of our city and our city is
somehow too quick and too intense so
whenever we move forward I've put this
project behind me so if one day I'll get
the opportunity for a publication then
perhaps this put together might be what
you're suggesting but for the time being
again seeing it as a punctual things
that is erased
yeah it's waiting for another thing to
come and they are always in the here and
now in what's really happening
moment over there happening thank you
for the suggestion yes hello I am Rosa
and I am currently working with my
friend here at Caesarea we are working
on a duo exhibition for next March and
well I was talking with her about better
because she's doing a project about the
room she was keep on mentioning about
the boundaries and barriers how it how
it how it contains the social political
narrative especially suppressed or
limited in historical way and even
though I never been there I could really
immerse because it is the same thing
happening my my city in my country and I
believe it's the same for all nations
and regarding that I wanted to ask you
what because you have mentioned that
your main sights of your work is better
I wanted to ask what boundary means for
you in Beirut it might be a broad
question but it will be interesting to
hear what kind of aspect you want to
concentrate or have concentrated of
boundaries in Beirut actually every
project is addressing that kind of a
boundary or a kind of a threshold but I
personally don't see any wandering I
refused to see boundaries because I
still believe that we exist very well
without it it's something that's been
inflicted on us but if you look at
people if you see how they react it
tells you with it they are not about
boundaries the boundaries is something
that is imposed on them so my opinion is
that there are no boundary ones you just
have to me always work to erase whatever
boundaries that get to be imposed on us
and I think that goes for every city
this is where we need to do the work and
not wait for anyone to do that for us
it's our right as citizens it isn't of
the world you are welcome for a nice
help for your next installation sorry
huh
you will take any student from the a
they want a help
you're all welcome Peter you're the
first I love it
so I think it even to me it's really I
thought I I know how walk but it's
actually put into this context it's
quite quite inspiring or maybe
encouraging I must say just one things I
thought when you said titles don't take
it seriously I don't think I'm just
thinking because and run are telling me
that wow it's actually she was given
officially the title activist given by a
city ok route so then I just thought
maybe activist is the provocation at the
same time having sense of humor it's a
very very important
then my tutor da used to tell me that
well one things you cannot teach it's a
sense of humor and irony then I think
you are very brilliant teacher and also
I think we should take it very seriously
about attitude and work and what kind of
city aspect she reflects through series
of blocks oh thank you very much thank
you
you
[Applause]
