okay good evening first I would like to
introduce myself my name is Shireen and
I'm a fifth year student at the AAA and
tonight I'm very pleased to welcome here
with us Ben accordion who came from
Lebanon to share his very particular and
rural approach to the extreme conditions
of the Lebanese territory and its urban
environment so the Hanna has completed
his architectural studies at Rhode
Island School of Design after which he
acquired his master's from Jessie
Harvard he started an independent
practice in 1993 when he came back to a
war-torn Beirut and took a radical stand
against the government's vision for the
reconstruction of the city which
entailed erasing the collective memory
by implementing a devastating tabula
rasa condition so over the past 15 years
his office has developed an
international reputation and a
significant diverse portfolio of
projects both locally and abroad so his
work recognizes the precarious
conditions of the Lebanese territory and
deals with the notion of history by
engaging with the grounds in a very
sensitive and poetic way the Henault
also advocates for the engagement of
local crafts of the artisans role in the
built environment and he takes an anti
denial posture towards the context by
acknowledging its difficulties and
engaging in an architectural dialogue
I'm very pleased to have been ah here
tonight so we can start a conversation
that treats the discourse of
architectural concept and realization
with an extreme na with an extremely
precarious context caused by
socio-political stresses and tensions in
Lebanon and explore the possibilities
this confrontation creates to evaluate
the contemporary ways in which these
types of toxic territories are treated
which obviously in recent years have
proliferated around the world and how
they can contribute to the Disciplinary
formal in this course of architecture so
I'm going to leave the floor to Verna
and we will end the session with a
series of questions so please join me in
welcoming behalf thank you very much for
the introduction I think you've said it
all so maybe we can end it here but
don't stick now the title of this
lecture is in order of appearance now
this is gonna be this is the first time
I'm here so this is gonna be an
introduction I'm gonna try to tell you
the story of my life in an hour or so
which is not easy and in order of
appearance is the title of the last
chapter of a book published about three
years ago the book is entitled local
heroes why local heroes because well as
an architect obviously work with a very
grounded discipline so you're you're an
architect from Italy you're an architect
from France you're not here from
Netherlands from India from China and
even if you end up doing things beyond
your geographical territory
you're still the Indian architect who
builds in Dubai or the German architect
who builds in France and so on and so
forth were very much grounded probably
more than most other creative
disciplines so the issue of territory is
very important where we come from is
very important and each of context also
is very particular and very very strange
in our in our practice so local heroes
is a book that that takes you through
basically 18 encounters with 18 actors
who were behind projects were very
crucial in the making of the situations
that made the projects possible it is
also a very particular approach to
context some we've seen in the last few
decades we've seen some of our
grandmasters of our disciplines bring
forward the practices
that have proliferated in terms of
dealing with context so there's this
term that keeps on coming research
research research whereby the master
comes with with an army of students from
GSD or another big school and they study
a territory and they publish a very
thick book four five six seven eight
hundred pages with a lot of very cute
graphic a lot of graphic information in
it sometimes papers of experts of that
territory and they try to come up with
consensual definitions of a territory
definitions that try to be objective I
met war with those people I met work
with those people and I've kind of given
up in trying to define my territories in
any sort of conceptual terms I'm also
not very good friends with with theory
because I think he reproduces consensual
definitions theory has a tendency to
produce sort of very flat definitions
particularly when it comes to defining a
territory so I don't like this I like
exceptions I like exceptions that
contradict those definitions I like
everything that doesn't fall in that
very flat in those very flat consensual
definitions that's why I think the
characters are very important because
they're made of different cloth there
are sometimes pirates they're bankers
they are real estate developers they're
good they're bad so these people I think
are the beginning of context for me and
I'm gonna go through a few of these
characters the first one being where I
started is the entertainer the
entertainer being my senior of a few
years
I owe him very little I know about music
my relationship with him starts to
become interesting at some point in the
mid late 80s through very interesting
parties we held in his small studios his
small studio where he have parties that
he called the musical therapy sessions
and the musical therapy sessions we were
not allowed to speak but only listen to
music drink booze and abuse
illegal substances but I was great and
then at some point years later he
decided to take his his thing public and
I built his club and this was in the mid
in the late 90s 1997 1998 at which point
Beirut had a very lame nightlife I think
produced a lot of garbage and I was part
of that see not the pole dancer but me
here I was I had long hair and ten kilos
less than today so we decided to build
this club and we looked for cheap land
obviously we couldn't buy a piece of
land we had to rent a piece of land so
we went to a broker and it turns out
this broker had quite a colorful and
problematic past the broker was well he
took us to an area called the quarantine
the Cantina near the port of Beirut's
which is also very problematic as it was
burned down to the ground in 1976 and we
obviously don't talk about these past
events this this our our recent past is
something we have kind of developed in a
museum against so so when you took me to
the quarantine I'll never forget our
first trip to the quarantine this man
tells me I know the quarantine like the
palm of my hands I've cleaned it up in
1976 it turns out this man was one of
the people responsible for cleaning up
or burning down to quarantine down to
the grounds of the camps the refugee
camps back then so the broker takes us
to the landowner who turns out to be
also quite a colorful character who at
this point was in Brazil because he
couldn't come back to Beirut turns out
this man was the nephew of the general
or the leader of the Lebanese army of
the south the southern Lebanese army who
collaborated with the enemy in the so
called
security zone in south of Lebanon that
was invaded by Israel so this is this is
the general mood that brought me to my
site my first site on which
I built a project the quarantine that
you see are in there did you see here an
aerial view now there's something very
strange in this picture which dates back
I think from the late 90s what you see
on this side on the lower side of the
picture is is a very dense fabric and
then on the other on the upper side of
the of the of the of the picture is a
very scarce fabric and that's very
strange because the upper side of the
picture is the literal side usually our
cities in the Mediterranean they grew
from the coast and inland here it's
exactly the opposite and so there's
something very clear and already in the
fabric of the quarantine there's a very
obvious scar and you can see that this
ground is very problematic as until the
state the quarantine is still doomed the
city as it expanded northbound and it is
sprawled northbound it bypassed the
quarantine so if you look at the picture
of Beirut at the Google Earth image of
Beirut you will see that Beirut sprawled
continuously until the next coastal town
about 20 kilometers north but it
bypassed the quarantine and the
quarantine to the state there's mainly
nothing except well the garbage
processing company the slaughterhouse
and and the tanneries those are the
three big operations at quarantine so it
stinks and there's my office and if you
army barracks so everything stinks in
the quarantine nobody wants to be in the
quarantine but I have a particular
relationship with this area areas that I
call under convalescence so this is our
project that maybe a lot of you know
most of you know the first thing I ever
built is a nightclub with a convertible
roof but besides the fact that it has a
convertible roof it is a building that
completely disappears during the day as
close to 300 thousand cars drive by it's
in front of it because this is the most
important vehicular axis in Lebanon or
probably on the eastern coast of an
Iranian so a very very high traffic yet
we've decided to go completely
invisible if anything to preserve the
void which was very important and
sometimes in preserving the book void
and in the disappearance of of
architecture you become more visible I
want to believe so the animal is at
sleep during the day - except at night
and when it wakes up at night
it makes all sorts of noises and it can
make a lot of noise because there's no
one around no one no one lives there so
the choice of being at the quarantine
was a very pragmatic one and as it opens
up it reflects the sounds but also the
flickering lights of what is happening
below through the reflective panel that
opens and recedes so this is it inside
we have we had we had the luxury of of
designing everything controlling
everything down to the ashtray so I'm
kind of a small spoiled kid because
because nowadays it's very difficult for
an architect not to buy anything off the
shelf we didn't buy anything off the
shelf
everything was fabricated in situ in on
the sides with no contractor so I did
everything I was drawing at night
building drawing at night building
during the day for six months so this is
it back in 1998 this is it now the club
is now twenty years old it was designed
to survive only five years but for some
reason it's still alive it's still alive
and kicking and if anything doing better
numbers today than it was at opening
here which is very strange and the
building still functions the roof opens
and closes and also many times every day
and every night and that's the receding
panel and this is to the rights what
happens at around 7 8 o'clock in the
morning so you can see this woman her
hand in her crotch
the guy's passed out the bouncer doesn't
care
as if there's a girl leaving we're the
guys who probably regret so this is this
is what I've been doing in my early
years I was looked at as an architect of
the entertainment the temporary
buildings the non permanent I designed
this building down to the last bolts as
I didn't have an office so I was alone
drawing at night building during the day
with with not without contractors but
with artisans who became my great allies
and with very primitive CAD tools that I
had learned as I was as I was designing
because I went through seven years of
education without even typing a paper so
I was very much old school doing things
with my hands I didn't even have a
parallel ruler so this is me to the left
to give you an idea of scale you have to
understand that the site is quite big
about 5,000 square meters the building
is time so the parking becomes part of
the of the architecture part of the
scheme I call this the carousel parking
so cars can drive around and around and
around and and park very respectively
very spectively around the building and
so if you have a Ferrari you will it
will be parked right on front in front
of the entrance if you have a shitty car
they will hide it in the back another
person who was very key in this in Bonn
in my in my first few years in Beirut
obviously was the Prime Minister the
Prime Minister was in charge of the
reconstruction the reconstruction of the
the city centre of Beirut a very
symbolic project but beyond its
symbolism he was the man behind the
private company that took charge of the
reconstruction where the state was
bankrupt and could not do it so I think
I feel hadiri our ex prime minister who
was assassinated in 2005 is a very
interesting case because it represents
very well this very blurred line between
between Institute
as he was a prime minister and the
private sector and represent represent
very well how much the private sector
took over and the state became absent
for the better our and the worst this is
Beirut fantastic images that were
produced by what hooli our friend and
critic I and but this was a major
exhibition photo exhibition photos that
were taken right at the end of the
conflict so I think in 1990 and then
Holly came in and and with his
rehabilitation scheme
expropriated most of the territory and
then the landowners were compensated by
sharers and we get back to that in a
moment
this is happy Learfield Hadid is
standing on the roof of Paseo de suite
after which we had a an interesting
chart which ended by words that he told
me my son my son the war is over you're
still living in the past
unfortunately hadiri was assassinated
about four years after we had this chat
so maybe the war was not over I have my
fear about where and why Hadid he was
assassinated at a very particular spot
having worked on a project which is
located in a very problematic zone it's
called today is a tuna bay but back in
2001 I was one of the architects who was
commissioned to work on that project
which is a 500 meter long project on
public land mainly entertainment food
and beverages and so on but very
interesting sight device interesting
location because it stands at a very
problematic point where the solitaire
project the plot the private project led
by Heavy D for the reconstruction of the
center of Beirut could not reconcile
with the rest of the city which is
further west on the on the on the
and there's a there's a no-man's land
located between the two zones the two
marinas the the soli they are marina
that we know today as as a tuna Bay and
then the corniche which remains to this
date I think the most important public
space in Beirut and at some point there
was a no-man's land of about two three
hundred meters that we call ashram
strangely hadith he was assassinated
there we've Illustrated this with our
project as if Steven holds project did
not happen this is the the site of the
explosion that you see here again so our
project was was about this impossibility
continuation of the two grounds of the
two of the two territories before
arriving back to Beirut back in 1991 so
I was fairly young at the time I was
still at school my first encounter would
be we'll be able to as a project I've
worked on with Lepidus woods for those
who know him lebbeus was was working on
various problematic zones such as
Sarajevo and the Balkans which were
going through their own wars in the
early 90s and abuse had strongly
encouraged me to work on Beirut for
which I had a lot of resistance the
project was about the recuperation or
the demolition of the of the war damaged
buildings that were basically recoupable
and we worked on this idea of a memory
collector the memory collector would
collect memory as its demolishing the
ruin the more memory you collect the
more matter you demolish and the ashes
of the building would be collected in in
the skin in the doubles in a double
sided membrane on its periphery so the
process would sit on so these are
pictures of of the period it's a model
that I had worked on at school
demolished it so it no longer exists you
see the membrane getting up to its
saturation point and at that point the
memory collector would dig its own hole
and go into the ground and the idea is
that we would replace the physical
memory by any material memory which is
the memory collected by those who would
have fed this memory collector
throughout the process we've revisited
we've revisited this project in a book
we're working on right now called toxic
grounds this time with digital format
and we've looked also at the
mathematical or the very mathematical
relationship between matter in cubic
meters and data in kilobytes and
megabytes and so the idea of the
physical math of disappearing the
physical memory disappearing and another
type of memory being collected
obviously these projects came back and
they hurt me so in the practice more
practical scenarios such as my second
project the soft hand restaurant which
was built around within a ruin and that
was recuperated literally at the edge of
the city center or the newly restored
city center here I've tried to tell to
have another take on memory so the
memory here is not about the
mummification of a building but it's
about the violent acts that were
performing on it we got it out to
building as as the inner walls inner
bearing walls did not allow us to
implement our program and we've
installed what we call these structural
belts on the periphery of the building
usually when you're done you remove
those and then although there's a new
monster inside you remove those and you
replaster the building and you paint it
in some kind of pastel cute color and
you try to make it look like it once
supposedly was the cute postcard picture
they call this history I don't agree
as the building did not have a roof
we've built a structural roof that holds
the two bearing walls together and is an
inhabitable roof that becomes a bar so
this is the plan in the middle of the
plan at the ground floor is one big
table was one big table in which you
seen an H formation you see this kind of
H shape in the middle of the of the plan
is the circuit where the waiters walk so
the waiters don't share the space of the
guests they are trapped inside the table
there are the prisoners of the table and
their only escape is the staircase that
takes them down to the hall where they
belong which is the kitchen downstairs
and if you look closely at the section
you will see that you are seated on a
plane that is 40 centimeters higher than
the plane that the waiters walk on so
that you keep looking down at the mat
they keep looking up at you the chairs
were very high this is another project
where we we've designed and manufactured
everything in-house down to the window
profile nothing was bought from the
industry the space had Cathedral desk
proportions absurd for restaurants
almost 10 meters of ceiling heights very
narrow but five and so meters by 70
meters in length and above in a very
majestic way was the bar is the bar that
is suspended and the bar is a very
serious space for me so I had a lot of
fun building it I was on site pretty
much every day and this is a close-up of
the facade that we did not replaster we
let it rot I call this the poetry of
decay and this is so you see the patina
of the facade and and it's ashes
remaining within the wire mesh with
which we've wrapped the building and
that's the bar upstairs which again is a
convertible roof now it's closed now
it's open closed open closed open so now
after project number two I'm not just
and
just the architects of entertainment
spaces futile spaces spaces of the bowel
free but I'm also the architect of
convertible roof buildings and that's
cool so the table as you see it looks
very serious like a pastoral table and
with very high chairs that are very
heavy and in front of every chair is a
not a microphone or a pilot lamp that
lights up the plate which becomes a
reflector this is a very odd setup as
people would go there and they couldn't
speak to each other they could only look
at each other
no dialogue whatsoever so this is not
about dining it was a very intense
situation that I managed to keep going
for about a year and a half until the
management said it's over enough we're
gonna go bankrupt so we had to change it
and now we have a mobile condition with
with regular set ups and tables where
people can speak the third project again
at this point I'm completely trapped in
the entertainment scenario this one is
again a very impossible project located
at very close to the demarcation line or
on the demarcation line what you see to
the right of the picture is West Beirut
what you see to the left it's East
Beirut and this kind of visionary
entrepreneur friend of mine comes to me
and rents this piece of land and tells
me we're gonna build the coolest sushi
bar in the world and I tell him go to
hell because we can't do the sushi bar
there if you look at the building next
door
it is squatted by refugees who live at
150 dollars a month with no windows no
handrails no running water no
electricity and so on so it is totally
not correct to build a sushi bar a venue
where you're gonna charge what fifty
hundred dollars a pop I can't be part of
that but then again I did it because I
love
the portrait and so this is it when we
completed it you can see next door the
guys literally without handrails without
so any any any reasonable architect will
turn his back and walk away from such a
condition so this is where you
understand that I'm not an architect of
museums I'm not an architect of public
housing and an architect of schools
another architect of the public sector
I have never served the public sector
I've only built for the rich but
extremely bad so the critique doesn't
love me for that but this is where I
come from because there's no public
sector the state is corrupt incompetent
and bankrupt
so you have to do with whatever you have
and try to do the best and produce
meaning hopefully relevant meaning out
of these situations so this is Japan at
at at during the day the coolest or
weirdest sushi bar on the planet this is
it that night and this is an exploded
section of it so most of it happens
under the ground you arrive at the
center you enter this episode circular
Tower which is about seven seven meters
high it's a circular room with with a
very decadent sofa two sofas in the
middle of it you are put in a very odd
situation whereby you're facing the
street you're facing this condition if
anything glorified in a very absurd
manner and then you're sucked down into
the ground and you land in the middle of
the bar so if you're shy don't go there
in fact they just closed you land in the
middle of the bar and once you're below
sea this is the cylinder through which
the room moves up and down amongst you
below you can enjoy your sushi at $100 a
pop in complete denial of what's
happening literally behind the wall the
situation is it's become so forced and
so obvious that hopefully it should
produce meaning so my spaces are not
always sugar-coated they can be very
sour but sour can be good also and
meaningful hopefully it has the
precision of a Swiss clock in its
composition so there's no or geometry
none of the
was very much trendy at the time no I
never played that game but again in a
bunny we designed everything down to the
moving room its mechanisms up and down
the lights everything was built in situ
on-site
so in fact and once or below the only
relationship to the outside is the sky
nothing but the sky so you can pray God
to forgive you for the sins you've done
eating sushi there's a tree across
behind the wall across the tree next to
you so the first six buildings I built
which is very strange I didn't choose it
to be that way the first six buildings I
got executed were all temporary
buildings there were buildings that had
an expiry dates there were projects for
which there was a date of demolition
before I even started designing them now
that's very odd for an architect because
we are trained to think in permanence we
have a very odd relationship with
temporality as architects so probably I
I keep on repeating that probably the
last practice or profession of the Stone
Age literally a relationship with
temporality is very strange and very
different from that of many practices
that have much more influence today in
contemporary culture so we start a
project it takes us five six years for
it to be built and then it has to remain
it will probably remain usually way
beyond after we were six feet under so
as far as I'm concerned because I don't
believe in the afterlife they are
eternal and that's very strange there
are not so many practices anymore that
do that yet strangely and I did not
choose it to be that way the first six
project I built has an expiry date that
was very close five to nine years after
I designed them so I compare this to a
pregnant lady to whom you say once is
expecting a baby that what baby will die
at a very specific date five years down
the road and that you will survive the
death of your baby it's very strange
I didn't choose it to be that way this
is Beirut post-war this is what I call
the sites that are no comparisons the
sites that have not reached their
real-estate maturity the the zones that
are still not very stable so from the
entertainment we move on to the next
wave of projects through the young
entrepreneur or the young entrepreneurs
and this was a big leap because I moved
from temporary projects to permanent
projects and this was in fact quite a
difficult change or quite a difficult
leap for me so what you see in the back
is my first permanent building that
turns out strangely to be right next
door to last column which was my second
temporary project and this project the
first permanent building was I describe
it as a kind of masochistic involuntary
masochistic approach that I've
engineered whereby I am told by the
developer that this is gonna be what
they call it their jargon Shalin core
development therefore he wants no trace
of my existence in the interior plan
because this is aimed at a very high
sector of the of the real-estate
development market people who basically
come in with their own interior
architects and decorators interior
architects and decorators who are
smarter than me have better behaved
better than me are more cultural than me
more sensitive than me obviously I had a
profile of someone who could not build
and it's any space in which you would
raise your kids and because they would
again associated me associated me to 2
to the power 3 the nightlife and so on
so it was important that I left no trace
of my passage in the inhabitable spaces
now that's degrading for an architect
the client tells you I don't want to see
you in the spaces all you can do is work
on the envelope
now and the shared common spaces great
so we take that and and then I decide
that well coming from six temporary
structures where I had complete control
over the ashtray where I was building my
my situation through many situations
through instruments that were engineered
to provoke certain behaviors I was in
full control of these spaces suddenly
when I moved to permanent permanence to
permanent structures I am I am asked to
to basically turn off my weapons and
disappear so why not take that and try
to formulate or try to build a strategy
that is relevant so I decided not to
draw this project I took the zoning law
the setback law which is imposed on that
site and I drew it down to the last
cubic meter the envelope I did not draw
the law drew it for me and then I
decided to take the shell and core
principle all the way to its extreme
whereby whereby you look at the plan
there's not a single column inside so
it's the shell that holds it and the
core so the structure does not leave a
trace in the inhabitable spaces and I
run continuous again shafts in the party
walls so that you can plug in your
kitchens or your bathrooms anywhere you
want so I recapitulate I did not draw
the mass of the building the building
loaded I did not draw the plans of the
building I left it completely open for
the seven different tenants were the
seven different interior architects who
had more taste and were more intelligent
than me to do it and once they were done
one after the other they started calling
me asking for elevations which I refused
to draw I told them to draw their own
elevations out of their own interior
plans and I projected them to the
outside so re capitally the three major
the three basic deliverables that an
architect has to do which is the
morphology the shape of the building
I didn't do the plan I didn't do the
elevation I didn't do yet I love it and
I think I do recognise myself in this
building very much
so you see architecture is not I don't
think is about drawing is I don't think
it should be any more about producing
desperately producing and inventing
forms I'd leave that to the so-called
avant-garde of the last 10 20 30 years
40 years who desperately looked to
invent shapes but are completely
prisoners of the Stone Age if it's not
stone it's steel in glass but it's the
same to me and the more it grabs and the
more it looks weird to me the more it
prisoner of form and and very archaic
practices for me architecture is not
about that architecture is about
creating conditions and building
strategies so you see here windows that
are not aligned it's not because I tried
to make things shift because it was
trendy at the time to do that no I'm not
one of those it's because every single
plan was done and developed with
absolutely no coordination with the
other so it turns out to be a total mess
at the end but it's very organic so that
was my first permanent building and it
sold extremely well suddenly the
developers like me they are no longer
scared of me the young developers at
least because we started with small
buildings and then we started waging a
war against the the established
topologies for the last 40 or 50 years
we've been living with particularly
where I come from
we've been living with disastrous
topologies that are imposed by
developers and lazy architects they
consist of blind cores in the center of
the plan very deep plans blind party
walls very small openings low ceilings
Huli ventilated plans poorly lit plans
segregated areas whereby the reception's
are in the front the bedrooms are in the
back to make a long story short a very
bad interpretation of the modernist
recipes and we've done exactly the
opposite so we've started
while we started fighting these type
ologies this is one example where we've
forced the tenants to live outside so
you can get out of your bedroom go down
the stairs walk around the olive tree
into the kitchen make some coffee go to
the living room pick up the newspaper
bill down and see your kids without ever
walking inside on a balcony that you
cannot glaze so sort of a forced
relationship with the street a
reconciliation with the neighborhood and
I call this I consider this a political
act as it goes completely against these
these very bad apologies that have
produced a very bad urban fabric and a
very bad social fabric that looks at the
outside as a hostile territory here it's
exactly the opposite so this is me
walking very proudly on my balcony and
you see the elevation is very honest and
very simple it translates the split
section and their story no funny no
funny stuff
perhaps the from the later projects the
one that reconnects with mind with my
past with the entertainment industry is
this one where the developer the young
developer comes to my office and asks me
to develop the design a building where
that people sell to people that have no
kids no family no mates basically
bachelors playboys that kind of clients
so no families no school buses none of
that that was the agenda which is really
cool because nobody thinks that way
everybody thinks of a very generic
product always here from the outset it
was different so we started with a
stupid story just to begin with because
my client was was very much amused by
the fact that our drive my car all the
way to my desk in my office because I
have a freight elevator my office is in
is an industrial building so he kept on
insisting that we do the same kept on
insisting we do the same and sometimes
you'd be surprised these developers have
very funny ways of looking at at the
project so the story is
is the following as he as he says it you
know my clients could go and spend their
evenings in one of my clubs and then
drive back and if there if they have
coupe company hopefully they can drive
their car all the way up into their
living room and if they are very good
company they can spend the rest of the
night in the car without even going to
the bedroom
and we built it and it sold extremely
well in fact we sold pretty much all of
it before we even had a building permit
that's my bike in that fantastic
elevator that moves up and down the
building this is me riding into one of
the apartments this is driving a car
into one of the apartments which are
relatively small a more recent project
still with that young developer which I
think would not have been possible
anywhere else around the planet is a
project which is located pretty close
from the other one fairly big about
25,000 square meters of developed area
above ground but the very particular
thing about this project is it's very
problematic site the site is about 400
meters of periphery of linear meters of
periphery the perimeter of the site is
from the meters but only six and a half
meters of the 400 meters intersect with
the public domain this means that on 390
something meters we could potentially
have blind walls erected by our
neighbors at the periphery of the plot
turning their back to us and if you
understand and you look at the fabric of
Beirut and how it was built with
absolutely no mechanisms of control no
master plan you see this catastrophic
fabric that has developed around what I
call solitary developments I alway often
compare Beirut to a room that is packed
with people completely packed with
people that turn their back to each
other they don't talk to each other so
every single building is developed and
designed in such a way to protect itself
from anything that's gonna happen around
it because there's no master plan there
regulating mechanism there is no common
vision so you sort of build your own you
engineer your own way of protecting
yourself because the outside is hostile
the state the city did not give you any
guarantee as to what's going to happen
next to your in front of you here on
three hundred and ninety something
meters I could have potentially someone
who turns his back to me if he sticks to
the property line it will be a blind
wall 50 meters high now this could not
happen anywhere in any city where there
is a little bit of of control over to
what is happening on the on the on the
level of the development of the urban
fabric this state being completely
absent again you dig you scratch a bit
and it's always it always boils down to
politics here the complete bankruptcy of
the state so what the developer had in
mind which would happen the wisest thing
to do would have been to retract at one
end of the site because it's very deep
about hundred fifty meters and erect the
tower that's very high because the site
is big it allows us to do it turn our
back to our neighbors and ensure a
setback within our site if the city did
not give us enough air and oxygen to
breathe since our site is big enough
we'll do it ourselves I refuse to do
that and once more I had a very well
kind of masochistic once more suicidal
approach whereby I said I will not turn
my back on 360 degrees 100 percent of
the perimeter because I'm the first one
to intervene on this area and I set back
the four and a half meters on the
periphery which are which are the
setback you have to do in order to open
and then we started which we started off
setting inwards according to the setback
law so that we can get legal light and
air on 360 degrees 100 percent of our
periphery and the result is a very kind
monster that is completely naked and
turns back and opens its arm waiting for
the future neighbors to do the same and
we'll see what happens so you see around
me is unbuilt territory
and then by doing that and going up to
50 meters because we did not want to ask
for an exception getting every single
last square metre that is allowable on
the site the building draws itself I
didn't draw it one more time
it was a purely mathematical approach
and we ended up with very particular
apartments the shapes are weird but I
did not draw them to be weird it just
happened that way
it was a very scientific mathematical
setback that you've applied and it turns
out we have fantastic apartments
extremely narrow completely open with
very generous terraces running along the
building and if you look well this is it
under construction so you see the type
of slab we developed is extremely
radical this would not have happened in
an ER situation in a stable situation in
a stable condition this would not have
happened in Rotterdam in Berlin in
London in Paris or any stable city this
has happened in Beirut because of the
catastrophic condition that was imposed
on us if you look closely at the
handrail the handrail is not your
typical handrail it's a bar it's at 110
centimeters of height and it's 50
centimeters deep just like the bar that
you go and have a drink out so the idea
here is that you go out of your
reception or bedroom or wherever and you
have your breakfast or you have a party
and you drink and you look at your Anu
wait at your potential neighbor hoping
she will not turn her back to you and
hoping that she will be friendly enough
this is it bill so again fantastic
balconies and receptions that really
call for exceptional parties and a great
relationship between the neighbors so
this is again a very long apartment
extremely narrow with very generous
terraces around this is it from inside
keep in mind that the glazing opens
completely so there's no clear limit
between inside and outside
well ah so I was talking about I was
talking about the the bad fabric that
has developed in there with this very
crowded room of people that turn their
back to each other this is typical of
the Bayreuth fabric extremely extremely
dense where every building is built
despite and without any respect to what
is happening around it and that's the
city I live in and I've decided to build
my house in the middle of that so what
you see up there is my house my houses
mean is basically one large window which
is 12 meters by 6 and every day I wake
up and I see this fabric right in front
of me I don't look at the Mediterranean
Sea this is nine-time in Italian poster
I look at hell but but this is this is
where I'm from and I better celebrate it
and enjoy it in the middle of that
window runs an absurd pastel that
connects the two sides of the library
we've manufactured this whole thing you
see on top that looks like over craft is
the HVAC system which was which was
designed in collaboration with my
mechanical engineer is the most perfect
and an ideal machine to to ventilate and
without the space that volume and this
was again because it was my house one
one one more recent occasion to
reconnect with artisans whether they are
metal welders or or carpenters there is
great know-how in the owner I come from
and and above is is my Terrace which is
kind of this very decadent poster above
the CG and the two cannons and there's a
very funny anecdote when we were done
with this with with installing the
cannons
I had the secret services of the army
that showed up they wanted to make sure
that this was not a military
installation
true and then a few months later
somebody moved into the building and was
very worried and was that and asked me
to remove them because he was convinced
that then the next war the Israelis will
shoot at our building and we will all
die so I told him if that happens I will
be victim of my own architecture and I
will be I will be young and be a great
way to go so that's my house it's
basically a house perched on top of a
building
I built where I got the air rights the
last eight meters above above the
building
I once worked for this guy - or his son
it was right before the Arab Spring and
the agenda was very interesting near the
town of sapa we were supposed to to
build a gateway for africa for trade and
so on and so forth and this was supposed
to be a seven and a half meter long
intervention by about 100 meters of
width a topographical intervention I
looked at it as the longest horizontal
building in the world they loved it but
then the revolution came and it was over
so it didn't happen yes the revolution
so talked about the Arab world where
we've done a lot of a lot of work in the
Gulf at some point this is Bahrain so I
have a problem with with modernity in
the Arab world so you see a lot of a lot
of these stupid twisting buildings there
are mainly mostly if not all the time
imports it was not like that all the
time back in the 40s and 50s and 60s up
to the seventies so Cairo Damascus had
their own first and second generation of
local modernists who thought that they
could be part of the game unfortunately
it's not the case the further you go
east the more you see that modern
modernity is something you buy new
imports mainly from the anglo-saxon
world
that produce a lot of twisting
building so you see this this is the
tallest concrete building in the world
but for some strange reason it does that
why I don't know
so the mold is tweet the moon they twist
the stupid or they are but there's a lot
of that and then there's Dubai again a
very I wouldn't say even say episode
territory but so this is the kind of
ridiculous symbols that we're producing
you see and then when you look closer at
it this is what it is this is that
believe it or not would you love to live
in a house like that who would mala so
but we had our take in the Gulf and we
always went at it with a lot of optimism
this was in Riyadh City what you would
expect that it would be difficult to do
something that is erotic but I've
produced my most erotic project in
Riyadh it was a woman's only letter
facility a very sexy project in the real
sense of the term the building where
there would be no men but when they
figured out what it was about it was
cancelled
so we do we sometimes work on art
commissions for galleries or museums
this is the cemetery of my of my own
built work and this is the ambassador of
Great Britain at the time hung by his up
in the air and in the gallery right
above my office my office is basically
700 meter square a space where we've
painted the floor red epoxy red because
it keeps everyone nervous and no one
goes to sleep and as you move up there
is a there's a printing office and then
there's an art gallery above above my
space but the red at some point
propagated and I was accused of
polluting the city
I'm always accused of polluting because
people think my work is to black or to
red Allah so I'm also very fascinated by
by the military so we build who once
built a replica of the one of the f-117
bomber except it was an operational
drone that we've engineered so that it
can be used to exchange prisoners of war
across enemy lines what you see here are
not the eyes of the prisoner it's the
eyes of the enemy that recalled the way
back
this was for the maxi museum back in
2010 it's called the reading Beirut
we had mapped areas that had been kind
of fetishized in them and the recent
post-war years in the last 15-20 years
and we had tried to create a journey
through these points so that bill can be
consumed very quickly by the curious
tourists and we've basically linked
these points by a circuit that would be
crafted above the street network and the
idea is that you could for instance go
in and out of the Holiday Inn Building
in a split second you know and consume
it very intensely and we've imagined the
pot in which the tourists could travel
and the idea is that you put the head of
the tourist where the tenor detonator of
the bomb should be for extreme pleasure
and we built the damn thing
we took around we took it around the
city and then we got arrested by the
secret services of the army we did had
to make phone calls to very important
people to get my my guys out of jail
more recently we were asked to
contribute to competition for which were
invited in which we were invited for a
National Museum of Contemporary Arts and
for this project I collaborated an
artist Walid rod who's very
knowledgeable about what has been
produced over the last 10 20 30 years by
our generation and the earlier
generation in the field and and we've
decided not to build a museum another
museum as we think that the city is not
ready for it as we think that we are
simply not ready for it um
but to start with the hole at the
foundation of a future museum we called
it stage 2 Europe and the ideas that we
would dig a hole on the sides and in
that holy would dig galleries that would
house temporary exhibitions of
collections that the museum would not
acquire the idea here is that we had or
well it had looked at a number of
private collections that were very
interesting about twelve of them that
were in the proximity of the museum or
within Beirut and its surroundings these
private collections are fairly rich but
what's interesting about them is that
unlike museum collections they are not
accountable that they don't try to write
a an objective history so as these
individuals collect they collect things
but without any sort of objectivity when
it comes to formulating a coherent
history and that's kind of what is
happening in Beirut I think that a lot
of coherent and interesting meaning has
been formulated in many fields but it's
never come out of an institutional
organization it's always come out of
singular posters that were never really
accountable whether it's in finance
whether it's in arts whether it's in any
sort of creative field I think the most
interesting works in my territory have
always been works that are not
accountable that were not accountable at
the outset so very singular posters so
the idea is to collect these collections
provide them with spaces to exhibit them
in the galleries that we dig in the
stomach in the guts of the city in the
grounds and I look at it very
pragmatically as I think that this could
have been possible because this would
have been this would have been built
within nine months at five percent of
the construction cost of a museum as
excavations usually are under five
percent of the total cost of
construction so this could have happened
with temporary elevators
construction-site elevators scaffoldings
and literally holes that are dug in the
rock in the stomach of the city
obviously we were disqualified again I
would have thought that this could have
sent shockwaves across the art world as
this is not built around you know your
typical museum and that usually pretends
to take a certain stance relative to the
history of a territory or certain
practices this would have been literally
a museum for Beirut the doctor who was
also very instrumental at least in my in
my beginnings the doctor is a surgeon
happens to be my brother who did a lot
of experiments medical experiments
throughout his life this goes back this
back to 1986 1987 I think I was a
freshman student at RISD at the time and
he calls me and tells me I have a task
for you at $50 a day so the idea is that
you got this rat it makes sure it's in
good health there were no cellular
phones but beepers at the time if the
rat is doing anything odd you give me a
call on the beeper as my brother was
always on call the rat he had stolen
from the Brown University laboratory it
was a very special rat that had no
immunity system so it had to stay in a
sterilized cage and the idea is that
they would keep this rat that has no
immunity system until they find a donor
body and they could amputate the toe of
a donor body and implemented replace the
rats one of the rats legs
with the toe the idea is to irrigate the
toes vessels with the Bloods with the
blood of the rat and then so that when
the patient is stable enough they could
retreat the toe and put it back
where it belongs so it was quite an
interesting story and you can think of a
pig with with a leg you can think of a
car with an arm and whatever so I
thought this was great $50 a day
I spent three four days looking at this
rat 24 hours a day and my brother
wouldn't call until I think the third or
fourth day ends up calling they had the
donor body unfortunately a very old lady
in Massachusetts 88 years old with a
very ugly toe so I did a spell to or toe
they came they took the rat amputated
the rat they've put the toe and they
came back with it with a rat that had a
woman's talk that was very ugly and now
I had to look at this thing and make
sure that it was fine and every half an
hour our protocol called me and asked me
so what's the color of the toe and I
would go well it's bluish green and any
move from blue bluish green to white and
then slowly was becoming pink it was
great but after five days $250 of me not
sleeping I said maybe I'll take a nap
and end up falling asleep very deep
sleep six hours later the phone rings my
brother gets out of the operation room
so I wake up and he asks me so I was a
rat doing I look at the cage and I see
the wrapped wrapped at the edge of the
transparent case the idiot had moved
moved moved forward until he reached the
the edge and kept on moving forward
because it was transparent and ended up
dying because of me all I had to do was
just move the cage and I didn't because
I was asleep so since that day my
brother doesn't take me seriously so
when I decided to go back to Beirut in
1993 he told me you're gonna go back and
act as a rooster on top of a garbage
dump
because you can't do any better
my brother became a very successful
surgeon and I came back to Beirut and
looking back you know I think one of my
biggest accomplishments or interactive
recognition was my Johnnie Walker
campaign so it was not the Pritzker
Prize or anything serious but it became
the mascot of the Johnnie Walker whiskey
and if I was I had my 1520 seconds at 10
o clock news for a full year I got sick
of it because everybody recognized me
that's just not typical for an architect
and if you look closely this is a 40
meter high a billboard at one a very
important intersection highway
intersection in Beirut and if you look
very closely I'm higher than Paris
Hilton and a buffer I don't think any
architect has done that before
thank you very much
[Applause]
okay we're opening the floor for
questions hello
thank you very much thank you very much
that was a wonderful presentation I have
a question actually relating to to the
sushi bar and the camp because I think
you brought up a very interesting point
there after 1967 the singer tomb
people's turned on her and they said who
once sang you know songs of love and and
was viewed to be a very political figure
of the Arab world after 1967
you know opinions fit and and some
people said that she encouraged stoner
culture under encouraged towards stoner
culture in their in their opinion in
carat stone a cultural tan belly done
belly okay
i-i-i don't particularly agree with the
critique but what I want to ask in your
context where does where does escape it
when is escapism political and and when
and when can it become a dangerous
boundary to cross what does this skip is
enough to do with in my practice I
wouldn't say escapism I would say in my
mind what I view is is when you build a
sushi bar next to a person in camp with
the awareness that it's there that in
that very position there becomes you
know I don't decide to build the sushi
bar this is a situation that is
happening it is there with me or without
me and despite me it's there so the
attitude of the architect that consists
of you know staying on that very noble
cloud of hours that you know that says
we do certain things we don't do other
things
I was I was raised at a time in the
1980s and I although I was really
studied in the US I remained very close
to Europe I remember after the meeting
on years or doing the methanol years if
you had not built for the state you had
not built any public buildings you were
not respected architects to a certain
extent it still remains in Europe it's
very strange
we're always you know there's always
this very almost Christian moral in our
postures that's you know there are
certain things that are good to do
others that are not good to do
developers are bad bankers are bad
finances but the private sector is bad
sure the whole world is bad but if we
don't engage with these our realities
the city will happen with us or without
us and despite us as architects we're in
fact completely disconnected I mean you
look at what you look at what the
architectural critique what about the
architectural media what the
architectural history retains it has
nothing to do with what contemporary
culture today were completely
disconnected we are stuck in the Stone
Age
and in a very pretentious
how would you translate that beyond
selves a pathetically self-centered
practice with with a set of very you
know if anything pretentious values who
are we to say at this point this should
not happen it is a situation that is
happening okay you either engage you
have the courage to engage with it and
try to produce relevant meaning out of
it or just get out to go to finance go
to things that you know are it's it's a
it's a very sour world out there on and
you better recognize it it's not as
frugal coated as as we've been told at
school at least I don't know if it
answers your question thank you very
much thanks just the fats last question
just to continue on what you were saying
it it's very interesting because look at
look at look at look at look at what
what the architectural critique Awards
today or in the last time 2006 in fact
it's always been the same it's always
been schools public housing you know a
very nice story very moralistic story um
what the hell is this with this what our
cities are made of I don't think so and
I think it's exactly here that I think
our practice is a serious problem
particularly at the school level and at
the academic and and architectural
critique level we are losers idiots go
new toes may i yes
since you had a really close
relationship with Raphael Hariri what
did you say about the Beirut master plan
the center that's not real you know I
was I was secretly in the in the early
90s
Apostoli there which was not a very
trendy thing because in the early 90s
the intellectuals and the people who
think properly and who have proper
Christian values will tell you that this
is bad it's the private sector it's
whatever there I was with a lot of
critique but not always not always the
best now is the most pertinent critique
relative to study there I was approached
there for other reasons because so we
there came with a very interesting
concept very dangerous maybe on a social
and political level but very interesting
for me at least young architects
aspiring urban planner so either came
and took the most grounded form or means
of ownership which is the plot and
converted that gave the plot owners
shares of a company that was listed in
the stock market in return of their
plots now that's very interesting
because now you move from owning a plot
which is the most grounded form of
ownership to the most volatile and most
dynamic form of ownership and I thought
that this would produce and would bring
with it a new set of parameters and
criteria around which we could build the
city I'm talking at the urban planning
level as I was at that point already at
the end of my studies completely
deceived and had no no hopes for the
urban planning practice as I thought it
was completely stuck in the Stone Age
and I thought that cities were evolving
despite us and without us that we could
no longer catch the city we no longer
understood the city because we looked at
the city with very archaic tools as
architects and urban planners and the
city was going somewhere else we could
never catch it so I thought for once now
we would be forced to look at the city
and understand the city no longer
through conventional means the
morphology the setbacks you know the
basic solid infrastructure but through a
very dynamic set of tools that is the
property being no longer a plot but
being something that fluctuates that you
can enter and I had a lot of hopes this
is one of the reasons why I came back to
Beirut at the time well who came into
the picture
urban planners and they came in with the
most archaic set of tools and they
produced a very archaic master plan
which basically projected the city in
the future in its in its in its full
grown up or mature state with set
envelopes or every single plot with a
development brief for every single plot
that give you its total PUA
it's set back it's its percentage of
aperture its materials and they built a
model which you can still see today in
their headquarters which projected the
city bypass completely it's organic
development and the dynamics that could
have been created by the hadiri formula
of ownership
completely they came in again as urban
planners with their certainties and this
is the result a city that is completely
disconnected from the cultural the
direct economic and the political
realities that should make it possible
hi how do you view very successful
architecture practices like sorry the
RAM coulis I don't like wine coolers we
are king Ellis I think he's a cynical
he's a cynical mummy all right
dressed in Prado stop 3040 years ago I
mean look at look at his Benari in 2014
I think this is this is the culmination
of 30 40 years of cynicism a very wise
cynicism his banana in 2014 was a morbid
autopsy of a dead cat over what
architecture has produced on the
mechanical level bathtubs toilets
mechanical systems you know but
absolutely no reference to the political
agenda of modernism
none whatsoever cynical wise morbid the
monty is wrong some fashion a balaclava
exactly that okay necrophile is a
necrophile and the problem is that he's
made babies and the babies made babies
and there are millions of them now and
they've installed something called it
was sort of comfortable radicality
through of the catalog processes you
know the the big books I made reference
to in the beginning of my presentation
you go to a territory you unleash 1520
students from our world they collect
data Tata Tata Tata you know how many
eggs does a Kuwaiti it a year how many
cubic liters so many how many liters of
urine does does a Saudi woman produce
per year who gives a that's not how
you understand the territory okay and
then after they have done they've
produced it five six hundred pages big
book they think they've understood they
produced consensual definitions
dangerously simplistic definitions of a
territory I hate these people I'm at war
against them they're anything but
radical and if you look at what he's
done again in the Biennale relative to
the mechanical you know the
accomplishments of modernism for between
1914 and 2014 if that's the result it's
a very sad case because we haven't done
anything never done for hundred
years and the mechanical or in terms of
structural you know
the breakthroughs or whatever nothing we
haven't done a thing we haven't we
haven't moved forward by any means if
you if you if there's has been no
progress nothing but at our best
representation of a cultural phenomenon
but we're no longer producing culture
and people like coulis endorse this they
they fabricate a story or a history that
comforts the that keeps on feeding the
comfort of the idiot kanuto architects I
met war against these people la la la
[Applause]
just on the topic of cynicism like at
first like listening to a presentation I
I thought that maybe were actually quite
cynical I mean tell me if I'm wrong but
given the cynical world that we live in
it's maybe not a surprise but I maybe it
would sound like a million dollar
question but I was wondering what
actually drives you in your project I
see a degree above of something
subversive of something on acoustical in
a sense and and since we were talking
about how ossified architecture is and
architecture critic is today
I was wondering also if you feel that
you've managed to maybe bridge the gap
or build or come up with something new
and worthwhile new I don't know but but
I'm not a cynical person I hate I hate
cynical people I have no sympathy for
them whatsoever but I I'd very much
accept the fact that I can contradict
myself from one street corner to the
other simultaneously with absolutely no
cynicism so it's the situation I think
that
that builds up the strategy for every
situation and and that's it I mean I
don't I'm we're no longer looking for
any sort of any sort of global
certainties I think at best I could
create relevant meaning in a very
specific situation and of story at the
very specific moment in time and without
worrying about the future the future
will take care of itself I create
instruments I'd like to look at my
projects as instruments in France reset
the dispositive thanks very much for an
extraordinary presentation can I ask you
about your opening remark about theory
do you you must you must start from a
position of something are you are you
aunty theory do you feel theory or
critical theory is nothing but a fiction
your your buildings have to start from a
position don't they or do they of course
they do
right so what what would be would you do
you feel that there's any reason to be
engaged with a specific position or do
you create a position for each single
project and you keep that to yourself
I'd like to think that we create the
position for every single project and
this is where I disagree with with you
know theory in in various is available
as a broad term because I think theory
produces consensual definitions at the
end of the day that's what it does even
critical theory at the end of the day is
about is about establishing some kind of
some kind of common denominators between
between certain certain issues in a
given situation in every given context
and and I'm not friends with that
approach I in fact try to build with
whatever doesn't doesn't fit doesn't fit
in that in that sort of flat common
denominator that tends to that tends to
describe a place or produce a definition
of a place or a situation that in my
opinion always ends up dangerously
simplistic I I see what at least in our
practice our chart architecture is
producing I'm not interested in that
whatsoever
and I think I think the theory of
archetypal who work in people the
academy in general is not interested by
what I do either
and that's fine you know I find my
allies somewhere else ok I have a
question at the beginning of the lecture
you said that architects are quite
grounded and I was just wondering how
would you approach a foreign territory
well I think when I when I say local I
don't necessarily I don't necessarily
mean locally in geographical terms I can
feel at home
very far away from the place I was born
and I can feel not at home at all
literally one street away from where I
was born so the issue of being feeling
comfortable somewhere or feel or being a
local I don't think it's just about
geography anymore as far as I'm
concerned I can feel at home you know in
a condition that gives me that gives me
stuff that that I can that I can
manipulate and and hopefully and I
cannot sometimes don't feel at home at
all in a territory that's supposed to be
home geographically so that's for me so
don't call me an architect from Beirut
because I don't think it means anything
anymore and I've sort of given up on I'm
trying to describe what my city is in in
objective terms
thank you
[Applause]
