all right I think as it's coming on ten
past we'll get started thanks everyone
for coming this is table of contents a
symposium really a second in a series
organized by PhD students I'd like to
thank Malad Lucas and Alif for putting
this together and inviting me here today
to introduce it I've got five golden
minutes so I thought we'd have a little
time for a set up
and I'll explain the organization of the
day as well you've all read the event
description so I shan't repeat it but I
did want to speak to how this idea of
table of contents came about and why it
might be useful in lots of different
places in terms of a research there's
this golden moment where after you've
completed your oh you officially
approved research statement where you've
delivered now a chapter the first
chapter of your dissertation to your
supervisor you've killed yourself to
develop this first chapter and they
immediately ask give me some context how
should I receive this chapter what is
your table of contents this is the
weirdest response to giving this
beautiful gift right they immediately
want this other gift the table of
contents and some of you might have one
in mind some of you might imagine I
can't have a table of contents until I
have content
I need chapters and then I have a table
of contents but I would argue at least
for the purposes of today a table of
contents could come fairly early in your
research and writing arc
it could be sponsored by that first
chapter I think it might be difficult to
pull off a table of contents in front of
any writing but provided you have that
first chapter you might imagine where it
sits as a fragment in the larger whole
and develop not the table of content
that you will abide by for the next 2 3
4 years but a working table of contents
a provisional table of contents in that
sense the table of content might be a
good tool as much as it is this thing
that you slap at the front of a
dissertation and I think we'll talk a
lot about that today
how can a table of contents be a tool a
tool about organizing thoughts research
methodologies not just text but also
images and diagrams a table of contents
asks you to do a bit of stock taking and
that's always healthy and it could be
that it shrinks and grows over the
course of your writing there's always
this difficulty of where to begin and
where to stop a doctoral project and
we'll be talking I think a little bit
about how you conclude a table of
contents today but before we dive in and
we've got a session of three tables of
presentations each an hour long
I'll introduce those people and describe
those sessions but before we do that I
think we needed a pub quiz five five
questions we'll just get the slide up so
that my visual joke can land there nice
thank you I'd like to show you five
architectural e significant tables of
contents just the table of contents and
ask you to guess the book my hope he
shall guess all five and because of the
power the table of content will know the
author will know the book will know the
project maybe will not know all five and
that'll be interesting as well
hands on buzzers will begin what's this
this is a weird one lots of little
chapters look at those page runs some of
them are to nine and ten pages the wall
Veil the wall cornice the angle the edge
and the Filat what's the book one of the
most famous book
of architecture stones of Venice Thank
You Maria gets a gold star you get a big
fat beer after this event the stones of
Venice published 1851 to 1853 for those
of you who were around in the 1850s you
know this came out as three volumes and
that in a weird way
Ruskin uses the stones of Venice to
expand an earlier work so those are the
three volumes that's the gun Scott press
first edition first page but it was
really the seven lamps of architecture
published 18-49 that then sponsored the
subsequent work as a kind of proof if
you will of the seven lamps of
architecture Ruskin had to write the
stones of Venice but even here with the
table of contents chapter headings the
lamp of life what does that mean so
that's one strategy for a table of
contents this sort of poetic leaving a
lot of room open for yourself I don't
know how useful this Russ kinian method
is this is the table of contents of the
longest-running and best-selling book on
architectural history ever what is the
book
if not a beer sir banister Fletcher his
table of contents is quite the opposite
of Ruskin it's every little thing it's
running and you'd think chronological
sequence not really only partly and you
see it has two parts so within the table
of contents there's the historical
styles and the non historical sister
styles and that's all being published
1896 first edition they serve
architecture of the comparative method
we usually call sir Bannister Fletcher's
a history just serve banister Fletcher's
that's how famous it was it was EE
Fletcher it was father and son as she
recalled the father having been trained
partly at the AAA but this became the
cornerstone of architectural history
surveys right from the word go it's
never been out of print and its
additions are numerous you will find one
of these books on every professor's
bookcase and you'll find this graphic
that is wed to the table of contents
this so-called tree of architecture a
lot of criticism of this tree it's
hierarchical it is completely a Western
perspective but it brings together some
themes that are laid out in the table of
contents but it makes them into a
graphic so I'm interested in this notion
that Fletcher looked at this as a
diagram of the table of contents and a
way into the project before you've
turned the third page so it might be
interesting to think are there graphics
are there diagrams that live with your
table of contents or health introduce
the whole of your work that would help
guide subsequent research it's so
strange to banister Fletcher's
organization he has to write a preface
to explain the table of contents which
has a lot to do with what he called
influences geographical geological
climate etc and then cultural influences
relate
social political historical and on and
on so this helps explicate why the table
of contents is organized the way it is
when you need an entire preface just to
explain your table of contents you might
be going down the wrong road
but that comparative method was
amazingly successful because it brought
together graphics and I'm speaking a
little bit to the PhD by design group
when I mentioned this and some of them
are so deliciously strange that they do
formulate a part of the work these are
not figures or illustrations of an idea
embedded within those images is an idea
that the text and talks to table of
contents the third what is this who
wrote this
Luka Busey a very good everybody gets a
point
19:23 this translation the first English
translation 1927 towards an architecture
it's interesting Korb wrote six of his
seven chapters as standalone essays
first all published in l'esprit Nouveau
that's an interesting strategy right to
think of your work your chapters as
being autonomous but as a series they
aggregate into something more so this
was a strategy of corbs is often a
strategy of PhD students it's difficult
to write a whole book or something book
length like a dissertation but to go for
a stretch to write something like a long
scholarly article as a chapter and then
to imagine how their sequence that's the
job of the table of contents to make
sense of that to make the whole now
these are gonna get a bit more tricky
this book was incredibly important to
architectural history in theory any
guesses here it's a weird one it starts
out with typology then it goes into two
chapters based on architect then it
finishes with a methodology that's a
nice strategy not calling
though he's implicated wit coward
architectural principles in the age of
humanism and it too has this diagram
that lets you into the whole of the
project
his famous diagram Palladian villas
reduced and it's only once you have that
series in mind that Dana you can read
that table of contents perhaps more
productively what's nice about the
VidCon book is the addition of
appendices
what are those about how are those
useful but the exclusion of a forward or
preface you just dive into part one
something more contemporary I hope you
all get this one 1995
not delirious but it is delirious New
York that's the wrong that's the wrong
cover it is indeed delirious New York
and I think ended so Maria gets double
points 293 appendix a fictional
conclusion what is that about so I think
the different strategies for how you
bring a project to a close and this set
up predicts that the way you finish will
in no way be conclusive but it almost
sponsors all the other books REM will
write so it does offer not only a way to
take stock but to point to subsequent
work and I would hope that's really we
will talk to you today in these three
sessions the three sessions are
organized as follows session one the
repository based research chaired by
Maria Federico and that will feature
David Sofia Ricardo and Alvaro
presenting their table of contents
without taking a break we'll jump to
session
to field-based research that's chaired
by Ricardo de Costas featuring Andrea
Mohammed and un J's work will then take
a little tea break at 4 o'clock and come
back for the third and final session
studio based research shared by ammonia
de marchi and featuring 9 Arturo and
milords table of contents will wrap up
at this table I'll bring those session
chairs together and we'll have an
open-floor QA to discuss the results of
this a leaf is going to be our task
master mistress she's going to keep us
to time and I will ask the sessions the
sessions abide by the time each session
will go for about an hour
very good well I will turn the floor
over to Maria and her team opening up
with repository based research thank you
very much the subject of research is
very important to me and the way we
conduct research approach it in very
dissimilar ways across there I think is
a really fantastic subject of
investigation because it alternately
leads us to exchange and interrogate our
own methodology I was asked for the
organizers to make a very brief
introduction maybe coming from the
position of how we understand research
in my own unit and I'm trying to lead
into the larger questions that these
amazing projects raised and hopefully
will resonate across the school so of
course my unit is in here in a research
design the whole point of starting a
unit and running in a day is to bridge
this very unhealthy gap that has formed
for example in a number of American
schools between history and theory
curriculum and design studio curriculum
my own education was a deliberate
attempt to move from from the two
professional
to a history and theory program and
ultimately to bridge across the
depositary based research is the one
we're most familiar with or has been
familiar with throughout 20th century
now let me just say very quickly that
it's not just this particular session to
which I'm probably mostly related but
it's actually all the sessions of
today's event I think should be
considered together because in the unit
we deliberately break away from working
on one mode of researching such as
depository field base or design studio
experimentation based in fact they often
overlap coincide and inform one another
that that doesn't mean that an enormous
value can be derived from a focus and
and and intensity of an academic
exercise that a PhD would entail but I
also come from a context of immediate
design application and so three kinds of
research are often run and and stagger
for example starting with intense
saturation and Depository based research
followed by the unit trips we're going
to talk about in today's session and
other other events their value of travel
we do that of course and we do field
Diagnostics we often take that quite
quickly into studio based
experimentation now the reason why we do
all this is because we believe that not
just the Disciplinary depository but
also the field of the city out there had
a fantastic way to begin and animate the
project perhaps in isolation it's not
enough the depository based research is
extremely powerful but I think the field
based reality test is also extremely
valuable that also allows us to
challenge the previous conventions of
depositor based research I think it's
really important that we start to
question why history why theory why
discipline your project some people have
followed those extreme pendulum swings
in the last the end of the 20th century
we were told intermittently to do or not
do research to do or not do a PhD occur
we were almost convinced of its utter
uselessness just to of course suffer a
very natural
to the value of history precedent and
knowledge or a long-term project
the reason we I think is important to
open up the discussion is I think yes
many things do need to change fixed
camps led by starchitect your figures
yes that is something we should consider
perhaps even their concept of a movement
or historical canon that's fixed defined
closed we definitely need to consider
there are many things that were
unhealthy and less productive about the
historical research operating in the
architectural academic scene of the 20th
century at the same time I think there
were really powerful things that we
throw out with the bathwater which means
the ability to construct the project on
a much more solid intellectual
foundation ability to frame the
intuitive haphazard discoveries within
design studio in a context of a
long-term historical projects that
nevertheless continue and I think it's
important to articulate our
specializations a particular things that
we can do really really well and that is
not particularly camp mentality but it's
a question of disciplinary expertise
just a few words again on how we then
develop certain methodology and I think
it's just partly it's a provocation for
some of the tensions and problems we
encounter that could be discussed we try
to see research changing like I said
good things stay bad things go the good
thing is to stay in our minds is that we
can still immerse ourselves we can
saturate we can enrich our project world
with historical research but we are free
to draw our own stream of precedents
associations friendships and enemies and
friendships and kind of battles within
it second the canons of fluid history
kiss can be written affiliations can be
remade so the student the person doing
the work is ultimately in control of
what sort of historical context what
sort of priorities and affiliations will
be constructed so we put the student in
the driving seat and third there is
important to understand that oftentimes
when we working something passionately
intensely we only see the short term we
only
see the section I need to make we don't
really see the long-term repercussions
so I think it's really important that we
try to get you hooked and as also we as
teachers were deeply hooked on a number
a subject that actually spanned decades
of our lives or a career so the
importance of short term and long term
projects leading into the presenter of
presenters I don't know their work I
don't know they're amazing projects
unraveling very well but from what I
could gather from the snippets I think
it's really important that we celebrate
the work that opens up the question of
mining and looking with the French lens
on what is being found so building on
what I said our own interests are
historical depository is open to all of
us to redefine so we take what we find
and we miss read misuse we misplace so
we'll see a lot of conversations now
about how something could be revisited
and re affiliated such as relationship
between Russia and Western avant-garde
or colonial and kind of dominant
practices that leads into the questions
of architectural exchange I'm really
excited about the presentations that are
coming now because the notion of change
travel a traffic of architecture across
territories and culture is really
important then we're gonna layer it with
the questions of how the repository
versus the field base work collide the
trip the engagement with the raw reality
of the city how is that form of
Education knowledge production
ultimately that leads it seems to me
that the projects that are engaged in
tensions maybe in postmodern times there
would be seen as dialectics what
dialectics the big ones do we understand
architecture is a clash between past
present and future local global
political aesthetics so with their
several there were several threads that
are still running through the abstracts
and then much more contextual tensions
city architecture figure-ground form and
organization but most importantly all
these dissertations are asking a most
important question what do we do now
going from here what is it the
projection into the future
so they always produce with the view of
changing the way we research and design
tomorrow thank you
[Applause]
okay that's practical
[Music]
yes better okay thank you um my name is
David I'm sorry about this because I
forgot to bring the the the fire the USB
so I couldn't do the presentation from
there so my presentation is actually
it's not about my research but I will
see this presentation as a reflection
also for me
of what I've been done in conducting my
research by far so the title oh it's not
clear as well well the title is escaping
excavating evidence a reflection on
conducting a careful investigation so my
my arisen by cyclists oracle research
and my main problem of conducting a
historical recess actually is about
reading the facts because whatever the
thing that we have whatever we call as
effects in a historical research
actually or already happen in the past
so the problem is always how to read
them how to contextualize these facts
into something into something or let's
say a fresh narrative so we can have a
better or a fresh reading about these
events or agents so I think
Oh No I think I just put it back this
thing is it okay yeah perfect okay we'll
start with what is a methodology
methodology for me so for me methodology
has three function at least in my based
on my own experience first is to frame
the research to help you framing the
research second is to help me excavate
further information but what I need to
to find to help me supporting my
assumption and to construct my
argumentation and lastly it's about to
structure the outcome narrative and I
think for the last part is entirely
about the table of content so I think
every methodology needs to start with
the interests we need to start with the
subject of research and this is also
what I need in my research so I started
with the topic what I want to do so like
in my in my case I'm doing a research
about the production of architectural
knowledge in the dust is in this in the
early part of 20th century so this kind
of interests helped me to to to identify
what kind of system of inquiry that I
need it means that what kind of question
that I need to pose for this kind of
research so I always like these two
diagrams that I always use from this
book title architectural research method
by David Wong and Linda wrote and I what
I like from these two diagram because is
really explicitly described a strategy
of conducting a research from what you
have as a system of inquiry and then you
need to have a school of thought maybe
in
well what we call as a let's say
literature review and then the strategy
and tactics of conducting a research the
the right diagram is about the what kind
of question related to the type of
research that we are going to conduct so
in my case and I think in as a
historical in a reciprocal research
usually and well at least in my case I
would like to know at least more on the
methodology called questions about why
and how such events happen okay so the
system of inquiry usually lead to 3j
well I think we all know here that there
are three general logical question that
we can use for research deduction
induction abduction and in my research I
use induction because what I want to
know is the operation and and the why
question why things happen in the past
and what is the and we know also already
the effect at the present and what we I
want to know is actually in the the
event in between the mechanism in
between why'd I why this
cause-and-effect phenomenon oh good
so it reached at this point that in
order to find its operation then we need
to find evidence to construct the
documentation and to support the
assumption and in my case I use I use
Alki for investigation for my for my for
my instrument to find this evidence
the problem with archival investigation
is not because we cannot find what we
want but because there are abundant kind
of information and it can lead to
something that may be unexpected what I
mean unexpected is that sometimes you
find some things that can alter
everything may be the direction may be
the assumption because you don't know
that this kind of information exists so
for me doing inducting a careful
investigation is also tricky and it
needs also a particular methodology to
care to framing the to framing the facts
to framing the information so I I do in
my practice in my practice conducting
the research in in archive in a 5 Center
I usually start with something that I
call is framing effects so I will start
with three criteria usually it's very
general it's about the topic that's a
the top one and in the middle one is
about period and then the place I think
based on it the three criteria I can
contain some of the information in
archive into something that's more
related to my to my research
and about the media itself I all I will
start with information that brought but
this source of information published
regularly for instance like newspapers
and journals why I think newspaper and
journals is a good media to start with
because it provides you a map of
information of events and agents so it's
kind of a doing a survey and by this
actually after this one usually I can I
have this a general map about
information and I can start to classify
or do a prioritize which kind of
information that I would like to further
investigate so so from like this one is
actually based on my own research so
after I I did the first stage actually
the the criteria expanding so the the
topic becomes more specific and period
somehow extended and it is happen
actually unexpected because I didn't
realize that in order to talk about the
topic like the production architectural
knowledge into 20th century then I also
need to talk actually some years before
that in order to create a cohesive
argumentation about what happened so
this is only a can for me I don't think
I can thing to extend my period of
research if I didn't do the archival
investigation and also the place the
context of the place initially I only
want to do in order to research what
happened in the dance is in this but
then I realized I also need to do the
research what happened in the
Netherlands at the same period because
somehow what happened in the Asian is
kind of a dialogue between there what
happened in the metropolitan hinterland
and the colonized play country that's is
in this so the next phase will be what I
call with excavating the evidence which
what I did is looking for the firsthand
sources so if the first stage is looking
for just newspapers journals but the
second stage is trying to find the
firsthand sources percent accounts such
as journals drawings may be project
reports or statistic whatever that can
really give can provide illustration
information about what happened on
particular events or figures that in in
that period in the a specific period and
contacts so as you can see it also
expanded it always expanded so now I
found a lot of things that well for me
is kind of new so now it becomes there I
found that there are they were a period
called the ugly time period exit in the
dutch nederlands there's a one
particular period from 1935 1835 to 1895
which actually the art that's art
history and usually forgot and they do
not want to talk about but in 1995 the
Wright museum conducted this exhibition
which tried to construct a narrative of
what happened in that loss period and
somehow this loss period is really
related to what happening that is in
this because this kind of style where in
the Netherlands they were kind of
stopped after 1895 but then somehow it's
it's kind of important to read us it's
English so the way the style there is
forgotten but it is flourish in this in
the 20th century so it's something that
is a this is something to cover of
information that is you can find in in
archive so I think I just moved a type
of convention the last part
yeah sighs I mentioned it in my first
slide that for me the methodology
function in three ways so the last
function is of course about
dissemination it's about how we
structure the the research and how to
make the research can be digestible can
be accessible to the audience and I
think it's also needs some instrument to
do that because it's the nature of the
nature of the information or what we
need to do that is different I mean and
in my case I use the synchronic
structure it is based on structural is
theory that so I'm going to actually do
the order of my table of content based
on the aspect it's not currently so it's
not chronological order but it's based
on the internet it related aspects that
construct the narrative so this is the
table of content at least in at least
stage at my stage now so there will be
four chapters so the first chapter will
be talking about the the background the
preset of the before before the 20
century is about the late 19th century
well actually a few chapters always
start with the late 19th century but the
aspect that they focus is different so
the first one is more about the
financial and social economy the second
one is about the engineering the
engineers and the third chapter is about
the rise of the training institution and
the last chapter is about a house the
the delay out of the house a ping that's
all thank you
[Applause]
here actually this here and I'm working
on a PhD that hopefully will keep
changing its name you actually used
there the old title again and I really
wanted every year to come up with a
different title in some sort of registry
anyways the first point I want to make
is the fact that table of contents can
can work as a table or it ours just
contents and that says a lot for for the
way at least in this very specific
context we're bringing together an x-ray
of what this book that would eventually
kind of end up in the library with our
name coma PhD will be so trying to think
of how to order the content that will
become the table of contents I could
only think of Star Wars and III I need
to tell you a one maid story about Star
Wars in order to make my point growing
up I really didn't like Star Wars I
didn't understand the call they didn't
understand the frenzy around it and the
thing it had to do with the fact that I
watched it in the wrong order and I mean
I'm very serious like there's there is
this website and if you start kind of
typing in Google saying what is the
right order immediately the next thing
will come up is to watch the Star Wars
movies and there is this disjunction
between the time that the first episode
appeared and the order of of the whole
story right like I guess you're familiar
enough to understand what I'm what I'm
to say here's a chart with when the
episodes actually appeared like we
started with Episode four not even three
four five six and then go back to one
two three and now we're at the point
that again we go back to seven and
eventually eight I guess and in the
right is the actual kind of internal
chronological order and I think in these
two charts lays the whole argument of
how things end up in a book or in a film
and and the decision to start from the
middle this kind of in medias res that
happens here is basically what makes the
story work you could never start from
the beginning which is what's my mistake
I did the kind of the the normal order
started with a newer stuff the newer
films watching art actors that was more
more familiar with so if you do kind of
play the the films in the right order
that of they actually appeared you
understand that there are clues and
connections that they appear in order to
link the stories in an internal
chronology and in in in that sequence
there is always something new that
belongs both to the fact that there is a
new film that came out with more
information but also more context that
that allows us to understand what was
going on in in their initial film which
was actually the middle of them and I
think every book whether it is a PhD
dissertation or an oval has to work with
that same system in order so this is JK
Rowling's potter book overview seven
seven books in the making and they're
kind of all organized in the
Charter according to an internal
chronology of the books you see kind of
October to April but also like what kind
of information appears on every chapter
on on every book and they're either
they're different systems obviously this
Heller is outlined for catch-22 or
Hanuman Henry Miller's for Tropic of
Capricorn Faulkner actually kind of
wrote the chapters on on his walls and
and kind of arranged his body according
to what he wanted to look at them and
work on every everyday the smilers which
I kind of really and if you if you blow
it up and actually read it it's
extremely interesting it's as if they're
kind of many books in one like you can
read the different stories without
needing the context of what is around
but once you read them all together it
actually becomes that book and of course
there is the perfect exception of of
these kinds of and this kind of thinking
which is on the road that only has one
chapter and it has been written in in
one go with absolutely no structure it's
one story that cannot be broken down
there's no chapters there's there's no
paragraphs actually and I think it's
it's there to actually reinforce the
difference between that kind of thinking
and working and and this one so being
asked to produce one image of a table of
contents which doesn't exist by the way
it can be very honest with you I mean I
could make up one but I think it's much
more interesting to put on the table the
content which is what this is the
content as of right now on a table and
talk about it talk about what what's on
my table on my desktop or mine
my actual desk a less successful title
than the original one but I think right
now it's more important to stick to it
is the the trip on the party
architectural education our play so what
I'm looking at is architectural
education but I'm trying to dissect it
in a way that allows me to generate an
argument that says that teaching doesn't
happen inside the curriculum
it happens wedged between trips and
parties this is this is where the actual
learning happens and and the curriculum
is is a way to facilitate that that kind
of learning that we all do here but the
actual learning happens between marching
elephants for our works masquerade balls
excessive dancing heavy drinking road
trips etc etc I'm not gonna go further
into the argument I'm just a couple more
words about the the the category of the
trip and the party being the same in my
mind being that exception from everyday
student life there's a whole term that
leads up to the unit trip there's a
whole week that leads up to the
Christmas party and the the power of
this category of trips and parties that
that indeed I would agree with what
Mary's just said that brings us in in
contact with something much more real
and raw than kind of the medi the
mediated architectural presence that a
book allows or even you know a studio
environment allows
[Music]
I was actually kind of surprised that I
ended up on this group because I thought
I would be on kind of fieldwork but I I
I do understand what why I'm here
[Music]
because the the the whole point like
that the whole research revolves around
architectural education on the roads on
on the field not outside the classroom
basically and in in a way I operated
like that as well like I took myself
outside the library as much as I could
for obvious reasons and I ended up kind
of coming across these four amazing
archives and and the constraint I gave
myself was that there is a bigger
project there is a bigger argument
there's a bigger story to tell around
the trips and the parties but how I'm
gonna tell the story in inside the book
that is gonna end up in the library with
my name coma PhD would be focused only
on on the stories that I can tell
through archival material that I will
have come across in doing during my
research and it's very liberating and
very problematic in in the same way but
I'm happy to have applied that that
constrained especially because I think
the the kind of the four archives that
have been working with have have been
really studied but also really slighted
in in in the same time and they're kind
of dark corners around the shelves that
really interesting things can come up so
last year I visited Villa Medici in Rome
and they they have this very interesting
archive of you know the great projects
I'm not gonna show them but you know
what I'm talking about of the bazar
students coming to Rome and making these
amazing drawings of temples
then like us they further their
education and they can actually work
upon them and and makes him better and
then you know what I'm talking about
and here it is like this this little
folder in the corner that was not
describing the output the academic
output that they were supposed to send
back to Paris but the actual life of the
prizewinners in Rome and I'm only gonna
show you a couple of pictures there
there's that many and they're that
amazingly interesting and beautiful in
kind of their own right and and they are
describing this life that I couldn't put
together with the image that I had from
you knowl opposed studying in in Rome
and being very serious while he's kind
of making his argument about custom and
which temple came first or between came
second and they're they're only stories
that kind of come together with with his
archive that no one has touched and I
think not because they didn't find it
but because no one
maybe agrees with me that this is of
interest and they kind of get to see
this is Tony Garnier with a big beard
the one who came up with came different
back from Rome like the he came up with
city under scale while he was there and
and you you you get there's a there was
a previous drawing before that they're
kind of all awake and talking to each
other and there's this kind of like
after the party after the drinking after
the conversation where they're all kind
of sleeping collectively on this big
desk table sorry in in Villa Medici so
there's this operation that I'm
attempting to compare and contrast the
academic output with the actual everyday
life of the student in in Rome and I'm
doing it through this kind of archival
window that allows me to look both at
the work and
the life there is a smaller and less
interesting archive that has been
probably exhausted in in Paris but it
does have the the life of the students
in Paris the kind of not the best
students when it up in Rome but the good
enough students to have made it to that
school and describes the life of the
utter yeah it describes the kind of
crazy carnival masquerade balls and
again like with with the similar
methodology I'm kind of bringing
together that aspect of architectural
education with the actual output that
were very familiar with as far as the
bazaar are concerned the third archive
that I'm working with is that of course
Santino's doxiadis he was this very
well-connected Greek architect who ended
up having a kind of a global presence
during his time but I'm really focusing
on the de l'eau de l'eau symposium
it's his this project that he was
attempting he attempted for 10 years
actually in a row inviting really really
important figures to Greece in order to
take a collective holiday together they
would cruise around the islands visit
vernacular architecture visits on to the
antiquities get extremely drunk dress up
and talk about architecture all that on
on a boat on on the Aegean Sea during
the summer and he took this operation
extremely seriously this is one of the
charts that you can find in the archive
where he's actually kind of giving
grades to the people he invited in the
first year saying this one was really
good like very talkative we should
invite them again the other one didn't
dance maybe keep them as you know at the
end of the list next year and and you
kind of get to see how serious he was
about
constructing that trip and party in
order in the end to actually produce
architectural knowledge through the
conversations that he orchestrated
amongst this kind of very important and
famous historians architects there are
this is again I always find it very
entertaining like there's this this
lists at the archives where you see
which pictures people are visiting and
which ones they're actually buying the
rides from so there's all these party
pictures that everyone wants to look at
like you see everyone's name when
they've registered just to look at that
that box but they never take them out
like they're never published and amongst
the invited people in this very famous
educational cruise was but mr. fuller
him on the picture there and he was
lucky enough that his birthday was
always in that week of the traveling and
and there's like ten years of
buckminster fuller's birthdays one year
he he celebrated being dressed up was an
ancient Greek and it's it's the same day
we're in the morning he's visiting and
an ancient Greek temple and at noon he's
giving a lecture of four hours he
wouldn't shut up but they would still
invite him back and in the evening and
Ikey he would kind of dress up as an
ancient Greek and continue the
conversation if you will the last
archive that obviously it's kind of very
close to home and I fought not to get
into but here I am is that of the a a
and and there's I think so much wealth
in trying to understand this institution
and I understand the the pedagogical
experiment that it represented through
the lens of the festivities the
celebrations that took place here where
that is
the the spring abroad trips that were
there just before the unit trip was
implemented there's this very famous
trip in 1972-73 that year were they a
leased a plane and flew the whole
diploma school to California and this is
the time where most of the people on the
plane was the first time being on a
plane
Peter cook's first time being on a plane
and and kind of unleashed in California
their their stories about what what
happened they're just gonna talk about a
different time but the this kind of
legendary carnival this image that I
think haunts me and haunts many people
of the director of the school on the
elephant Pink Floyd playing at the AAA
this is the publication that came out of
that trip to California there are lots
of goals that need to kind of be
addressed and and kind of put the right
perspective from from from this point of
view no to understand what actually
happened and how actually that changed
or didn't the mentality and the student
culture of the AAA
at that time so this is the content
basically and it's sitting on my table
and it's it's waiting for an order for
the story to be told
[Music]
last week slide this is I visited burner
show me trying to get some images from
that legendary trip to California he
didn't have much but he had these slides
that he would kind of organize other
slides with in order to turn them into
categories and there is one that's
Junction obviously and it's rare there's
another one that is city and but the the
one I think that is more relevant here
is that of event and I think in the end
the the the content will be organized in
a table looking at the different agency
all these events that I'm talking about
had on experiment architectural
education yeah so I didn't bring a
particularly or at all formalized
presentation and like the two previous
ones
I suppose I kind of make up for it for
having by having the most formalized
table of contents of them all because
I'm hearing representation of like the
experience of the recently completed PhD
student what I brought was to kind of I
don't know gonna call them books because
one of them is my thesis and it's not a
book to kind of volumes my thesis which
is called architecture and
counter-revolution and then it has a
really boring subtitle the ideology of
the historiography of the Soviet
avant-garde it's like one of the little
things that I would like to change if I
like retrospectively was just at least
change the server tile to the Western
invention of the Soviet avant-garde
would kind of function better although
we I also think it sounds a little bit
more trite I don't know
[Music]
and I brought another book called
Western Marxism and the Soviet Union
which is a book that I found when my
thesis was pretty much finished
I think uppal of years ago and I'm my
presentation really senses essentially
consists of comparing these two tables
of contents these are two very similar
researches at a lot of levels my thesis
is essentially a history of the
historiography Western historiography of
Soviet architecture so it's like a
compendium of everything everybody has
ever said about it in the architectural
world sort of at least it tries to get
close to that
whereas this book is a history of the
Western historiography of the Soviet
Union so like I'm compiling what Western
architects have thought over time Soviet
architecture was this book is compiling
what Western Marxists over time thought
the Soviet Union was so you can kind of
see that obviously there is a kind of
but again I just ran into this at one
event at the so us a couple of years ago
and unfortunately I couldn't take it
into consideration in my thesis because
by then I was in full output mode and I
accepted no more input these tables of
contents are radically different and I
will put it in a way the way I would say
that I would clarify this I suppose
would be to say that mine is a thesis
and this one isn't and this kind of
dramatically changes the problem is the
distinction is not really at the level
of mmm
like there's no architecture or even
kind of cultural issues here and mine is
about architecture as a cultural issue
and it actually it might easy say
explicitly about the significant
distinction
of writing a history you're kind of a
cultural history history of culture and
the history of like political economy
which is a kind of a central theoretical
problem in the way the framework with
which kind of the Left reads political
issues from what kind of the Marxist
life to the kind of contemporary liberal
left and but but the distinction between
the two theses is not at that level the
one that I'm bringing here the
distinction that is important is at the
level of let's say I mean and here I'm
gonna use two terms that mark hasn't
gave us in those kind of first years PhD
seminars I attended four five years ago
in which he proposed that thesis is kind
of always dealing with a problem of
articulating two different structures
what he called the logical structure and
what he called the rhetorical structure
and the logical structure that both of
these exist at level of the argument the
argument has a logic to it in which it
organizes the content but at the same
time there's a rhetorical dimension of
it
the way in which the argument acts on
the context let's call it in the final
PhD presentations of last year when I
was presenting my finished thesis she
was at the end of the event was asking
us the three of us were presenting about
kind of the experience of writing the
experience of producing the thesis in
general terms after the presentation of
all the content in the said run and I
was kind of obstinately refusing to
answer it in a way that would fit
Sophia's research I was like refusing to
give the experience of the production of
the thesis as in giving CMOS and the
audience one picture of those that Sofia
showed with me in it what I was kind of
trying to say as an answer to that
question is the problem of precisely
having I mean you you have the problem
of constructing an argument but then you
have the problem of making that argument
fit the context in which it is produced
as an act on what I call kind of the
intellectual space of the polemic which
is really in my opinion the only space
of production of the thesis that matters
it's not a repository or the field or
the studio these spaces are kind of the
difference between the spaces is
entirely secondary to the fundamental
problem of the space of the polemic and
I think that's kind of probably a
conclusion we're going to arrive at at
the end of the session at least I hope
so because I think I'm right the so the
action of the thesis of the argument in
the context forms the thesis itself it's
not really that you're changing your
argument to adapt to the context so you
can like sell it better it's that I mean
the the the metaphor I would use as a
kind of a visual metaphor because kind
of architects like those is the problem
of like the the the projection of the
object on the plane to produce the
perspective in which the plane of the
projection is the context it is imposed
on you you don't get to choose the plane
of the projection but you do have your
own object which is in this case your
argument in relation to the material and
you have and you need to kind of find
the place where you place yourself so
that the projection on the plane that is
imposed on you can be the kind of more
operative more more interesting more
revealing projection and this connects
to the central problem which I think is
inherent in the production of the of
what we call a thesis which is kind of
the move from the
the empirical relationship with the
material with the theoretical
relationship with material I usually
kind of illustrate this I always do it
to all my students in history in theory
with an example from the field like the
historical development of the what we
today call the science of biology
scientific field of biology the the
biology kind of begins through sort of
taxonomy you have several people like
the most well known name of it with
Linnaeus who gave his own name to like a
myriad of different species that start
looking at biological organisms and
starts kind of seeing or observing them
analytically in a physical way and
observing how their they function their
structure and kind of articulating them
and so you have he ends up with a kind
of a list that organizes like living
beings through that structure you have
and you end up with things like
obviously basic observable
characteristics like they live in the
water so they're fish fish are aquatic
beings and fish in the aquatic beings is
sort of the synonym is the same thing
but then later on you have what I
believe is the move to theory from the
empirical relationship to the
theoretical relationship and you have
Darwin and Darwin says well I actually
have a theoretical kind of model that
explains how these objects but organisms
kind of happen they're not static
they're not just there they rely to each
other and they evolve over time they
change and when you start constructing a
model that explains how the thing is
transformed how the objects are
transformed the way in which you
categorize them inherently changes
because it matches the theoretical model
that understands things that are
different it's not that Linnaeus was
wrong objectively but it's just that the
empirical truth he was producing was
much less useful and interesting than
the theoretical truth that then Darwin
can construct and so whales are in fish
they're mammals the categorization in
general changes and where things appear
changes and this becomes a central
problem here this table of contents is
as you can probably see relatively
simply chapter one - one is introduction
chapter two from 17 to 29 what Western
Marxists think the Soviet Union is and
then it's divided like by trends of
thought now we're going to go 29 to 41
and the same thing 41 to 56 it is this
is this is a repository this book it's
in a fantastic book there's nothing
wrong with it but it's not a thesis it
does not produce a theoretical analysis
of the object it's pretty it's it's
presenting it's an amazing collection of
data but it's not what we call the
thesis my problem becomes the following
this bit here this part three is
essentially that it's the same thing as
that book had but there's then there's
the rest of it and also and I started
with this I produced like something like
three or four tables of contents four
tables of contents over the duration of
the PhD this one the final one I kind of
arrived that in the middle of the third
year I think like middle end of the
third year my by the way of the fourth
this was already clear but I started
with this in fact like the first bit I
wrote off the thesis was roughly this
this was written in you know the second
year but then gradually as I was
researching the problem of like the
Soviet avant-garde from the Western
perspective it became kind of
immediately immediately became kind of
obvious immediately evident that there
was something missing but not exactly
what by the end of the second year it
was very clear that the category of the
Soviet avant-garde exists within the
general problem of the category
of the avant-garde as a whole and indeed
the category of the avant-garde as a
whole is predicated upon the Western
history of the Soviet avant-garde like
the two are interconnected in fact we
have a seminar with I don't remember her
name it was organized in the HCT master
course by marina Greek researcher who
teaches in China and she was precisely
tracing the use of the word avant-garde
curiously enough an obvious coincidence
with my problem and the she wasn't sure
that explicitly I well IIIi
noted down how often the word
avant-garde which is a word that is
effective you sort of invented in the
1960s how often did this term matches
like these several objects that it's
related to and the Soviets avantgarde /
Russian avant-garde was by far than she
said definitely the most the object that
is most often referred to through the
term avant-garde precisely in this
period which is kind of nice I wish I
could have quoted her in my thesis but I
wasn't done yet so as I realized that
two things are essentially connected and
that the ideological problems of the
Western reading of that non-western
object became intrinsic to the category
of their from Garvey in general terms as
we were dealing with it the little thing
that I used to think was gonna happen
which was like the second half of the
introduction which was going to talk
about the avant-garde as a whole became
the entire first half of the theses as I
was writing the introduction the
introduction became ninety pages long no
I actually know 199 pages long and it
became at the first half of the thesis
and it had to become that because the
theoretical reading of for me to produce
for me to be more like Darwin than like
Linnaeus I had to do that
I'm gonna finish here can you hear me
well no okay no better so thank you very
much for being here my name is Alberto
and I guess I would like to depart from
an idea that more the mark Hasse point
out which is the idea of the table of
contents something that somehow is the
final product also writing in a way I
said can be read and to move from that
into what Mark has said and to
understand it has a tool right the only
thing is this is a soft word that I'd
use the most I guess a I'm in the last
year of my PhD and and just to say a few
words you have said not to talk about
content but just to point out my
mattresses it's about the desert and
particular bit journeys of artists
architects that have been in the desert
okay we would see but the so same word
is a tool that I use the most in a way
and what you can see is one of the tools
that you can insert is precisely a table
of content okay so you just it can be
generated itself and it's a way of
saying okay that's it that's really the
table content that I have in a way and
you can see where I am that I have
written up to here but then it changes
and you see what is not written yet so
that for me is not really the table of
contents as you would suggest M what I
wanted to do in today's presentation is
to reveal how throughout these three
years that I have some of my PhD the
idea of the temporal content it has been
really a productive tool of reciting
basically the archival material
that I was collecting so I supposed to
Sofia was saying that he's not very
comfortable in the idea of the archive
though she has done a lot
I'm feeling very much comfortable with
ADFA archive and I think it's a field to
reclaim somehow nowadays in history of
architecture in a history really looking
for first-hand sources and rigor ok so
my first table of content and these
precisely with that so throughout my
research I have been visiting different
archives and collected and very much
with the idea that David was pointing
out to the idea of well Maria was saying
idea of mining for me in connection with
the desert it was very important idea
digging up of kind of finding lost
things among sand and dunes and things
like that so the archive was a real in
which to dig dig up things but at the
same time I was very interested on the
idea of the archive is a space that
builds up you have archives like
novelist this Spanish archive is in a
castle so I was interested in the idea
of the archivist spades itself and how
it informs not only a way of cataloguing
of maintaining but also as a way of
claiming something about the the content
of the staff so in a way to
understanding it as a table of content
in a way in a special way this is very
clear in in one of the archives our was
visit innocence and surgeons songs
museum and and one of the ideas that
influence my research visit in this
archive or sagir precisely the need of
having a collection of having an archive
was important of generating your own
material of collecting of course
this was relevant and I started to
collect of this material that I was not
really sure if I was to use or not but I
was building up my own personal archive
in a way and the way of organizing it
somehow comes influenced by borkus and
this quote about the frictional I guess
Chinese encyclopedia that race with
their categorization and as he says in
this remote pages it is written or
animus I divided into a belonging to the
Emperor be embalmed see time the sucking
pigs is etcetera etcetera of course this
is also the parting point of Foucault
but in the parallel is placed at the
order of things depart from this joke in
a way but it's the idea that the catalog
is never kind of objective and kind of
unimportant but really in the way you
organize a material somehow puts forward
an argument I started off with
generating like a database of organ
organizing material in a very simple way
but your third the location the year
that I was doing and I started relating
by tax and also framing together
different images mostly so in a way I
was interested on this ideal having a
personal archive but movies and the
banality of yes is my personal
collection and that's it and try to
generate like a source that could be
shared by people okay
it was also organized especially in
dreams of the city that I was interested
in and historically so that changed that
idea of having a digital contemporary
version of an archive changed when I was
visiting another archive which is the
working city and on scene the project
for purple that I guess more or less you
know is not it's down the road and
you invited yesterday but ideas that he
was generating this collection of
reproductions of works of art throughout
history and he was arranging them in
this kind of work his way of relating
things that are not a priori related and
what was interesting for me is precisely
that space of the reading room in which
he was displaying all these different
constellations I would call them
different works of art put together
which in a way became his pace of
production the way he was disseminating
history of art producing his writing
about it or giving lectures was
precisely not spacing which he was at
the center in elliptical plan if we was
able to see all history spread in a way
M so in that way of having reproductions
and starting them arranging them in a
very nice it is true that I was a bit
low budget but at the same time these
transform my workspace okay so I put it
in my room and I started in and up and
relating things um that was a key moment
for me because rather than just
collecting and collecting and collecting
histories about the desert I was
starting to put limits to them to start
framing them okay this is a
constellation of and I was generating
different ones but in a way the idea of
collecting was very much a frame by the
physicality of the board so for me to
move from the digital into the physical
collection was really relevant also I
said the thing of I was moving in low
budget because by the time I was not
to be said that that's it okay and there
has been question well okay so I have to
speed up I started producing all the
material that I had in a collection of
postcards but these guys were and
somehow we were in correspondence and
these are the constellations so this
idea of not being able to visit the
desert was also very relevant for me
because I was very much focusing base it
in archives and seeing through their
eyes seeing the material that they were
producing so these constellations were
playing with idea of workers like having
a bit surreal sort of feeling to the
rigorous categorization and and I moved
to reveal the technology of vision that
they was using how I was in the desert I
was through the technologies of vision
on these different people that was
visiting so one is on the Cyclops I know
it was in the Icarus this is not yet
that they would have content but it was
the way that frame most of my thesis a
I'm gonna move into very quickly the
second element which was an object that
I found in an archive which is the Sun
compass that brought what null which was
a geologist I was working in in the
water between a deep anivia mmm was
using to navigate the desert so in the
desert I don't know if you know what
there was a shifting which you start
using cars and because of the cars you
can reduce the magnetic em compass
because he was affected by the methods
of the cars basically so he mended this
solar compass that was put in in front
of his car and he was able to navigate
using the Sun okay because the Sun was
changing with the azimuth and he was
able to
recalibrate constantly I thought the
subject okay the Sun compass and what
was interesting it was he was producing
a series of maps of the desert thing
with the complexity of the geography is
traced basically by the inner area he
was doing with a smooth spine lines okay
so it was important for me to somehow
embed the idea of navigating through the
desert was the way I was journeying so
how so the way I communicate that is
that this was my first table of content
in a way which was to organize the
complexity of the material that I was
having by setting up a map in which were
very clear constraints which was it was
to start in Paris moving to Egypt and
then navigate westwards through the
north of Africa up to go back into Egypt
or into Paris sorry and that has to do
more with the argument of the theses but
somehow this circularity was helping me
to organize the material then so it's
one of these fragments of maps is a
chiral maps that these guys were
producing on the areas that they were
visiting and I started also all the
Nicene in accordance to another criteria
which is the technology efficient the
means of transport and different ways of
organizing I'm gonna move on because I'm
super behind but the idea is that
finally I ended up with producing super
grid of content in a way that was the
previous step to start in writing so
this came from visiting the the archive
of cell which this really somehow
claimed him as his father and and behind
this super were stories he was writing
in heart like a super clear mathematical
order which which he produced his books
and I wanted to apply that logic of
very clear rigidity and at the same time
a sort of madness about it okay so the
way this works is on the left you have
the different chapters okay I have
twelve chapters and they are gather
around clusters with one specific topic
so where you see the red line the red
line sorry
is the end of one cluster that talks
about the limits of identity the second
cluster is about the limits of mission
the limits of knowledge and then on
hybridity at the end and on the upper
part you have the differing constraints
that I was putting myself though it was
to start in 1848 and just look at a
hundred years so in move chronologically
as well as geographically NHSN I was to
have a main character the kind of the
type of character
I was secondary character the main book
secondary so I was setting up this
series of like constraints that I needed
to have and that I still work in
basically
yeah and need integrase well I would say
[Applause]
momentum we'll call it the organizers
have asked that we keep our conclusions
and I won by the this session chairs
back to the table at the very end but to
press on and introduce Session two with
Ricardo giving a few words in front of
presentations by andrea muhammad and
youngjae at that point we will take a
break after those three students this
last session is the only one was for
students will take a coffee break and
come back for the last session after
which we will be able to take stock of
all three sessions ricardo okay let's do
it
so good afternoon everybody my name is
ricardo de austin i would try to be
short
i'll try to be on time so i'm gonna tie
myself here as some of you know I'm a
teacher Intermediate School for the last
many years right Maria but I'm also run
a studio down the road Conine the
hostess with my partner nati Akatsuki
and I was very interested in of course
intrigue to be part of this conversation
because I just the title interest me so
much the title about field research is
something that I tend to study and I
start my career in fact with a project
that was a bit of a middle finger to
traditional contextual understandings of
we need to go to a site to understand
the place the idea of the hanging
scimitar of Baghdad if this project that
we did in 2000 and from 2004 to 2006 was
exactly at trying to see our own
relationship to the
context of Iraq that we were not there
we're not from there we don't have
family there but although we were going
for protests and manifestations and and
their idea with that was how can we
actually discuss a context that is part
of TV news that is part of the media
attic that we constantly exposed to it
so the project itself is observed by 6's
a TV camera so my started into context
and a lot of people tend to think I'm
very interested in context was exactly
not doing the traditional context so the
idea of the of fieldwork perhaps I'll
try to perhaps introduce the discussion
for us to throw a few interesting
questions about the distortion of
context the distortion of field and -
how can we create a center of gravity
that we can maneuver with a certain
independence so my field of reference
primarily is literature and it's fiction
and is mythology so I'm fascinated by
writers like someone who shies or
Gabriel Garcia Marquez which are able to
tell a whole cosmology about Colombia or
british-indian
and also create a sense of imagery a
sense of non-literal verbose
configuration of what the context they
are trying to describe or the fieldwork
that is trying to describe so these are
some of the books we published the first
one that the latest one called disc
averages and other creatures in promised
lands and this is the table of content
this second book here called am bigger
space we actually we told the editor in
America preset on press that the title
was birthgiver
and they said 'no this is not our
architectural title you gotta give
something now so we end up becoming
ambiguous space which somehow described
and doesn't describe so if use a bit
alien our career so far but i really
like this idea
currently that I'm to think about ideas
of context and ideas of how we operate
in some context with gravity so a lot of
the titles a lot of those words might
sound quite eccentric to some of you
like Lent warms phantoms more filled
builders scavengers or their even the
word creature but as the authors that I
mentioned before the table of content
and the organization of research for us
is really about how the sympathy of
words also create his own constellation
by naming something by giving a shape by
giving a form somehow you also attract
and repose order assimilation so the
idea of naming the idea of analyzing a
context with this kind of contemporary
digital and noise is very much part of
our endeavor something as well that like
for example books like American Gods do
very well is exactly to think about when
you migrate when you bring your contact
when you go to another context do you
also bring your context with you that's
what this book which is now actually
Amazon series on Amazon talks about it
talks about when you bring your context
when you come as a migrant you also
bring the gods and you also bring the
traditions and rituals and what happens
to them what they do not have the value
or the circle or cosmology that happens
in traditional communities so we travel
we take the students particularly in
turn three too many places places that
tends to seeing not their comfort zone
so for example Varanasi in India where
do we have a sacred River along the same
river if you take a long section of this
River you see on the top people
defecating urinating down the river five
meters down we see people washing
clothes and down the river even lower
you see the sacred cremation of bodies
and the deposit of these bodies on the
river and why you might think that most
of the people are ignorant by not doing
something about that in fact they know
very well what they doing some of the
people having a bath everyday in this
place and knowing that the water is very
polluted they are the ones they are
doing pitch these at universes of water
filtration there so I'm fascinated by
what's the cognitive mechanism that
enables that to turn off and turn on
certain intelligence there is a
decision-making there that is that they
bring the context of the sacred above
the context of scientific rationality so
we visit through a lot of these places
we travel to some of these contexts and
and part of this conversation is about
engaging with different characters how
can we instead of the fieldwork perhaps
being a concentration of rare factual
reasoning which is always necessary
objectivity is necessary in some point
of the research for us I'm fascinated
but also the this calling automatically
here this kind of encryption within the
sites like this sample around this core
which was all mined but the only thing
left was this Ganesha temple is that is
one of the temples of worship you might
call it power control for the workers or
simply a respect and we work with a way
that by giving names by creating
imagination or by selecting images and
they can assimilate some of these stalks
like seasonal village or suspended
village that this can inform projects
which as we call with chromatic
strategies like ingest when you have a
you have outer node outside the scale
you bring something else because of the
of the composition so some of these
compositions are we generate in our
generator from photos from drawings but
also from artifacts like this artifacts
from Peru which actually is an
architectural model
the architectural model is the fieldwork
they take they used to take the Incas
used to take these out of their house it
was a little like environmental device
they took this every day that I left
their house with this one is a wind
blower and another
one is a water capsule so they used to
take their house with them every day
which was part of the cosmology or the
nagura canvass which is also that was
used for a land ownership I think also
as is going to be discussed soon when
they lost their land this campus was
utilized to prove that the desert was
not invisible or unoccupied this was to
prove in court that those guys could
earn eight minutes could earn a vast
tract of land so suddenly a document is
created out of Mythology No out of
tradition out of this context and it's
transverse it has a friction it has a
validity to it so I'm very interesting
about this conversation that we can have
with with lack of a better word some
kind of a proto mythological spaces and
at the same time at digital spaces where
some of these decisions are made so we
make drawings and some of these drawings
try to create a bring that those
contradictions they have different
scales
they have different times they don't
have they don't are not drawn the same
plane similar to that little Peruvian
house and they also don't talk don't
only talk about perhaps what is written
on the books that describe the place
some other outputs talking about the
table of content as organization of
their research the output here also
organized research this was a
installation we did with the students at
the Embassy of Brazil to tweet two and a
half years ago or two years ago and it's
a map of Rio de Janeiro all those that
the idea of when you go somewhere and
you we have partnerships with
anthropologists with people too which
are dealing with land with different
aspects of land from anthropology to
social workers to actually policies you
find the incredible amount of stories
that is hard to bring to the debate to
justify people using a
and so part of the output of going to
field work I think is about trying to
encrypt and try to create an output
which try to achieve organize the
complexity which is not spoken yet so I
think that my interpretation of field
work is of course we strive for clarity
but I'm very interested on the from
drawings to diagrams like this one and
artifacts as a way that we can perhaps
not run so quick on the research of what
is fieldwork and amazingly enough some
of those conditions are brought back
into sites like this sites were the
coast is moving three kilometers a year
so how do we deal with that of course we
need data we need to measure those data
and that data I cannot do it I don't
have that expertise I need that data
coming from satellite from the
Bangladesh stations and the USA stations
they are reading this coast that moves
at 3 kilometers a year due to global
warming so I'm very interested on the I
wrote here a few questions then just to
maybe spice up our discussion at the end
so how can you identify or present what
is not easily quantifiable or it's not
yet on the protocol of architectural
research
how can comparisons in case studies be
cross reference for example
pre-industrial land ownership patterns
and could some of those cultural
elements and neighbor conversations
between spatial traditions land usage
and contemporary issues Oh in the last
one is fieldwork purely on the side of
local contextual elements or projective
areas of digital no house and practices
bring different ideas to the field these
are just some questions and I don't know
if I understand all the questions myself
but I'm very very interested in what
they have to say in terms of
establishing the disorganization of
thought so perhaps different from many
people here I work with imaginative and
not fully explained ideas and I think
that gives a great leverage for
exploring they don't know
but now we're going to going to see
three amazing students with Andrea
Mohammad and Jay so let's see also what
they have to say thank you very much hi
I'm Andrea I'm on my third year there
was a struggle coming up with a table of
contents just beginning of this week I
told her curse that awesome I was going
to pull out I feel like I'm constantly
in the cusp of changing the table of
contents there's this constant movement
of going in and out focusing magnifying
going into each chapter and then pulling
out and then realizing that what I just
wrote has nothing to do what with what
my table of contents was is this
constant going in zooming in zooming out
zooming in and realizing that I might
have wasted probably two years of my PhD
just going in and out and not nothing
you sure what this is about so for now
at least what it is about I'm writing
about Singapore and how with national
development and then coupled with the
limitation of the amount of space that
we have there's conflicts of interest
and because of that a lot of policies
introduced like the 99 year lease whole
properties there's also the land
acquisitions act where the government
can acquire your land at any time even
though it's a privately owned land and
the 1998 burial policy which means that
burials can only last for 15 years and
the cemetery estimation exercises which
has cleared cemeteries in Singapore and
all these challenged the concepts of
home and land ownership by discussing
these policies that these are aims to
reflect on spatial technologies to
tackle land scarcity but these policies
are not only used as pragmatic we used
to solve the problems of them scarcity
but it's also a reflection of the
state's power and authority over the
ground as a young nation saying it was
about 53 years old
it is multicultural and here comes a
bigger struggle is to forge a national
identity and inculcate a sense of
belonging and retainers to do what
rootedness alone has something to do
with the ground but yet at the same time
the irony comes when the government is
moving the ancestral remains from the
ground and the ground at the earth is
constantly shifting and constantly
moving so the thesis opens up the
discussion on such difficulties and
ironies and the state strategy to try to
decipher what an authentic national
identity is so this is the length the
cityscape was Singapore and the public
housing which about 87% at the moment of
population is in these public housing
and these are the old burial sites this
image was taken from a film that was
made called moving house I was trying to
say that in Singapore there's no such
thing as a final resting place and
there's no that so in this particular
film this grief was being exhumed and
this was at like 5:00 in the morning at
dawn and they were going to excavate the
cemetery so the table of contents
firstly this image is a cone the latin
phrase at the bottom means that if the
the owner of land owns the land from the
center of the earth to the heavens so I
just imagine the ground as a huge cone
it we always imagined ground as
something a plane or you know but in
Singapore especially this phrase
actually doesn't apply because when you
own a piece of land you only own thirty
meters underground and whatever the
height allows you to build up to so I
start off by looking at what national
identity means and especially
post-colonial identity Singapore is made
up of Chinese Malay Indians and others
and this and this segregation actually
in itself is not multiracial I'm not not
multicultural and then I look at homes
for the living so I look at why public
housing system here is necessary and how
by using these some policies home and
rootedness to place is the same thing I
look at the relationship of the ground
and its
and a national identity as well and how
Singaporeans are never living very close
to the ground
they're always 40 stories 30 stories
above the ground and even that the
public housing flats are designed to not
even have a ground story so there's no
one actually living on the ground and
then in the next chapter I thought I
talk more about homes for the dead and I
thought to talk about how cemeteries
were being cleared and all the bodies
exhumed and in a recent case actually
when bodies were exhumed new houses were
being built and a lot of Asian cultures
I'm sure many cultures around the world
are very superstitious and this will
probably not go well with many people
living in the next cemetery but for some
reason there is this public amnesia or
there is this new tradition where it's
okay to live on on on cemeteries and in
fact the demand for those flats they are
built they're actually really really
high driving the cost of public housing
to about four hundred thousand pounds
per flat so this is public housing flats
and even that demand is very very high
and I look at how because of this how to
deal with death the government has also
built public too large crematoriums or
which are the main crematoriums in
singapore and the architecture of these
crematoriums actually show a stripping
away of traditions and cultures if
there's so many cultures that were in
Singapore the architecture actually has
this ambiguous plain architecture that
tries not to have any symbolisms of any
religion and doesn't it's not biased to
anything
so I I look at this stripping away of
tradition and coming up with a new
identified entity of pragmatism and so I
look at the new traditions and the
Singapore identity and the relationship
of ground to national identity and I
like to play with metaphors so my titles
are like the post mortem and the final
the final part of my thesis I know I
love the ground rules and I talk about
the sense of self and I really
discover what like psychologically what
the personal identity and how it's tied
to national identity and how that is in
relationship to the ground so yeah so
what I hope to do is to put alongside
how the hones for the living if you
can't tell it it's on the side
and then home so the bid on the other
side which strangely looks similar to me
so so yeah that's that's my pieces and
that's my people have contacts for now
thank you hello my name is Mohammed I
submit in a week so I'm in a very weird
place right now I'm actually kind of
this is well actually the table of
constant presence in today differs from
the pea table of contents that is in
this booklet which I submitted a week
ago so yes exactly so I have kind of a
bit of hindsight's in which we made this
presentation after I've structured
almost everything I think and so my
introduction is kind of just the basic
introduction where we have the research
methods and research questions and so on
and so forth but ever since I can
remember I mean I remember the first
slide I had when I started the PhD here
which was I had these three domains and
was a biology computation and urban
design and for the past four years my
entire thesis has revolved around these
three domains and what it does involve
is an exhaustive kind of literature
understanding of the current state of
the art of specific subfields within
these three domains I'm not much
interested in all of biology or all the
computational role of urban design I'm
more interested in evolution
specifically evolutionary computation
and urban variation more importantly
though even those three subfields are
quite extensive and so between them I've
kind of highlighted specific disciplines
that I find most interesting and that
have contributed the most to my research
and what I really like about these kind
of sub disciplines is that they're not
all related
to one another and that has pushed my
research into different areas that I
feel I didn't really expect beforehand
when I started essentially when I
started my research it was all about
urban design but then later on I've
really kind of jumped into evolution and
started taking courses in the natural
history you know Museum of New York on
evolution and evolution for educators
and then I started taking courses on
computation and now I'm kind of finding
myself between this computation section
that I can't really get out of and so
this is one of the most difficult
chapters not because it was difficult to
do but because it was difficult to
situate chapter 3 mainly because it came
about from about my second year until
today where I continuously developed
these analytical tools into which I can
evaluate the application of evolutionary
computation in urban design and this is
a section that I've moved around my
thesis I'm not really sure if is gonna
stay here to be honest so I'm quite kind
of you know straightforward with how I
conducted my research its revolves
around several experiments and so the
first sets of experiments revolved
around the application of evolution of
computation and specifically within that
the application of evolution computation
for single objective problems or multi
objective problem so essentially just
design problems comprised from a single
objective or multiple objectives and the
comparison between these two and all the
experiments are conducted are sets or
utilizing a urban superblock in
different regions or countries and of
course the the comparison between these
two and the methods of which I've
started to develop into how do you set
up a design problem something that is
constantly overlooked when applying
evolutionary compensation and design the
design problem in the regulation between
Fitness objectives or design objectives
gene pools or variables and the body
part or the actual geometry that is
being evolved and so this is when I
started this is kind of the first steps
of where I already developed the
analytical tools
and the statistical analysis and this is
kind of one of the first you know times
this was applied as a a degenerative
process and not just analytic process so
the whole point of these tools was to
learn from the experiments and use them
as a feedback mechanism to further drive
the second set of experiments which is
kind of the second stage of this chapter
it's which I've learned from those first
and then so the first chapter was
creating population sizes of about 400
solutions this chapter started to
increase that population size to
thousands of solutions and then this is
where we started I started to integrate
kind of the statistical analysis as a
feedback mechanism and how I can
correlate each individual that's being
evolved to how it looks to its position
within the the objective space which is
kind of dance craft there so this kind
of this first strategy really builds up
my my comfort zone so to speak I've
became very comfortable with these tools
I became very comfortable with you know
specifying or generating the design
problem and now we're and now I wanted
to test these tools and methods that
I've developed in to do different
scenarios one which is application of
them for the developments or of a super
block in a plan sitting in a in two
distinct extreme biomes one which is a
city in Russia and Nora Liske can one of
the most populated or x'q cities and
this is where kind of you know I started
to really understand the impact of these
tools and generating variation using the
same super block that was being used to
design and so the whole point here is
how can we start to tackle the same
fitness objectives
better through more variation within
different blocks and super blocks within
the same urban tissue and so this to
test this in a kind of opposite biome I
went into testing this concept into
welding a set of super blocks for an
evolved urban tissue which is the city
of Fez Ballet in Morocco and how can we
kind of also through different
objectives
that are specific to that specific site
how can we work with those and generates
also a urban variation for that finally
this is where kind of I started to go
into the computational parts of things
and I just kind of you know just went
into this kind of wojtek's that I can
really drag myself out and this is where
also I started to work with my
colleagues especially my lad where you
know he started and his enthusiasm
Sarris you know pushing me towards
directions that I didn't really know I
was capable of and so here I started to
understand well all these kind of
experiments looked into generating urban
variation through a exhaustive analysis
of the results generated by the
application of a fluid evolutionary
computation so there's this create a
design problem run this algorithm
analyze the results and feeds its back
into reconstructing the design problem
to generate better results with more
variation that are best better fit to
the fitness objectives but then I
started looking into ways where I can
incorporate the analytical part of
things within the algorithm so that the
algorithm and the design problem is
being updated according to the analytic
results being generated live and
dynamically within every generation and
so to test this I tested this on both
again going back to my first experiments
single objective ad multi objective
problems where I was able to control how
much variation I'm generating within the
algorithm without having to do or
conduct an analysis parts outside of the
entire kind of simulation so everything
was done internally and then also you
know applying this on a multi objective
design problem this becomes enormously
difficult to do but I mean I'm very
happy that I was able to do it mainly
the problems are a little bit simplistic
now so that so this is where I started
to straight into kind of the
computational part of things there so
there s of the urban side of things but
as a proof of concept its works and you
know it's been kind of accepted within a
larger scientific community
thank you and I want to introduce oh how
I organized the structure of my research
and develop the design experiment so
this research exposed the field of
intelligence and consequently finding
news is applicable techniques to program
on architecture system the system is to
be capable of understanding real-time
data and controlling spatial
configuration merabh all of this
research discussed the design methods
for urban open space which deal with the
issue of polymers in public sphere or in
the digital space and the decline of the
public life in open space our currently
community formula formation has been
transformed from being placed base to
base to being media based due to the
audience one of communication
technologies regarding this this issue
the design the design of program
programmable space such as a place
making strategy to encourage community
engagement and to promote community
cultural development of the city so
there are three main domain to be
investigated the study of intelligence
include applications of artificial
intelligence the design study of
adaptive architecture develop tiny
change of structures and the study of
orbital space focus on spatial data
analysis this research explores the
relevant studies of intelligence or
there is a gap between the emerging
knowledge on intelligence and its
technical application to architecture
practice this research attempt to find
the gap and apply different techniques
to the design and architecture body in
the architecture field the practice of
architecture adaptogen have been
investigated to extend the Bleacher of
architecture to be more closely
responsive to users activities for urban
development the term smart city has been
used to describe the information and
communication technology that can deal
with urban data to monitor
your time happenings in cities in the
field of AR I theta processing
techniques have been developed it to
create I think a machine they can
perform a cognitive function akin to
human way of thinking such as learning
or understanding so after spawning the
field that four techniques are selected
to carry out the design experiment so
based on the four categories of
references are collected and reviewed
for the design development and the
design experiment attempt to set an
architecture system to make the flow
from input to input update a topper of
spatial condition so based on the
current knowledge of intelligence the
design experience develops or
computational model also to such as or
please making strategy for social space
in open up the space so this is my table
contains so that the weight is
constructed the structure was applied to
this table contents so the chapter 23 is
mainly about the literal 2d view and the
rest talked or chapter described the
design experiments so the chapter 2
includes the field of intelligence and
describe how the term intelligence is
defined it to develop data processing
techniques the status trees about how
urban open space have been organized
through the history and how the meaning
of the space has been changed and the
four discs are useful techniques and
algorithms to develop an intelligent
system and chapter 5 is about our
analysis of open urban space and the
design experiment of architecture system
the chapter 6 is the test and simulation
of our intelligence architecture so my
research question the primary research
question was rather on architecture
system could adapt or just adjust its
spatial configuration to the time-based
change social activities and the
secondary question was whether
artificial intelligence technique code
used to program a controlling system for
architectural dictation so open public
space in Manhattan Island were
selected to be decided to simulate the
architecture model and I would like to
show how the design experiments
developed by the presented structure of
the research so investigating one over
the NRC open data are it's called
or a noisy primary event a data be
jeweled agent technique was applied to
observe social activities in open space
in New York City so that data
visualization shows the location of a
social activities in a in an icy open
space and the data over the past month
was collected to observe the frequency
of activities so you see you can see
that different frequency of activities
in different seasons and as a result of
analysis there were five open spaces
holding high frequency of events so one
of all annoys the open space holding
high frequency of events the poem park
was selected to simulate an architecture
model there is like a animation but it's
not working
okay so the design experiments also not
missing so if the design experiment I
did was like something skin can like
transform and dip like about can
transform bite of prey moving but the
video is not showing it and also I did
the real type the simulation based on
the algorithm our dead tiger I didn't
connect to the internet in the data and
then it just automatically perform the
transport infrastructure so this was the
algorithm I did I made so unfortunately
I cannot see the video which is was it's
quite safe
yeah so what the development is like
basically the time simulation was was
achieved and then it based on it close
and open and it'll open the skins based
on the 2 theta cells and after that are
we thinking about this isn't making a
process that with the more detailed
information of the context of events and
also the weather patterns so it's not
just gonna be open and closed but based
on different condition of context of
event and different condition or whether
you read like behave differently all
right thank you I will end on that sad
no before our it isn't so sad we got the
picture don't you worry session 3 looks
at studio based research and the session
is chaired by my dear colleague mone de
marchi who will be talking with Nana
Arturo and Malad when that session
concludes I will gather the three chairs
of each a chair of each session three of
them round the table for some
conclusions and hopefully some
fortune-telling of the future so off we
go I wanted to give known you a chance
to address the room Thank You Mona okay
I've been asked to chair this section
and we're gonna have then 9 or 2 row and
millet given a presentation on studio
based research and very very briefly
just so you know I've been first
starting in DRL so studio based
environment I mean teaching intermediate
and diploma for a few years and in the
last seven years run in the first year
studio which again is a studio base not
only because we have this year 100
students but I also work with a team of
12 talented teachers so it is an
investigation that we always have as a
team team based I'm not gonna shoot
first year work or the work that I've
been doing
with the students with the tutor instead
I thought that maybe we can put four or
some here maybe question or the way of
approaching research then I'm not saying
that they are say unique or particular I
think that justice had a other way of
how we my can approach research and
that's the way that we've been working
so as I said the for me the focus of a
studio based research and the point that
we can use is that it is malleable
environment where research can happen
with different agency and expertise that
can be actively be engaged so we can
work outside the realm of architecture
and we can work outside the realm of the
school the reason is simple because if
we put as a question how do we inquire
investigate and explore and test topic
in which the level of complexity require
a collaborative approach how can we do
it
and here put for a look for things that
maybe could could be investigated one
who is actually the author of the
research maybe we can allow the openness
of having multiple author
so getting expertise as an active member
as an author of a specific research
instead of having or expecting that one
single author is actually the making or
specific project so the author at the
end maybe of your research might be a
team instead of a singular individual
and on I don't know if they apply for
PhD but listen I think that their way of
how we can approach a project then how
does the process of inquire actually
take place we can embrace an encouraging
a physical extension where a research
take place again I said outside the
school but extend towards different
field in order to explore how different
point of view on the same topic can
actually challenges this is not in order
to see the application of
our only research but to see actually
what other fields have to say then
location where actually is work research
output taking place we talk about studio
field world etc this place could be run
in parallel so when actually we use the
word experiment test exploration we
don't really mean that we are doing
simulation but we really mean that we're
doing actualization so this thing have
been happening and they were and we have
some sort of feedback so in that sense
the work has to take place outside the
studio and not only for a brief time
maybe two years outside AAA then last
one is what one of the students before
David when he was talking about
dissemination I call it the after match
who is actually interested on the
research we were putting forward who is
the audience or the client or what well
what are the possible application so
instead when you are done instead of
reach now pay attention to who is
actually reaching in pay attention to
who is interested on your own research
it might be unexpected to see where
actually the application might be
potential to the urgency that go beyond
sharing knowledge but is much more about
how your research is an active tool that
enable physical change and now I'm gonna
let naira Arturo am allowed to present
their work
[Applause]
okay hello my name is Nana my research
right now is called becoming
international being modern I have
changed the title I have changed the
content and the table of contents far
more than I would like to mention and in
fact these the ones I'm going to show
you now I haven't yet decided on one I
have actually two options that I'm
putting out here I was supposed to do
three but I stopped it - it took all my
time just to say that the reason I am
part of the studio-based research group
today is I believe my work is not a
single author I mean I will get the
credit for it but I would think that my
supervisors are equally important but
also the students I work with I work
only in the PhD studio every single day
I'm in this school in fact this
particular drawing was because Lukas
misunderstood something I sent him a key
image and he thought it was my table of
content image and then he printed it so
I had to change my table of content
image and kind of rethink the whole
thing so I think that is where it
becomes very interesting for me to
actually see these the misunderstandings
or when I talk to my colleagues about
certain things how they completely
misunderstand what I say and it actually
becomes useful to me so I'm gonna start
with the first version of it this is
version this is one option which
basically talks about my research as a
system it says about the idea of
defining the International through four
terms in this particular version and as
you can see all the four terms are
interlinked and they actually drive the
international forward now to be able to
understand not gonna read through this
and I can't um I don't even have money
yeah but to understand this I've had to
actually understand every single chapter
or summarize it for now because I would
not have been able to make a table of
content if I didn't understand what I
was putting into it for me that was very
important and I and this was also a way
to test my argument so when it's
something did not work
the argument I went back and changed the
content a little bit or you know change
my argument this is version 2 which is
very different from version 1 and I'll
explain I'm gonna actually show you why
that what are the differences between
the two now this particular version of
the table of contents actually shows the
research organizer six separate chapters
which actually each chapter singular
they exist by themselves and they are
they actually they they address the same
issues but from a very different point
of view the argument remains the same
but there's a nuances in the way that
the position is articulated and if you
look at this and the over here as well
I've had to actually list out every
single chapter and understand what the
content is and how it can be tested
against the abstract and that's why the
whole thing is on one single piece of
paper now the real difference is
actually quite interesting because I
never thought of it till I didn't have
to actually do the present presentation
so as I told you in the first case which
is on the the diagram on the left the
chapters are interlinked so it's
actually a process of sequence so one
chapter leads into the NADA and the
third and the fourth and the argument
actually develops through this process
that connects them and then there's a
final argument which becomes like the
Buddha almost a field or a case study
which then I test all the different
parts of the thesis against the second
one is actually every single chapter is
singular right they exist by themselves
which means that the second version
would be easier to publish would be
better for lectures which would possibly
you know I would be able to handle it
better also as an object I also found
that in the first diagram when I was
trying to articulate some of the terms I
really struggled and it also gave me a
clue on the fact that maybe some of them
were too big they were too impossible to
handle within one chapter which made me
then question its validity in the time
span or maybe that one chapter was the
whole research and I was not willing for
that yet that was that's one of those
some differences
then they both will involve archival
research they will also have library
research they will have fieldwork I will
use a lot of drawings and text not only
as as material but I will actually make
drawings of various books that I read
and Alex I'll show some of the examples
a little bit later and then so I've
explained that to you and then I have
said okay now what I do is when I name
the chapters for me that's very
important so all the names of the
chapters actually so that I do not
forget the point of the chapter so right
now the name is actually constructed so
I understand what the argument of the
chapter is supposed to be because
otherwise I think I could so for me the
title becomes very important to ensure
that I keep consistent and then the next
thing is I told you about the position
being the same but slightly nuanced and
I also created what I call an image of
content in image of intent for my thesis
which is basically I didn't want to
forget what the larger aim was and it's
the idea of defining the International
as it's it's the idea of defining the
International but also showing it as an
other mechanism of oppression in certain
cases and that is the kind of position
argument that I'd like to take and I
thought this was a very important image
it on the on the left you actually have
minute de silva who is a graduate of the
architectural association she's a Sri
Lankan architect very unknown
she studied here quite unknown and I
thought it was very interesting that
she's actually 1956 walking up a bamboo
ladder to inspect concrete wearing a
sari and all the while modern architects
are talking about D nationalizing dress
and removing the ideas of you know
feminity
in modern are collected to actually make
the woman equal in a way and I thought
that was a very interesting idea to kind
of juxtapose only because that is the
central argument of my thesis that when
modern architecture has kind
or the International has been propelled
forward it has always done so at the
cost of a lot of other cultures and
religious practices across the world and
this for me was the way that I remember
that basic idea
I work in many ways I do I have a
notebook and I actually write every
single quote and reference and
everything is written down and then I
scan it I also have a blog and what this
forces me to do is summarize my readings
or summarize some certain comments and
put them up and make sure that it's well
written it also becomes an exercise for
myself but it also becomes something
that I share with people in addition I
do drawing so when I read a book this is
from Kafka's the trial I actually draw
out the spaces or the structure of the
book which also then helps me to
navigate through the information so
there's like these layers of where there
many ways that I will to be able to kind
of construct this thesis is arduous it
takes a lot more time but it's it's it's
the way I work so I spend possibly
double or triple the amount of time to
do one particular book then maybe if I
just read it really quickly but it's
it's part of the whole experience and in
addition I in terms of talking about how
to kind of forward the research I just
spoke to ed ed with the archives today
and we talked a lot about this
particular image and he doesn't have her
archives material in the school but
there is a lot around the magazine that
she worked around so that is but that
becomes another sort of investigation
which might be connected to my PhD
directly but it is something that I can
take forward in many different ways and
many different forums that's about it
thank you
[Applause]
Wow
that was tough because my pH is pretty
much about the opposite is about on
structure and and it is not so much
based on documentation as some of the
percentages we've seen but is based on
us use of material manipulation
exercises that eventually led to
conclusions or theoretical arguments
about the relationship between the
everyday use of plastic and certain
process of certain process within
organization this is a PhD by design
that the title is plastic the subtitle
is very small because I might change it
I almost almost finished the use of
everyday materials as a design tool
towards the material to assault erotic
material perspective on the process of
urbanization so I what I what I thought
on doing is organizing the table of
content for this presentation
chronologically since is a design based
PhD which started with a lot of
exercises and sketches the first thing I
did is actually the appendix which is a
portfolio a huge library of iterations
material manipulations that eventually
led to the first installation this sari
has to be said the the research is based
on three major one-to-one installation
which are these three public events the
first one was done in 212 a pet was done
in 2012 the second one was in its back
net was done in 2004 asset 14 and the
third one was done in 2016 so I started
my PhD in 2011 this is I'm just I'm
gonna flip to the images in a very
chaotic way which makes my point I guess
so this is part of the first
installation this is the output this is
a part of the second installation
which explore kind of joint tectonics
and this is a third installation which
explore the idea of manipulation of the
space which you can see here that became
all of them became public events and and
the idea was to test architecture design
as a kind of a didactic model to
communicate the relationship between
their everyday use of plastic and
certain aspects of of organization now
many exercises were done and this is
part of the appendix we don't III think
I say we because this is a group of like
seven to two hundred people depending on
the installation that helped me actually
to produce all these things so they were
done many many of these installations or
material exists I speak some of them
became installation some of them died so
basically what I wanted to say is that
what I wanted to present is a very own
structure way of dealing with a PhD
making a lot of iterations that
eventually became installations and the
installations were the vehicle to kind
of connect me to theoretical arguments
which are split in three chapters the
first chapter which is deals with
everyday material and the conformation
for environments which focus in in the
work of fair number Adel and how there's
a synergy between the confirmation of
certain aspects of infrastructure mainly
and the manipulation of of things of
daily things chapter 2 which is much
more than a material explores plastic as
a paradox as a social paradox looks at
the good things of plastic bad things
plastic and through the exercise so
design exercise is trying to make people
aware of these things and the third
chapter talks about manipulation process
of everyday materials which looks
directly at how architecture has dealt
with deal with this so looks at
architectural design methodologies I
kind of review in a very innocent way
from Alberti all the way to Lakota
regime trying to see where the material
how the material play our role within
the a creative role within manipulation
processes and basically in this way that
thesis has two arguments one is tourist
architecture and its inner processes and
the role of material and how the
physical the physicality of our
environment conditions also the way we
structure ideas and the other hypothesis
or the other kind of direction of the
research is towards the process of
urbanization and the physical
environment and has to do with pollution
and all the things right I when I did
this persist elation I just go very
quickly through this when I did this
first installation I actually didn't
know where the research was gonna go my
original idea was about my original
title was process architecture and the
border condition was they're interested
in process and all the things I did this
first installation and realized that in
Mexico for every brick we produced we
produce a plastic bottles so the volume
in which we consume this material is
gigantic and the question the situation
is trying to resist which point this is
also part of the city and which point is
also or should be also an architectural
problem and this kind of day design in a
way or the manipulation or the
iterations and the feedback often the
people that participated in the
installations
guided in a way the table of content as
you see the first success always knew a
bit and then it kind of built up until
the conclusions and the and introduction
which is the last things I wrote it's
pretty much thanks
[Applause]
Oh
hello I promise to be very quick and I
have my timer here so everything's on
time
my name is Mila and I'm in my between
second and third year of PhD my title is
homeostatic German assembly is an
evolutionary model for intelligent urban
growth I'm not gonna go in detail what
that means what I'm gonna explain it
briefly but rather I will like to talk
about how I'm trying to organize my
research so these two table of contents
are the one on the left is the one that
I had my proposal officially submitted
and the one on the right is the one I
had my mini bible and and they are
actually quite drastically different and
the one on the left is very broad and I
was still looking at the very broad
spectrum of the subjects materials one
on one on the right as you can see I
focused more on one specific moment of
the one on the left which is about a
logical process through that change also
my title has changed from the one at the
top to want the one on the bottom which
is vertical and growth and homey steady
given assemblies and but right now I'm
even like way back from what I had and
I'm actually right now in a blank page
of a table of content and trying to
reorganize myself as I move forward I
don't know if I don't even know if this
is the right way of looking at my table
of content as of now but this is what I
see myself pursuing the research and
pushing it forward which they all have
like some progress force and as far as I
going forward but this title that right
now I'm trying to again from those two
table of contents try to emerge and
create another table of contents more
comprehensive and more accurate so what
I do I'd look at these keywords one by
one and according to how I see my
research can move forward I prioritize
them in order to investigate them
accordingly and this is how I see them
too
investigated throughout my research and
all of them are quite in a different
domains and disciplines some of them are
in the Natural Science biological
processes some of them in architecture
and urban design some of them most like
computation again and they're all
overlapping we want on each other
and it's quite funny because I see my
presentations are quite similar to the
presentation that Mohammed just because
I find myself and my research is quite
related in the same triangle that
Mohammed is situated so I situate my
research within these three domains each
of which has its own way of
investigation for my research I this is
how I see I move forward for example in
the realm of biology in Natural Science
I predominantly use library and archive
sources and when it goes to the urban
studies I have two extension which is
like a field and repository and I
explain why I have to and then in a
realm of computing and computation I
mostly I'm at my computer and a studio
and it doesn't necessarily mean that I'm
just sitting at my complete also the
collective and group discussions that we
have in our small group also it is
within the realm of a studio mmm so
every one of these big chunks they are
also divided into different again
further more detailed sections which
each of them also have their own way of
investigation the way I move forward is
so for example I started with intense
studies and investigation in biological
process that I'm very interested in
called homeostatic homeostasis which I
briefly explained it later then it goes
into how we use them into another
discipline which is architecture it goes
back to studio work and then testing
them abstracting them in studio and then
there is another section which is like a
field there's a dash line around it
which I'm not quite sure if my fees is
at the end is going to conclude with the
urban solution or just a model that's
why I'm not quite sure if I may conduct
a field research eventually or not
starting with that it's just like a I've
been studying and taking courses online
courses on biology and reading a lot of
biological books try to understand what
humi stasis means try to abstract it
which is very if I want to put it very
simply it's like a feedback loop which
everywhere everywhere in like a
biological process is everywhere in the
nature there is a feedback loop which is
actually it's homeostasis and then again
try to understand how I can use and test
that principle into my work and that's
when I go back to studio and that's when
I start like doing some design works and
how it can abstract it then how can I
use those abstractions in a way to
inform my design and inform the other
discipline rather than biology just
moving forward this is the step I said
that I'm like going through right now so
I've a library reading in the intense
investigation then try to work some
pseudo works which is mostly my computer
and also collective discussions and
group discussions that we have in the
studio then it's just like a very simple
investigation on how I'm investigating I
don't want to go I don't want to go
through this diagrams but this is the
red dot that is there is my contribution
that with which into something that is
already existed in the realm of
computation and with that have in mind I
try to test my ideas into through two
tests in order to see if it's possible
to use something which is like a very
important principle on biology into
architecture then mathematical equations
come to a play then design problems
comes to play I don't want to go in
detail on what's happening that I'm just
like showing the design works started to
emerge in my research in order to test
if this studies that I've conducted is
actually useful in architecture and the
studies is not just drawings they're
also
analysis failures successes moving
forward more statistical analysis
simulations which they eventually inform
me whether something was successful or
not and again at that stage was the
stage that I could actually go out and
publish what I've done in order to
ensure myself the path that I'm taking
he's actually contributing to the
knowledge and he's useful and then I can
go back to one step before in order to
restructure what I was thinking of the
entire thesis structure again
the thing that I'm not quite sure yet is
the part that I'm I will be conducting a
fieldwork in my research because I'm not
quite sure the outcome still yet but
then if that is the case then the the
chunk of the urbanist studies will
eventually have the fieldwork as well
and so like to recap whatever I've just
said there is a biological process
called homeostasis I want to implement
it in architecture how I conducted this
I conducted a very intense studies and
investigations try to understand what
are the important principles and try to
use them in architecture and then those
principles then inform me what to read
and what to research and investigate
more so I see myself situated within
these three big chunks knowledge but
then as I move forward they are all
divided into smaller parts and I situate
myself more in detail on how far in
depth I want to go into any of them and
then at the end of the day instead of
having a very linear table of content I
find myself something like this which is
like everything is floating around I
don't know where I see to add myself
within what are the principles what are
the disciplines I need to look at and
yes this is this is where I'm at right
now I'm trying to situate myself and
still still I think far far way to go
yeah thank you
I bought it away into some attempts at
synthesis and summary I could at least
announce sort of three initial reactions
I've had to the afternoons presentations
one is that in as much as the last
symposium
what is PhD by design led to some
realization that that differentiation
between the PhD and PhD by design after
a certain point wasn't so critical or
even discernable I would say today it
didn't matter after a certain point
where across the curriculum these PhDs
have been nursed or indeed if these PhDs
separate along the lines of these
repository field based research or
studio based after certain Pony didn't
matter so I don't know how effective
these three sessions were in terms of
genres of PhD what we get in the end are
individuals with a project and they
begin to cluster and I think the word
constellation was used in three
different presentations we did see
constellations so that's something we
might talk about is there a reason we
might want to articulate difference
across PhD types of programs or is that
not so useful in the end
another point that Ricardo spoke of the
sympathy of words which is a nice idea
the sympathy of words I'd also say
there's another thing boiling through
most of the afternoon which is the
dominance of words that no matter how
architects tried to reconfigure the
terms of what a PhD might be
nomenclature naming things coming to
terms with the table of contents where
you have to Nancy
in text what you are doing that still
dominates so as much as architecture
might have a task to try to subvert a
PhD type we are stuck within the
conventions of the written dissertation
where words somehow might be sympathetic
but they might also be dominant I
thought that was a particularly the way
those slides ran over the second and
third sessions I just kept becoming more
apparent that if you're not comfortable
with words if not fluid with changing
the title or change in the table of
context over time something else might
go seriously wrong and then thirdly we
had the other Ricardo making an
assertion with a kind of strong point
that the PhD is really the space of
polemic it's not just a space of
collecting stuff and I would like to ask
well the panel really to get going if
indeed in microcosm the table of
contents isn't always a place also a
polemic that the table of contents today
that seemed the most engaging were the
ones that on one page seemed to
broadcast not just the content but the
argument I'll turn it over maybe we
could take these in in order of the
sessions today get the table over to
Maria first or some kind of sense I
don't know if I can synthesize
everything but I'd like to respond to
some of the related issues I think what
I think marks right and I think we need
to assess before we get to the other
tiers of problems I think but that erase
by the today's presentations and the
larger more global issue is obviously
how do we do research going from here
and as I alluded before there there's
been a lot of debate at the turn of the
century what would be the relationship
between architecture right as a
perfectional practice versus an exec
adem ik discipline and a lot of
assumptions went up into the air and I
think that the larger tier of how how to
understand the divisions and whether
they should even exist I think is a
bigger problem of understanding
with the expertise be restored because
if you if you know a is a revolutionary
experimental kind of school where a lot
of the experimental models of doing
research and then the pilot programs are
created which I then would be copied
elsewhere so with that comes
responsibility to lead the debate on
what kind of research infrastructures to
create and how they begin to actually
get tested and splintered and
reintegrated the fact that there are
very few schools when I was grading my
Master's probably a very three schools
where he can't do PhD by design it was
virtually impossible and I remember
considering either accepting go to
Harvard doctor of design or Stanford
engineering PhD because I was desperate
to find it was active field was black
but it's fascinating to see that the a
actually encourages and I think with
that comes a question where would then
be the sub expertise and degree of
clarity so we no longer fighting this
eternal battle you do art historical
model and I do a scientific experimental
laboratory model and we will could fight
until the I don't know who else comes
home but we will never agree because
they're external disciplines portion of
architecture to appropriate their
methods and we've seen have failures of
really kind of superficial appropriation
the second tier of question and I think
it relates to what you you referenced
regardless point I think it's definitely
true that what came across to me in a
lot of presentations that the content
and the tools the methodology are
constantly polluting one another and I I
think in some of the most promising kind
of pitches is where I saw this ability
to to incorporate the feedback between
how the what started then what it under
precipitating there the choice of
methodological tools the process of
articulating research and then changing
the content which then reciprocating the
change of methodologies so that peak is
important because it's a project it's a
creative project and that's where I
think we should really strive to move
away from those fathering disciplines
like art history
or signs and the third point again III
don't know if it's any help but that the
the much more local specific issue of
table of contents it's interesting to
then talk if we talk about feedback how
they're most specifically the type of
work that was emerging then was calling
for different types of tables of
contents and I don't just mean the lose
the field ones are hard at once but also
the kind like the dissertations that I
dealt with incorporation of modernity
became phased the table of contents
become raises in some cases which is
about the notion of understanding the
old theory de Familia rising herself
with it and projecting new theory right
it in some way it dictates the kind of
the kind of moments within the table of
contents in some cases perhaps it's
these yes
thematic clusters and constellations I
find it interesting and I think
genuinely we should project more richer
diagrams that organize emerging
knowledge and and continuously to
experiment to the flow
is it is he working it's working
maybe just falling from from Maria's
explanation I think that first of all I
say that I don't have a PhD in a very
kind of conscious state and I also
understand that all the students are
exposing and exhibiting their work is a
little bit like exposing an open nerve
no everything's on process and I think a
lot of these diagrams are very dear to
you in the sense you try to organize
your the research your thoughts what you
like but in a way I'm a very simple
tongue in the sense that I like to do
what I makes me excited when I wake up
in the morning in terms of subject and
what makes me excited in the morning is
what I show you does this subject so I
try to keep that very close to to me and
I think I seen a lot this afternoon
which is really a critique because maybe
that makes you excited during the day
but I think sometimes we tend to
overcomplicate for this not for the sake
because you try to press organize to
some level and the research and maybe
that's what PhD is do for to to get to
that rigor but I also think that through
this long process which can go on three
to six years eight seven four four years
right
okay so there's someone there but I'm
very interested on how through all this
research period no perhaps the the table
of content or the idea of for me what
works is mainly I know that that that
that creates a certain sense of gravity
from where the other planets circulate
around sometimes I put a lot of diagrams
of my own sketchbook and I question what
we do both in the unit and also this
told you about how where the precision
arrives were the approximation to the
desire of researching something appears
and I think his perhaps we need X more
diagrams but perhaps also there is a
certain affiliation of a genealogy of
words a genealogy of themes they can
create their own center of gravity
around the subject because I have a lot
of friends who deep PhDs and I have new
friends now which are doing PhDs and I
think that tends to sometimes get crambo
inside the terminology or the verbose
Ness which was nice that I did they hear
so much today on the terms so I think
the idea that one can own knowledge they
can sort of create terms from what the
other terms gravitate around I think
it's quite refreshing sometimes when we
start researching so they realize that
the bibliographies like and mammoth and
of course to start you have to cover a
field but to other extent when you
mirror that after the initial research
we can also make those authors gravitate
around a year on interest no and I think
sounds obvious but it's not obviously
for all of us who write and publish and
but I am no that's what I have to say
the idea that this combination between
were methodology becomes destructive and
where certain level of the spontaneity
has to emerge in order for create
refreshment yeah you had pointed out in
your presentation this ambition that the
the creative arc of the dissertation
could be
imaginative and inconclusive maybe
that's a part of we were looking at how
things were ending and my kind of quiz
options but I was also looking at where
particularly the students who were very
close to defending a dissertation how
that conclusion was organized and it's
kind of fascinating how some of you had
written a conclusion before the third
chapter depending on the chronology of
your work not being the chronology at
the table of content and yes I mean
similar to Ricardo I don't have a
potentially as well but you know I've
been investigating specific topic for
many years with a group of people I'm
not saying that is similar what I want
to try and I'm going to make before when
I was talking about the studio what I
was trying to say is even if we think
that the KGB it is a polemical say
Australia for a polemical investigation
what does it mean to make a choice of
doing it here at the AAA if we have this
flexibility that we can actually
challenge what a PhD students might need
why you don't tell us so I would say
like before like if we need expert a if
you say yes in order for me to actually
put for a specific ideal specific
project specific thesis I would like to
have specific expertise we need to know
so you know I mean I'm talking about say
I'm gonna say we assume a tutor here and
also a racist I tell the students pick
up super means that well I say if we
need to have works that are actually
making an effect we need to know much
more how we can construct this reaction
not only at the end of the thesis but
actually while the work is taking place
so as I was talking about we should work
much more with expertise we should see
if it is a way of having authors be
present or if we need to work in
different environment etc for instance
like many of you have are working with
really interesting questions somehow
we don't know you know I don't know what
are the questions that are driving your
thesis tell us I would say like I mean
there are some of the question that I
I'm curious about it so I would say why
you don't I don't know send me an email
sometimes send an email to a tutorial
say these are the question I'm working
with do you know if anybody's has the
same interest so for me is that or more
opening up this idea of having
conversations well I have really few of
you that I would email next week because
I need you I need you to see if we can
investigate some topics together but as
for me that's what I was trying to point
out that we need we have a resources but
if we don't speak up we always leave it
at the end and we say yes we have a PhD
thesis that is going to be kept in the
library and someone's going to read it
and it's gonna find its relevance I
don't think is enough I think we need to
start to build it more as a process as
well and not just as at the end hmm I
said by way the feedback loop to the
people that prepared for today and open
their nerves I thought we could look at
yes this question in the first session
about ordering principles David talked
about his synchronic structure to
organizing the PhD Sofia a question
where do we begin where to be and
whether Star Wars analogy is it alright
to start in the middle is it more
productive to start in the middle
Ricardo talked about his introduction
stretching to a hundred pages or there
abouts and sponsoring chapters allowing
one thing to grow and become more than
the anticipated proportion of the final
project and then lastly I thought Alvaro
with his board exemplified this notion
that every PhD is a kind of Warburg II
and library nine palace and it's
constantly updated it's constantly also
routed to in his post card analogy how
architects think through images even
when they're doing something as tech
space as a PhD I thought there was a
really kind of beautiful way of
summarizing our unique approach
going back to Maria's charge that we
have to begin to announce what a a PhD
might be like and that was an
interesting illustration but those I
think because if we if you think when a
visual is to be kind of replaced the
world what is the reason why sometime we
use a visual so we said it's not the
question of khichidi by design or not
familiar it's a question when the words
are not able to explain something then
we might use the visual so there is also
some time the use of a different medium
just in order to make more clear
specific a point in a way it's similar
to the studio situation except it's just
in the unit it happens a lot faster the
students are taught methods and tools in
order to challenge them and unlearn them
and invent their own and I think what
what was really beautiful about those
heuristic devices is that they are not
just borrowed or learned from elsewhere
they are constructed within the project
and then they drive the project forward
and the more cycles of revision the the
author would allow I think the more
productive would be and it was really
beautiful to see the inner kitchen of
that because it's often invisible in the
final product somehow and maybe
something also to distinguish between I
think going back and returning to the
idea of the polemics that to what extent
based from the sixties onwards the idea
of the autobiographical part of the
thesis know is constructive and and to
what extent that kind of sometimes there
is also the almost like you have to take
a box to have a polemic and sometimes
that polemic comes to fast and and I
don't know if I agree with that idea the
polemic I do agree with happy
interesting subjects that the perhaps
you don't know where you're gonna go I
do agree with some I have a level of
autobiographical interest to enlighten a
more travel path of EPs technologists
somewhere in anthropology archaeology or
computer science
but at the same time I think that once I
sometimes we are a tables in
intermediate where I teach here and
sometimes there is a bit of an over
emphasis on you gotta be radical or you
gotta be polemic oh and sometimes on the
imaginary there is some projects who do
that but sometimes a project might be
absolutely opposite and my refresh the
field so I wouldn't maybe for some
people that works I'm a lot of people
think that works for me but in fact it
doesn't I think that idea of otherwise I
can generate a certain I start to scho
about being different which is also some
in this place I think can become a bit
of a historical track because we are in
2018 and I think then the next big thing
is going to come out of some of you is
going to come out of some of your
idiosyncrasies and some of that
different tables of contents on
different outputs that you might
generate so I think that level of
extrovert Ness know that some of your
thesis my rage some people for example
you're talking about going back on the
real world versus good so I think maybe
the polemic is how you extrovert that
thesis and bring some players and and
that by then you you create your own
history that comes that that cautionary
speech come from a book by Chuck
palamoun who wrote The Fight Club and he
wrote his book about celebrities as a
fiction he talks about everyone is
trying to create a mythology of
themselves you know sometimes there is
over emphasis on that historical effect
and but I think he's also a balance
between that constant critique that
feedback loop and some kind of more
natural path but this external aspect
was at the core of the debate about the
relevance of theory and in fact the
ability of theory to survive in the
mm because in a way we've shifted now we
used to debate between critical and
projective right for example if I if you
still remember in American kind of
circles there was this divide between
for example understanding that the role
of history in theories to in a way
understand the past and critically in a
way create a space of polemical position
with relationship to the past whereas
the projective camera argued for the
immediate ability to project future
scenarios and and future applicability
but I think now we're moving in into
much more even even more difficult
situation where simply being projective
is just not enough apparently
everybody's projective so now it's a
question of not just being speculative
but also being understanding where is
the field of action what's the agency of
the world exams yes I mean we all agree
that we need to look forward we all
agree that simply historical survey is
very very different to cell in today's
intellectual marketplace but where do
you see the field of action of the work
is very difficult because it's not its
it then brings a much and I I have no
answers to these questions because it
brings a much more long-term problem of
intellectual output that that goes for
millennia which is the market doesn't
always call there were the intellectual
projects in which to engage and it
becomes a very twisted conversation if
we think of session two and I think some
of this question of the autobiography of
authorship started to be challenged
there and in the third session somebody
talked about why is it about one
investigator ultimately for the PhD but
in session two Andrea admitted that not
only was the table of contents for her
always changing but that she almost
pulled out of presenting it in that kind
of fluidity but then I thought she said
something very nice but sometimes she
laughs at her own thesis that there you
go through stages right with a three or
four year relationship where you're in
love with you fall out of love with then
you come to terms with your own
dissertation and
one seemed to be different stages those
who are nearly at the VISAA you know are
also about ready to have a divorce and
they're going to be on they're only
thinking of the next project write the
next great hurdle but I thought that was
a nice and aside from Andrea that that
was telling Mohammed talked about how
you diagram domains and how each domains
and sponsors a kind of new worlds
fractals if you will intellectual
cascade effect that seems a natural part
of not as you say bringing the context
there's a process of discovery that
wasn't guided just by the polemic but
about triggers associated was working in
archives finding new things are being
challenged by peers and advisers we
didn't hear a lot about advisers today I
must say Jay talked about that at the
end of the dissertation at the end of
all this field research and process
chapter six was the test that one way to
conclude something is to test it and
evaluate it that was an interesting idea
of going back to the idea how do you
finish something maybe you just have to
test it anything like the again I'm just
putting things on the table when to
remember the name of the students now
the one of the 3-sphere the three
different discipline muhammad in a sec I
mean maybe was just a way to ward some
time it can be misleading because the
one who was like I looked at specific a
different field and I look at the
literature and I was like why do we
always need to go through Wars
why we don't need to go through project
through work through no patents or so
for me is always like how with what do
we engage I mean of course if I work
with archive and then maybe with visual
images and text but there are other
things that maybe we can work with and I
think it's kind of opening up much more
make it more part of what is the
investigation
it should be more embraced I don't think
sometimes it is rethink the student in a
missing job or actually going around and
okay
different fields but I think we can be
sometimes supported much more on just
even working with the different
expertise yeah I think just maybe a
couple of comments discuss how as part
of that group but just to start I think
was really excited to see the diversity
know there was a I think Andreu from H
history Theory right and the other
 junior from M Tech correct so
it's quite interesting that around that
congregation of thematics know the idea
of perhaps representation was unspoken
but it was quite present about sometimes
there is the pressure of how that table
of content should look and I think for
example in your case and I was how I
thought was quite interesting how you
are connecting spatially and suddenly
the table content becomes a drawing but
what I enjoy is that the drawing you can
guide us through that drawing now I
think there is recognition there is
steps to understand and I think even the
tapering though the axial element is
connected to the thematic I think that
is I think simple moves like this are
what the simple moves in design lead us
to certain certain sees now and I think
that was quite refreshing I think I'm
glad that in Muhammad's case these
simulations or animations worked and
unfortunately perhaps it didn't work
I was about to shout like you have to
close the part of the PDF and open a key
and normally it reboots the problem but
but I thought was interesting that the
I'm fascinated by the the research of
the mtech because I think it does
something that from a different point of
view from what I do now I tend to look
at the environments and is part of my
passion but I look from the point of
view of culture and with some factor of
interaction and computation but to a
lesser degree than the mTEC so I think
for me is always interesting and curious
to see what the potentials to
externalize that research is for example
how can
and the simulation at nowadays in 2018
perhaps communicate or or be shown in a
way that is not necessarily the the
computational aspect of simulation no
but it's actually part of a partial
conclusion on because I think the
process is super good for for you guys
which are developing that at this point
but I'm always wondering to what extent
the ways that we show it the same thing
because it shown on your thesis you can
also kind of refresh the same thematic
now that's why things are tend to be
cyclical we tend to talk about similar
subjects but because someone is showing
in a different way because that theme no
embrace and bring something new sudden
the method of representation from
something which is a computational
compilation or simulation is shown
differently I'm looking at you but of
course you haven't seen it yet but it's
just an assumption the third session
opened up what we might call glitches
typical things we trip over that some
people might capitalize on naina talked
about them Lucas giving or
misinterpreting one of her figures as
the diagram of her table of contents and
instead of offering that up as a problem
she took it as an inducement and trips
imagine if that's true so to going back
to the diagram as an analogy of the
table of contents Arturo
I thought beautifully represented in his
table that the order of work is not the
order of a table of contents that if you
have this fluidity of time available a
table of contents might be reorganized
multiple ways and it's flows which loop
back I think to some of Sofia's point
about where in sequence could always be
changed and if you are writing
distinctive chapters that are somewhat
autonomous you have more flexibility
than in those systems to reorganize
which was the kind of beautiful point
made by the law didn't Malad at the end
talking about publication as proof that
between beginning the PhD
setting for your vibe there are other
opportunities to test the work in
smaller forms but in public fields and I
thought the publication which we hadn't
talked a lot about up until that point
was one way through and that was a
collaborative publication but that
starts to I think set up some degrees of
confidence that would then help to
divide itself but that was a collective
work we've talked about single author
shifting autobiography teamwork
particularly in the studio based session
talked about what is this collaborative
nature how does it flow into a PhD what
do we do with that as architects the one
or the many I mean for me was more like
if the topic is complex that you need
other expertise you just look for the
expertise you know it's not really too
much to say I never say like it's now is
it at one way or another way is either
PhD by design or eyes it's just more
like what is actually needed at that
specific moment let's be flexible enough
and never sister that is malleable that
allows actually to constantly adapt for
work and that's why I was I think that
that's why was it was great even to show
on what we did was showing off actually
putting out the work and see what is the
the reaction or the media or the
relevancy of the specific moment so I
mean that that is the main reason I
think that is interesting because I
think some of the table of contents
somewhat the design appeared and always
had a bit of a difficulty to see a PhD
by design in terms of my expectations or
what is outputted but I I always think
that as a designer I think when the
output appears no or the part of the
output or the process which is a sketch
in the from a table of content from a
simulation so these delicious no I think
for me it shouldn't be and I'm talking
about what makes me wake up in the
morning happy is the it shouldn't be
necessarily a symmetrical exercise in
terms of matching the words no because I
think once the the thought of the
production which is written and
design which lets and I don't mean tax
design at this point I think if you if
one aims for that for the behavior of
the design to symmetrically respond the
questions of the text I think then is it
the design comes as a as a as a
conclusion already taken no it comes as
a part of the process which you're
already is like when you go studying
certain to minimize it to summarize the
conversation when you study ornament by
but by the simple understanding that the
picture that means that that shield
those words means so there's a very
claustrophobic symmetry when the design
appears on that way so what I try to do
on my own work with the students is to
try to think which simply call a
symmetrical thinking know how can some
questions of the design are actually
there to be asymmetrical they are there
to open and should not to be fully and
compared to the world of of the same
text over the text is same but it's
actually more open doors some things
that are unsaid because you can't
describe everything about a joint or a
mod or were a few more a photograph so I
think that's quite a interesting way to
perhaps stimulate that idea that they
have the design part of the PhD by
design is a more asymmetrical than
symmetrical but there's moments of
glitch and and accident I'd like to
extend it to the relationship between
these three types of research and and
and again the question whether the rigid
distinction is productive I don't think
it's a coincidence that in the third
session the there was much more
acknowledgement of the switching between
different kinds of research throughout
the course of I would argue those still
emergent models of producing research
through PhD by design here at the
bargain is relatively young programs
that do it in the United States again
are not yet fully tested in terms of the
generation
transfer so I think it's in really
important to understand that we're we're
and I think it relates then to a
question of production testing iteration
dissemination and kind of maybe
reappropriation and and readjustment
because if you sometimes need to do the
research and the question is why
literature oftentimes in the
conventional PhD model you do need to
identify a gap in the literature to even
justify the life of your PhD which
sometimes you do afterwards after you
have a product you need to place it and
there's a reason I'm saying it's not an
accident happens in a so-called studio
based model and I do believe personally
I might say I was wrong ten years from
now I do believe that architectural
design studio as it as a general idea of
a kind of platform that allows for these
different kinds of research to
constantly switch on and on is extremely
unique and productive and you can
oftentimes immerse yourself in in
literature halfway through your
experimental project uncover a very
important subset and then engage with
experimentally the same goes for
publication and other forms of
dissemination because again I would like
to alert us to the fact that it used to
be understood that architects make
architectural drawings or ideally
buildings and architectural historians
write books just how far we've gone from
that crude division I think is
fascinating and we've mentioned we had
two dimensions of blogs we've had our
history researchers engaging and
basically artistic projects and
installations we have publications in
collaborative collaborative academic
article books books by by tutors and
students at they so I think there's a
fascinating variety of ways to test the
project not necessarily at the final
phase I think at this point it'd be nice
to open the floor to some I won't say
questions because I don't know if you
have questions we've had a kind of long
series of presentations today and some
summary but we have people in the
audience who are a few months into the
PhD project or a few years I'm really
curious about the people embarking on
their second year I said about that time
you really start to feel that a table of
contents is something you have to start
to grapple with
but if not questions it'd be nice to
have some feedback loop from the
audience in terms of things that you
thought will remark about the
presentations today or problematic or as
they relate to your own work because I
think oftentimes you're sitting in an
audience there's certain presentations
that triggered an association with your
own method or organization or content
that resonated with you in a particular
way maybe you weren't expecting that but
let's open the floor any questions
comments or confessions yes
yeah thank you for the set of
presentations I'm not actually doing my
PhD at the moment but I just have a
question regarding table of contents and
to what extent should the table of
contents
reveal the research and the outcomes of
the work but at the same time encourage
people to still want to go and read the
document rather than finding out
everything that they want to know just
through the table of contents because of
the the kind of organization of you know
how it began in' and how it would end
I think I can't I can't answer because
I'm not one of the presenters but I
loved is it Alvaro Alvaro I loved his
map because it's like the bore hisses
map when his table of contents becomes
as big as his book he wouldn't have to
open it anymore so he carries it around
in his bag and he keeps adding to this
table of contents as soon as the table
of contents is exactly the same as his
phd's he wouldn't he wouldn't have to he
wouldn't have to use the table of
contents like maybe sometimes I don't
sir because it depends a lot so there
are two things here what I have
presented is more table of contents has
asked for their research in a way so
note that they was content of contents
as for the reader which is a question
that I have but also what is it that you
transmit on this first page so regarding
that that is when I was looking at my
mom who said is the last these friends
authored the hot idea like having super
greed in a way for like planning all the
work is a bit like Joseph Eric there is
a scaffold that is behind and it's about
the production of the work but that
doesn't correspond with the context so
what happens is that him after 20 years
maybe of a mobile cell published in the
book and everyone getting crazy like
what is this about this very strange
book and this would really say no this
is a proto suit really kind of writer
can heat and diet but after dying he
published I
how he planned and wrote some of the
books um it was a very strange thing
because it's like completely planned
predicted and not so really subtle way
of writing but the final product is very
different than the interface with the
reason so there's another question that
I think is open which is to think how
you transmit that table content or what
is the text about how do you transmit
the research I mean this is a I think
there is no one answer 50 what I think
is a space of production also that you
can you can transmit it in a very
different way I don't know I just it's
not a great dancer but I think of
correspondence between the production
tool and the final table content I think
I may be to simplify if you think that
you are the author of at the same time
you're also there either so in a way you
just need to say I always find a strange
when we think too much about there is an
audience out there and we need to think
about the audience like how they're
going to react to specific work I'll say
what actually you are the author but you
are also that you're the audience you
should charge your self you should write
the table of content that you want to
open a read so you need to be able to
schizophrenic and I have this kind of
true character of being the author and I
switch off a bit imagine you're actually
the reader as well and trust yourself in
a sense there is a lot of heat on a few
pages of the freshly bound at
dissertation you sort of have this thing
you're very proud you haven't quite had
your Vevey yet but you pass it round and
people immediately jump to two sections
it's always the same too one of course
is the table of contents they're gonna
kind of quickie he doesn't give the show
away but it certainly helps guide if you
find yourself in that table of contents
you might chapter jump and channels
serve and maybe that's alright yeah I
mean you know just to say it and then
other paged everyone jumps to and it was
featured on three of these presentations
of course the acknowledgments people
want to know if they've been recognized
if you ever asked for anything from
anyone and they ever responded you have
to keep a running tally for four years
and make sure everyone's and your
acknowledgments because everyone will
read it anyway mister me I've been I
didn't go pitch to do anything but I've
been writing quite a lot of table of
contents of as well one say one book but
the way I was testing it or a similar
way were just put in some time students
some time colleagues inside the room and
just film them and see where their eyes
go first you know it was if I'm inside
the room with them they're just gonna be
kind of behavior politely and go through
the entire thing so I did this kind of
test to see what actually they capture
more you know like and that it was
actually a way as well for me to edit
out quite a lot of other stuff that
maybe that was irrelevant or was just
too much of background information I
think maybe a social way that way
testing this way hours presents that
they've discussion earlier this year on
the aft bar design so I'm very full of
this one thing I would ask is about the
word dissertation and the affiliated
word thesis which have not quite heard
enough of a discussing table contents
there's always something that actually
really I will thought should precede it
which is what the thesis actually is or
what its asserting now what dissertation
is unfortunate because it doesn't seem
to connect to a simple verb to desert
you can insert you can assert well what
is it to desert and normally in
conventional discipline the dissertation
or thesis proposes an argument it might
be highly polemic in the spiritual merit
his callicles idea a problem with design
theses is what is it to to desert
something to put forward put it forward
when one puts forth an arguments in
history or logic or mathematics it is
subject certain kinds of understandable
rigors of criticism and and argument at
the problem it seems to me to recur with
anything that brings in design is that
it seems to require a different kind of
verb a different meaning to the verb to
assert what is it that you are proposing
the word thesis used to be used a great
deal for diploma thesis in the final
year of architectural education and it
always struck me as a curious and very
idea syncretic use of that term ceases
to put forward a design as a thesis so I
just wondered if preceding the table of
contents or at least on at the top of
the page should be some notion of what
is it - state your dissertation
while I have this dog hanging in my head
I would start before it disappears I
will answer them so comment more
regarding the the idea of theses and I
always thought that there was a I
thought somehow along in high school
when that's perhaps not connected to a
PhD that the students had to had their
thesis no in order to have the design
and something quite incredible happened
in this period which I don't think was
very fruitful which was the idea that
somehow with some cases and people who
spent a lot of time trying to formulate
a thesis and then the design became a
illustration of their thesis with with a
high degree of quality almost
undiscussables
because the thesis was quite strong but
again the output was highly
complementary to that which I'm sure
that's not the right way of doing thesis
but that's what a lot that happens that
at least in my view and something
interesting is I don't know what perhaps
but my colleagues will talk more about
that the idea of insertion of
dissertation but I think the idea of
when one experiment with something one
test and observes and notes and create
inarticulate elements around and then
around to feats of the journey the table
of content appeared or some kind of
words which can create a gravity around
these appears I always thought that
there was the camp that I thought was
more fruitful in a way in the design
studio where accountability if we can
say that word in terms of the the what
is being put forward in terms of design
is not just some kind of submissive
element for a highly strong but comes
claustrophobic thesis so I'm sure
there's the super exciting ways of doing
thesis but that was not one of them yeah
I think it's important that we
both acknowledge the search for new ways
I mean they're there I'm sure there's a
way to give a more rigorous definition
the way is understood from an academic
point of view academic discipline but I
think what Ricardo was just talking
about really makes me think that the
whole point of for example for us in the
Diploma school is to keep the pressure
for the final project especially for the
fifth year to have some element of what
thesis used to do and I think it's
really really important in the final
year of Education what it means well I
don't really know what that means but I
do know that if they can take a clear
position and they construct it
theoretical model of the world they can
articulate that model with in regardless
right the design elements shouldn't be
sidekick illustration and maybe it
should be slightly more than a very
responsible retroactive understanding of
what you've designed I think it should
be much more productive relationship
between the two and I think from that we
can then look at the much broader range
depending on where you are in the school
and which tutors are you mentored by
whether there's a lot more
accountability or kind of maybe
prospective theorization going on and
from there maybe new definitions of that
like I said if you compare us to
historians or scientists who will always
fall short and so we need to defend the
ability to redefine what they mean in an
experimental school of architecture I
think to go to your question where do
you announce the argument relative to
the table of contents sponsors all sorts
of reactions I'm sure some students are
wary to put it in their introduction as
it kind of gives the game away some feel
it belongs as a conclusion as if you're
reading a novel and there's something
spectacular at the end that offers up I
think that projective or heuristic
opportunity of the dissertation if you
had to announce it in front of the table
of contents itself you would be maybe in
a very different position
of how to order that table of contents
so I think to construct an argument or a
series of arguments we heard a little
bit of that idea today is part of the
alchemy of the dissertation but it also
must have this projective element you
brought up and I think you were hinting
that it could be more but there's
something beyond that that we still have
to grapple with and maybe those projects
are in the room and maybe it goes to the
point that the the argument the
rhetorical device that sponsors the
table of contents might not be singular
but might be dispersed across the series
of chapters that then have to be read as
an aggregate and in order to to get to
something like the conclusion if time
for one more question before luscious
drinks are served and anyone else yes
hi it's not really a questions but I
just want to share mm-hmm our experience
because we are starting our second years
with PhD and we just had our fieldwork
in Thailand so right after we finished
our fieldwork the thing that I in the
proposal my dress type of content in the
eyes put as to last chapter the thing
that I think it is interesting but I
don't really know where should I be
right now it's come to the first
priority after the field trip and
without realizing and we just had our
last supervisions with our second fob
supervisor from in Bangkok so instead of
thinking thinking of building up table
of content or starting doing it we are
thinking of building our drawers to put
our materials from the field work and
which so we are constructing our drawers
and and think it as a which draw a we
should put materials in and where should
be and which material can be put in like
some material can be put in many
drummers not just one and I just what
you had the idea of how we build our
table of content right now and it will
be our like structure off their thesis I
think it ties back nicely to the image
we had of the warburg library that every
PhD project if we don't use the word
dissertation assumes a kind of mind
Palace or a space to be creative to
Warburg is explicit your drawers right
will start to concretize what is this
guy the intellectual project it's nice
that they sponsor this to field research
because you were talking about field
research surely everyone has drawers if
not literal figural as they begin to
organize your dissertation does it
become useful for you to have something
tactile does it help you organize each
of those drawers represent ultimately a
kind of chapter or subdivision of the
larger project you're still making the
drawers that's all right yeah go ahead
I think it's virtually represent
chapters but we are not like I'm not so
sure whether it will be a chapter or not
but right now we I just we just came
back from a few work you feel like I
feel like I've got so much materials and
right now I have to categorize them and
put them in the right place find the
right place for it
and it will be a chapter or such chapter
it will be like in a few days I my guess
is you deed those drawers because you're
working not just with texts and
citations or photography that you've
done but you've collected ephemera and
we haven't talked about that we talked
about archives we haven't talked about
the nature the materials and those
archives what's beautiful for example
about some of the archives mentioned
today is their inclusion of ephemera
things around projects playbills tickets
the handwritten note correspondence and
how all those feed I think that's part
of the beautiful discovery and
indulgence of PhD research and
ultimately everyone needs archives to
support their work they might not be
labeled as such but the fact that people
even two years in are connected with two
and three major archives the fact that
several of you are using the AAA
archives in some form probably speaks
not just to the usefulness of looking at
flat images but finding stuff you didn't
expect to find and ephemera might be one
of the reasons why you need the physical
drawers because there there are grades
of material that aren't going to
necessarily flatten on your computer but
have to be pinned to your blue board
it's not I know you don't want to Tory
but I think what is nice is perhaps to
really take that as an exercise if you
don't if you're doing a drawer know when
you're bringing actually not just papers
with materials that you collect these
materials also are have a transfer now
from you to this drawer so I think the
way and the depth and and how these
things will change throughout the terms
my amide role is very different you
might not buy or you might not draw
similar to IKEA you know you might one
day this piece of break would be on the
top drawer but then you decided that it
changes to the third drawer so it sounds
kind of very simplistic but in a way you
might be if you think your table of
contents slash drawer would change what
are the mechanisms based on your
research that this will stimulate you to
generate change is that whole there is
there a software that you have to lead
to something every day or every three
months there is a large clock there you
have to open that so I think the Meccan
is of design which is what we call like
every idea has consequences though I
think every idea doesn't come alone and
from large ideological ideas to kind of
let's make something so like design what
are perhaps some consequences in some
step one and tool that this
materialization of your organization of
materials could stimulate interchange
with otherwise that the normal you want
to say oh man I'm I'm so stuck I mean
I'd be put in a drawer head so I think
you don't want that connotation I think
maybe based on your research how this
can stimulate a constant interchange and
a reassessment perhaps what I think I
was like in array should be a table of
contents my knuckles were talking that
what I find that I'll be curious to see
with some of you is a take a few table
of contents one for example is the table
of content that show clearly what are
the material physical material that you
investigate with for each chapter
another table of content all
- no how much did it cost for you
just to you know travel go to see
specific things for that specific job I
want to know which is the chapter more
expensive I want to know that which is
the chapter that you work with most
amount of people which is the chapter
that you are dealing with different type
of materially this there are many table
of content that we can have in a start
on generate open up kind of different
type of curiosity and different type of
investigation I think we're totally in
tutorial mode okay so what you should
know but genuinely I think it's really
exciting to have this cross section and
reason we are design tutors were all
like ready to go is because there's a
wonderful innocuous power of innocence
that you can have in studio and I think
we can see more of it occurring across
doctoral programs as I said you know
let's reassert ourselves is the most
experimental school who said we need to
have chapters who said we cannot switch
between emergent technologies mode of
research - histories in theory invest
emergent technologies what who's to say
that that analog Atlas cannot turn into
digital database and become a
collaborative project then a blog and
then go back to an atlas and it is truly
personal intimate investigation I think
what's beautiful about it
and again I may be again extremely naive
and optimistic person but the reason
I've tested it is that you can tell this
to students like ok for Monday I'd like
to have a history of program in a 20th
century and they say ok ok
and they combat it on Monday morning
they have no idea that it's impossible
they have no idea that they will bill
all the wrong precedents but they
actually produce it and so in the first
year I've seen some of the most
incredible new categories or I mean
Koolhaas is is completely obsolete with
his elements because the students in a
week reinvent new elements of
architecture that happens in first year
because they're not encumbered by what
they must be doing and what the
tradition it weighs them with so what's
beautiful about the a so we can throw
things in the air somewhat
in the most advanced stages of education
without perhaps you know complete lack
of accountability so I think in the
tutorial mode absolutely we should have
more crossover more experimentation and
challenging the structures and modes of
delivering that research I think just to
complement what my colleague said is
maybe as a suggestion for mark and
everyone at a page to you that so how
how you can stimulate methods of
exchange that take some of those ideas
forward no for everyone because I think
we know that during this conference is
absolutely amazing
sometimes mind-blowing but then your
mind blows literally afterwards because
you don't know what to do immediately so
we do somehow expand the possibilities
in a disfavor for the secrets of but I
think that's really that's really
interesting how perhaps to stimulate
some of these conversations now which
was suggesting how there is a different
protocol of of exchange of this of these
ideas now I know because I think we
colleagues by unit space is just beside
a PhD pitch the room I think did you
guys change the former PhD you were more
p0 I'm stay with the danger and I've
seen the danger but yes so I think it's
just a suggestion that I know there are
the day to day this practice is changed
but maybe some new elements of vertical
cross of vertical crossing will
stimulate some of those different types
of exchange I daresay one of the more
instrumental ways of achieving that is
to integrate all faculty in supervision
of PhD I shouldn't say the word faculty
the AAA doesn't have faculty we have
teaching staff integrate them across all
PhD supervision let me thank the
organizers of the authentic and Lucas
Malad Alief but let me thank the a a
ph.d program . we don't get together
like this so often and when we do it's
productive that you all have a new and
improved space a home this year that's
in a very special position speaks to the
schools I think commitment understanding
that the
a PhD program as a whole is a big part
of the school intellectually culturally
and literally and when we do get
together it feels like we're going to
move from strength to strength and this
was a part of that today thanks to to
our session chairs thank you all three
and on to drinks in the south jury room
thanks a lot
[Applause]
