so the format of the evening is
basically each of our speakers will
state their position in a kind of short
presentation and following that we'll
have a conversation about kind of what
this word on the screen actually means
and hopefully open it up to all of you
to ask some questions as well to briefly
introduce tonight's speakers they have
much more extensive BIOS online but
Pierre Vittorio and Maria direct the
city project PhD by design and they also
run diploma 14 and they really kind of
question how we can break the divisions
between theory and practice and reclaim
architecture as a project and how it can
both change our discipline and also how
we design cities Nicholas sambhar she
graduated from the AAA earlier this year
in June 2018 and he currently works at
forensic architecture and his work sits
between architecture media and politics
and he uses speculation and allegory to
form SSD space across scales Marie colon
is the founder and director of Betts
project which is a Contemporary Art
Gallery based in London and her
curatorial aim is to present
architectural objects as works of art
and you'll see a selection of the
architects she's exhibited to date in
her presentation Vera van gool graduated
from the AAA in 2014 and she's the
associate director of the new museum's
ideas city initiative she's organized
public programs exhibitions and
workshops for this initiative in awls
Athens Detroit New York Shanghai and
Toronto and she focuses on how art and
culture can shape cities and theose
propolis is the director of the a design
research laboratory and he's the
co-founder of experimental architecture
and design practice minima forms and in
both his teaching and practice he
speculates on the future city and new
ways to engage occupy and inhabit it so
that's a kind of very speedy
introduction to our speakers but please
join me in welcoming them
[Applause]
so thank you manager actually for the
invitation and for the introductions so
as we have the first slide please
great so we are Vittorio and Maria and
as mine she said Ashley we work in the
city architecture ph.d program so we
will be presenting just one position
that we both of us we share but we also
share I think actually with the
researchers actually who work with us in
the program and of course this word
autonomous or the word autonomy rather
has been incredibly important for us in
the past few years we are very
interested in actually what it means to
construct a form of autonomous practice
but we also feel that very often the
discussion on the on this idea of
autonomy becomes very vague when we
don't root it in the actual conditions
of our practice and particularly the
labor conditions of our practice in a
specific moment in time so what we
thought to do today before the
discussion was just to present one case
specifically the case of an artist al
red Laurel that you see now pictured in
this slide that we feel is a very
interesting actually example of an
artist who debated in his own work very
clearly through visual but also text
evidence his own position towards this
idea of autonomy we also think it's
interesting actually to talk about him
because he was at a very beginning at
the birth almost we could say of the
discipline of art in fact as a craft as
a job at the beginning of the modern era
and so we feel that a lot of the
problems that he was facing and he was
debating his artworks but also in his
texts are very much actually still valid
today and in a way to retrace actually
his own position means actually to take
a position ourselves actually in the you
know above the above on this topic so I
will let now actually purgatorial take
you on this very short sorry can you go
back just a second
this very short actually you know two
minute introduction why doula is
important for us and why we feel that
actually his way of discussing his
autonomous or not position is still very
inspirational for us today yeah actually
the reason why Mari and myself become
kind of obsessed by this artist is
because you don't actually belong to a
generation of artists that realize they
were very conscious that the work was no
longer based on craft but on ideas and
intellectual work and this position was
so clear Tudor that as you can see from
this famous self-portraits which is
actually if I'm not wrong the very first
artists self-portrait that is signed by
the artist himself with these famous
actually logo that you see actually on
the on the left and you see that your is
so self-confident with his own position
that he portrayed himself as Christ he
almost has actually almost the blessing
hand and he really actually fashioned
himself as a dinner jig creator which is
actually the idea of the art is creator
that we know since then of course
Durell actually was not only an artist
he was an intrapreneur first of all an
intrapreneur of himself so he wrote a
lot and he almost fashioned all his work
in a very autobiographical way but he
also reflected in a rather problematic
way on the status of the artist as an
autonomous figure and wraps the most
telling image of this condition is this
famous picture melancholia which has
produced endless interpretations and you
might be familiar with the one by
Panofsky but actually what is really
interesting about this image is that is
almost a self-portrait of the artist
totally lost towards actually this
condition of autonomy is that he or she
has achieved and melancholy is exactly
this state of utter discomfort and
sadness of an artist who doesn't belong
to a community anymore but is actually
surrounded by
plenty of tools but he or she doesn't
know actually how to use them next for
us actually Euler is also very important
because he wrote a lot but also he tried
it invested a lot on pedagogy and
perhaps one of the is the author of one
of the most interesting theories of art
and to a certain extent also
architecture and geometry the universe
under my assumed the instructions on
measure and what is really interesting
about this book is that here you know
although he saw himself as a artist he
really wanted to teach artisans and
craftsmen about exactly the knowledge
that was making artists more important
than craftsmen the problem that this
pedagogical project failed because the
book was too difficult for craftsmen and
I would say that even today it would be
very difficult for PhD students to
really understand the incredible wealth
of precision of this of this book and I
think that may be the last image this
this kind of failure is very much
reflected in this picture which is one
of the last illustrations of this book
and actually it's called the monument to
the vanquished peasant the book actually
by Durrell was published in the mid
twenties of the sixteenth century at the
time of a very famous battle that just
happened before the Battle of Franken
Hauser which is actually a battle where
the Lords of Tora India had defeated the
peasants who have tried to revolt
against their Lords and Judah actually
celebrates his side somehow with the
Lord's he celebrated his victory he
doesn't show actually the winners he
shows actually the losers the peasants
so it's a very ambiguous actually
monument that celebrates a lost battle
rather than one
but he also shows actually the subject
that the rise of artists like Narada and
architects as autonomous let's say
artists actually came to the expenses of
another class the lower class the class
of peasants and workers and for us this
is really a cautionary tale of how every
let's say our on it's a science idea of
autonomy is always in conflict with
class conditions that in a way and and
the conditions of production that
influence the work that we do and
therefore Mary and myself believed that
any discussion on autonomy should really
be discussed within the conditions of
production that produce our knowledge
but also our professional status and I
think this reflection at this point is
very important because if at the time of
the oral what was downgraded was manual
labor and and intellectual labor was on
the contrary on the rise today we live
in an era where intellectual labor
itself is being prolate arise is being
actually downgraded and I think it's
interesting to reflect really on the
archaeology of this process by going
back to this very specific moment thank
you hi so I'd like to talk about my
position towards autonomy in relation to
identity and specifically mediated
identity but before that I just want to
briefly speak about sort of the work
that interests me because I just only
recently graduated a few months ago so
predominantly what I'll be referring to
is the thesis that I've been developing
in my education so I like writing essays
an architecture for me is an essay in
form similarly to how I see projects
like Pyrenees Santa Maria del Prado in
my work I curate arguments and design
allegories that are sometimes buildings
and sometimes methodologies but
nonetheless aimed at questioning how we
use architecture as a comment to debate
but also to reveal different ways of how
we see and understand the world and my
work always tends to enjoy issues of
political ontology media and spectacle
and how these forces inform identity and
identity making architecture provides
for me is an intersection for all these
issues and a mediator in itself and
studying these topics and when it comes
to autonomy an interesting starting
point I guess to my position would be
the word Norma's from after Mia in the
Greek definition that talks about which
means law but also not law in in our
judicial understanding of law or how to
govern the self after the law of a land
of a tribe or even the law in the laws
with which we used to sort of describe
objects or cities for me extend to this
idea of rules of applied rules rules of
a particular language rules that define
an object ROS sort of systems of naming
and indexing of categorizing in other
words the means by which we determine
the world around us and we classify it
the way in which we define the edges of
what belongs and what does not belong so
the question of where you're from refers
to a place and that place for me is
media mess on the the in-between and by
media I mean any technology from
architecture to language that is used
for communication and the fact is to
mediate one must always succumb to
representation whether in word or
ornament perception is aesthetics and
resources representation as the moment
of people allows
self to be representative it is no
longer free it no longer exists so
information is discrimination and who
curates the space of information
determines the edges of identity so I
feature quite a few of my projects but
the one that you've been seeing up to
now is my this my 50th thesis which is
titled Terra media and explorers
explores precisely these notions and
notions of autonomy and identity and
this is done by treating media as a
territory and Terra media imagines
imagines two cities are utopia that's
striving for edge lessness on your left
and the city akin to what we we
understand with spaces with seemingly
fixed edges and the characters in both
scenarios engage in a Socratic debate
across the screens the edge versus
edgeless becomes the foundational
argument of communication since for me
without edges we cannot communicate and
without information we cannot
discriminate which is I guess
foundational for any sort of social
contract and interdependence II and in
this and following on this here we've
got an algorithm that I've trained to
read in real time the surfaces of the
city and this was a study on sovereignty
a particular term of autonomy attached
to the modern sort of understanding of
the state and I guess start a rather
naive or maybe a big ambitious question
was how sovereign is a building is
sovereignty something that can be
quantified is it something that the
degrees of power essentially can form a
typological spectrum and this also
becomes interesting in me when we talk
about sort of how we relinquish our own
autonomy to an automaton or to other
sort of media and it opens the issue of
autonomy and identity in its
contemporary technological dimension and
so to conclude
this territory of media that I enjoy
investigating talks about identity as as
constructed from fragments that they
give meaning that define edges and all
borders the lines and symbols on a map
the fretwork of walls and the fence is
on a ground and often the complex and
measurements by which we organize our
lives are all explanations of identity
we construct borders literally and
figuratively to fortify our sense of who
we are and who we might become and we
are always we always find ourselves
living on an edge always becoming always
in between in media res it is a question
of who determines these edges and who
and on what scale individual city or
state has the power over drawing these
borders that make the link between
autonomy and identity something that is
bound to an ever-shifting territory of
of media thank you hello so I'm not an
architect I didn't study any
architecture I've got control pre art
background so I've been trained as an
artist and for some reasons I stopped
being an artist and I came to London and
I studied business business and doing
one course one teacher was speaking
about what is the niche and my English
was really bad and I'm not really good
at business neither well at that moment
and in French anisha's is a hurt fault
dog and I really like this idea I was
WOW I need to find my niche and because
for me it was a little kind of a little
space a little house where you feel
comfortable where you can just be nice
with yourself and to stuff and I really
like tour so the idea of supporting
artists
helping them to show their work and to
understand their work a bit better and
and to explain to work to the others so
but I didn't want to add another art
gallery to the London scene because
there were too many so I decided to do a
key tech chure and I was coming to the a
read your phone because my friend I'll
ban was studying here and I found that
architects and students who are doing
amazing things here very creative so I
say okay let's do something so I started
to do this this little gallery has a
pop-up gallery and the first exhibition
I did was to go to Dubai and to exhibit
office custom gears and dalit and seven
with some photographs of past Benson it
was already nice exhibition but nobody
came except the creator of the Pompidou
Center which was quite cool and then I
had this kind of temporal space where
I've been exhibiting Pia Vittorio and
Peter Buckley and and this little
gallery I was just doing exhibitions and
I found that it was really nice to do
that and I had really good replies from
the public and it was like oh people are
starving for exhibitions like that so it
took me two years to fund the space and
I don't know if we put the window shop
yeah this one so I haven't done that
much so the shelters are still really
rusty is not automatic and look at the
space on the ground floor 30 square
meters and there's a basement space of
30 square meters too and then because
I'm not an architect and I didn't study
architecture the problem was
where I can find architects and and I
found atomically online so I went to to
meet him and he said yeah okay so I did
the first exhibition with atomically and
it was kind of a success and then I met
javi toyou and we did kind of the same
exhibition with a pink wall and pipe in
the middle of Soho and it was really
nice and so each time I'm I'm kind of
choosing some some works from architects
some works that I can relate to my
outward I think so
so for me they're about architecture but
they also really artworks and oh and
that's why or so so that's studio Mumbai
and that's we can't see the greedy
really well but that's kind of little
little window grids that he's been
finding in Mumbai and you got graphite
gah God which is very phallic and really
heavy and that's an imaginary city by
outsource to Mumbai so it's a panel of
[Music]
 cows with some little object
which reminds him of the city and that
Shack on the lotsa a French architect
from Bordeaux who died in 2002 and he's
never been with the well known in France
we say he's a confidential architect
which mean is really good but a bit
scandalous so we don't really speak
about him but this project it's it's one
of the plans for the juicy Opaka the
Shuster University project - the
competition but
finally nothing has been done but it's
been doing beautiful plants and yeah
just beautiful plants like I mean I
can't tell about that but it's going to
take a while but to come back to the
autonomy I really wanted to do this kind
of fix this kind of gallery because I
found that it could be the space where I
could be creative in a certain way where
I could be myself where I could show
exactly what I want because it's also a
private gallery so it's not publicly
funded and I do what I want
I've got some rules I've got some
constraints but I'm totally autonomous
[Music]
except if I don't sell the work because
I found the gallery by setting artworks
so that the thing but maybe we can speak
about that a bit later voila they are
hi everybody my name is Fiona from home
I'm a graduate of day a I graduated in
2014 of diploma 10 and then I left
architecture and it was kindly kind of
to do with this struggle that I've been
having with autonomy um
and go through next night in a way I
don't believe in autonomy I believe more
so in Frankenstein and kind of different
autonomies that also get her shape me
recently I was asked to make a
presentation of my work which I thought
was ridiculous and I started off by just
dragging a bunch of screenshots of
basically everything that I've done from
exhibitions to writing to videos to
table designs to somewhat architectural
projects and realize that none of those
individual projects represented me but
the kind of blur that it lets you all
together was more so an image that I
could identify in and I kind of see the
city that way as something that is
inherently anything and everything but
autonomous it's a web of structures of
clubs of power of people of
relationships of securities of finance
and I guess we as citizens are some of
the only agents of autonomy in our way
to have an ideology and our ability to
enter these webs but that does not
depend on who we are it really depends
on our capacity to negotiate to break
and enter and to disrupt these different
systems that are there could you go to
the next one so when I got invited for
this talk that was basically saying to
view the city as a curatorial project
I got terribly excited because it's a
very problematic exercise to declare the
city as a curatorial space cities are
dark they're unfair they're harsh or
Stern and like the build embodiment of
policy structures they are basically
installed to serve those that are in
charge and not necessarily those that
are trying to make their living or make
an autonomy in the city so in one way it
is great to see the city as a curatorial
project because it assigns a certain
type of responsibility
who that is I don't know yet but I guess
a lot of my work is trying to figure
that out I work at the new Museum where
I'm the associate director of idear City
which is basically a project that really
is in yeah initiated to see if we could
perhaps have the exercise of viewing the
city as a curatorial project we don't do
kind of standard exhibitions with
contemporary artists but we like to view
the city as dark work itself and trying
to abstract what different agents
whether those are designers architects
or community activists make that space
liveable and could potentially make that
space nicer or responsive to needs to
date so this is the kind of snippet of
the facade it's a sauna building built
in 2007 which was just before the
economic crisis hit New York City which
basically made our program very
responsive to everything and anything
that happened in the u.s. afterwards and
you can go to the next one what's been
great about ideas cities that we run
very responsive so we've held residency
programs in cities like Detroit Athens
and RL which is very problematic because
you as a museum come in and basically
say hey there's some cool organizations
and want to work with you have some
interesting topics like older refugee
crisis let's make an art program out of
it but inherently if we don't do that
who else will that's not an argument but
it is to say that we often view the city
from a perspective that is from academia
or it's from architectural practice but
it's not necessarily from what is
shaping the city community centers
neighborhood centers social housing etc
and with idear city we've been able to
build a framework that invites anybody
that we feel cares about the city in and
come and present that work to an
interdisciplinary group of people what
we do with idea city often is take what
we cannot do in a museum outside of its
walls into public space this is a drone
shot an illegal drone shot because you
need to file for permits to get a drone
to shoot anything in New York these days
of any way of ID or City New York which
was a big massive public program in
which ever took part as well when she
was still helming storefront in which we
invited over a hundred speakers to
respond to the question what actions
makes make the city to you and those
changed from what are their design
features to 3d prints to security
systems to community public art
installations next one this is a shot of
gathering what we try to do is play very
much with the traditional form of a
lecture is that having a mic is that
sitting in a roundtable discussion or is
that without a mic and what we notice is
that actually this the set up without a
mic in which everybody could speak
without hierarchy without one assigned
speaker was the most popular and was the
most interesting one of the other
elements that's crucial about idea
cities that we really tried to say that
the city's not made by architects so one
of my proudest maybe not the best place
here to say it is but one of my proudest
achievements is that I've run many
programs without architects that's not
to say that architects aren't to be
valued for what they do in the city but
it's to say that the power that
architects have is shared by a lot of
other people here we are in this photo
in RL which is an old railway station
that was transformed into a cultural hub
what we do is often take buildings that
aren't necessarily yet designed as art
spaces and situate ourselves in there to
kind of show how easy it is to transform
vacant railway stations hospitals music
schools and transform that into spaces
of gathering and thought one of the
artworks that an artist's that I feel
very much resonates with autonomy with
my work with my interest is actually not
an architect it's Jonah come fro who's a
filmmaker and this is a shot of his
Hemsworth riot films which is made in
late 80s as a response to the riots that
were happening in 85 and what he did was
take a medium of art video in this
particular instance and allow that as a
platform for other people and other
voices that aren't necessarily empowered
to reimagine and rewrite what has
happened today and I feel in that sense
because next time it comes up to a lot
of the work that I do currently I'm
working on a kind of cultural Commission
for an exhibition in New York that takes
the same premise art as a public space
in this case again video in which we can
imagine video as a site for commerce as
a site for politics as a site for
individual identity expression etc and
if you can go through next one what's
been terribly exciting is when I got
this kind of Commission they asked me to
come up with an exhibition project and
rather than me renting one commercial
gallery and having ten screens I
realized that this is more interesting
if it could operate part as a kind of
citywide network that activates all
sites in lower Manhattan that have
helped shape video culture to what it is
today this is a still of Chicago ku
botas Soho so rain-damaged film which
basically covers the damage that was
done by Huracan to her and her husband
noon June Park video archive in a way
and what's amazing is take my
architectural interests of my interest
in cities but also allow other art
mediums to kind of navigate that and
then build an exhibition that's not in
one space but it's across five to ten
different locations in New York and in
that way the format of viewing the
curatorial which normally is entering a
museum is transformed into kind of a
city route where you can walk into
different spaces that you normally never
come you have to go up two staircases
down into basements and in that way the
public space that you are that you're
accessible to is transformed into that
of an event into that of a situation
which brings it back to I guess my
interest in the curatorial and the city
[Applause]
can you hear me I don't like a phone
challenged a lot of times so for me
autonomous and autonomy is a word that
somehow is symptomatic of a lot of the
things that we pursue in the practice
but from a perspective of the word that
I would say is more around the subject
of agency I think if you give agency to
something in a sense you're giving a
certain capacity to things themselves to
actually participate in the world so I'm
gonna read just a really quick statement
and then I think we'll just go through
the slides but a statement is somehow
articulated by using a man named Hans
whole lines kind of provocation to
architecture son sixty-eight Austrian
radical architect console and proclaimed
alles east architect or everything is
architecture publish originally as a
manifesto that appeared in the journal
bow it was a provocation I reflected a
heightened awareness of the limitations
of traditional definitions of
architecture in favor of an
understanding of design as an
experimental vehicle for the
construction of new forms of
communication beyond building oline
stated a true architecture of our time
will have to redefine itself and expand
its means many areas outside of the
realm of architecture will enter as
architecture and architects will have to
enter new fields all our architects
everything is architecture architecture
and an expanded field of experimentation
resonates with great magnitude today as
we live in an age where science fiction
has become fact our contemporary ages as
radical as ever with change latency and
uncertainty being the new norm
the ones comfortable and understood
historical models of
past of proven limited in their capacity
to engage and address the complexities
of what we could call the contemporary
condition as we live in ever-evolving
information rich environments the
question is not why but how can
architecture participate I can I have a
first slide ok so let's just say that
that's a statement from my side speaking
from the ghost of whole line and at the
same time if we look at this idea of the
city if we look at the idea of agency
and autonomy the nature of what we speak
about this always beyond building it's
beyond infrastructure
it's beyond representation it's
something that shared its time-dependent
it's a medium that actually manifests
itself over time and has a process of
becoming Frank Lloyd Wright made a
provocation which was an experiment in
his own right you called it broadacre
City but if you look at the image of
broadacre city you'll see flying
vehicles it wasn't just a plan in terms
of an idea of how a city should be
organized but all aspects fell into the
scenario of actually Hal one would have
mobility models how an idea of this
thing could happen he provoked this idea
when he published a book in 1932 called
a disappearing city and at the same time
he used a four square mile kind of grids
that he was sort of problematizing up
until his death until 1959 the city as a
project and I think this is something
that we share the idea of what is this
new space of production was all parts I
think of trying to think about things in
a much more ecological a sense of how
things interrelate with other things and
frankly trying to you know one could say
is a bit of a master was actually really
problematize with that kind of question
itself the next slide I'm going to make
the argument also that technology plays
a very important role in that and the
idea of speculation and experimentation
is absolutely fundamental to that so
I always use a slide anybody who's heard
me before I apologize but it's not like
I'm a Nicholas Negroponte I fan with you
know no other references but for me
honestly it's a very important moment in
time one's ideas of certain technologies
were coming into the field of
architecture and problematizing actually
what the role of architecture was he
finished at MIT two years later he set
up a lab the lab was basically at
looking at CAD systems and CAD tools he
called it the architecture machine group
and then for 10 years operated within
that the world of artificial
intelligence the world of robotics all
of these things that were germinating
within MIT were also part of this world
and what was the architecture machine
group after a ten year period of
sustained experimentation and trying to
discover possibilities and potential and
speculation became something called the
Media Lab architecture set the questions
that problematize a certain aspect of
technology regardless of what motivated
that that set up a certain kind of
fundamental thesis that was shared and
collective and that was part of a
communication revolution that we
witnessed and the architecture I would
make that argument played a very vital
and important role because in a certain
sense our unorthodoxy approach to
actually working on these problems
actually was something that was very
powerful at the next slide if we look at
today it's a videos if you play it may
be cool we also have to think beyond
ourselves so when I speak about agency
its we can speak about human to human
interaction we can speak about human and
machine interaction we could speak about
machines interacting with other machines
this is part of a world where everything
actually has a certain agency a certain
kind of way of understanding the world
and it connects back I think to certain
things that resonate with me which is
that we're all observed
of an in the world it's a kind of
radical constructivist approach towards
some of this thinking that's neural
neural network e stuff I should be a
video too I'm gonna close with just the
project that came to us as a speculation
so I have a small office with my brother
it's more like I wouldn't call it a
business either it's like a me and my
brother coming together to do stuff with
some friends we call it minimal forms
and we were asked by Nesta which is a
part of the innovation department for
the UK to speak about the future of
machines the future of machines as far
as we were concerned was really about
speculating on the idea of the city
about architecture and urbanism and
mobility and to think about how those
things interrelate the reason for that
is we were part of a group of people
speaking about the future of democracy
the future of money the future of
everything future for us is very much
about the present it's like a no mcluhan
sense if you're interested in the future
look towards the day because people live
in the past or the future of the future
as a present what we were trying to look
at is like what would happen if we sort
of reject the idea of planning and
reject the idea of blueprints and reject
the idea of a master plan and sort of
speculate about what it would be like if
we could create an augmenting system or
that the city that we know here like
London or a city like Detroit that's a
shrinking infrastructure had an adaptive
model that could sort of participate we
just speculated on the fact that that
should be mobile we speculated on the
fact that organization should be
something that was real time and that's
something that had the capacity to learn
and adapt and evolve with us idea of the
house the idea the collective was
something that would emerge through our
daily interactions
this wasn't a reactive system this was a
system like a lot of the systems that
are in our world that are trying to
understand us but instead of to try to
understand us to sell us different stuff
from Amazon or whatever to try to use
that there's a strategy of actually how
we could occupy and how we
move about the city looking at a lot of
the models that are ready going to be
deployed in cities like London like
autonomous vehicles and so forth
these kind of technologies if they're
not somehow problematize and if they're
not explored within the space of what
the city actually is and to be honest
with you the consequences of that is
that habits just like all of the machine
learning algorithms that are running
today are basically going to fossilize
what we know as the model of actually
learning of how we should live in the
future I'm very much interested of using
architecture as a very subversive
technology partly because architecture
is so slow
partly because it makes so many demands
that it's shared and collective partly
because anybody who's in the business of
ever trying to realize anything will
understand that the social and the
political are very much embodied in
absolutely every step of the way and
that the cultural aspect of all of that
stuff I think is a power of what
actually unites rooms like this
regardless of whatever we want to say
whatever camp we are if we'd like grids
or we like blobs or we like whatever
there is a necessity I think for people
to sort of also understand the
technology is not something outside of
us it's very human it's not something
that we put back in the box it's
actually that's out there in the world
and we ought to engage with that
sometimes that means actually literally
moving beyond architecture in terms of
the traditional sense of building
looking at a moment in time like
potentially like Negroponte and then
sort of looking that especially for the
young people in the audience with new
eyes to sort of understand actually how
you can sort of contribute and
participate I'm very much interested in
participatory models I also think that
agency from me is what gives autonomy to
things and I think the future of all of
the stuff is that we're gonna be living
with this one way or the other and so
the challenge I guess from my side to
people is just participate and to do
that you actually have to really engage
and to engage that means you actually
have to
to understand before we have these kind
of opinions about these subjects the
reason for that is the same people that
create these subjects are also the same
people that are also very fearful of it
because they somehow reinforce habit and
artificial intelligence and machine
learning is not something new this has
been going on since the time of Nikola
Ponte it's a science that died and now
all of a sudden has emerge and
everything is a I and I think
realistically speaking for anybody
that's invested in any of these things I
mean my definition of architecture is
that it's spatial it's practice is its
medium its time-based its evolving these
things I think we may all share in
different ways we may have different
ways of speaking about it but I think
it's something that is important to sort
of talk about some anyway thank you
thank you all for a very diverse array
of positions on a word that we kind of
chose because it means everything and
nothing so I think it was really
interesting to hear all the different
positions but I wanted to pick up on
something that very you mentioned about
how it's sometimes problematic to kind
of jump into a situation and I guess if
the brief of how we interpret our anima
sister view the city as a curatorial
project that it's sometimes hard to just
dive into a situation and and start to
curate something as vast and complex as
the city but you also said if we don't
do it who will and I think that's
interesting with the group of people we
have around the table that whether you
see yourself as an architect and artist
a curator what's your role in kind of
bringing together these different forces
or providing platforms and I think this
applies to everyone
providing platforms to change the city
to to to actually fight against these
conditions of class and production that
are limiting maybe how certain people
have access to shaping the city or how
do we control like the media and
identity of the city I think each of you
have a different position on that but I
guess there's a way to bring all of you
in conversation with each other to speak
about where you see your role in the
curatorial project of the city do you
want me to so I think what has been
exciting about the role that I have
which is not to have the responsibility
of an architect but being able to shape
the responsibilities at large for
architects for designers for artists for
policy makers strategists etc one of the
key things that I think is crucial to
understanding the city is to not sit in
a room just with architects and it's
really not because I don't like
architects I love architects my brain is
an architect but it's because I think we
have a tendency to select things as if
they're bricks as if they're tiles as if
they're
something that we could arrays or delete
in a model or a week and backspace in a
document and that's not the city
cities everything else so when I say
that it's problematic to come in as a
museum and as you said we've done
programs all over the world literally in
every part except pretty much quite
ironically Africa because we can't get
funding for it a strange thing we're
like we would love to go anywhere but
it's very hard to get there right it
inherently carries the problem of what
the museum as an agency is it brings
forward is yeah this conversation about
authenticity and players so what we try
to do is shift the conversation from the
city as a designed project or something
that somebody can actually even be an
architect on but take it as a condition
that is now and then we as a museum have
our own building that is static but
everything else we can change we can
change our exhibitions we can change our
staff we can change our wallpapers and
we can change who we're working with so
when we go into these cities one of the
key things that we actually identify
it's part of a kind of learning curve
that I've been undergoing is everybody
that disagrees or doesn't want to work
with us it's quite likely the person
that we want to work with so this
ability to choose a line or a color or
wool or a reference is completely out of
your own is it's taken away and that is
a very unique experience that is very
different in architecture school but it
comes back to the purpose of selecting
and it comes back to a conversation
about obviously it's elective
intelligence but also about morality and
I think that is a lot what is missing
autonomy without morality is very little
in my in my opinion and I think that is
the same for us as a museum we
understand that we're not the building
sector were not completely dependent on
public funny we have funny we have a lot
of philanthropy that supports our
projects were not architects we're not
designers we're basically nobody except
ability to create situations and
experiences and that is to say that we
are also in such a privileged position
to do so in New York that some of that
privilege privilege of being a cultural
icon in one way
and bring people to the table that
normally would not sit in the table one
of the key things and one of the
projects is actually most architectural
what I'm proud of is the project we did
in Detroit which was my first residency
program is very complicated City and
what you have had there is quite simply
put policy people speaking to policy
people Architects speaking to architects
and activists speaking to activists
nobody was willing to sit around the
same table but also know when you as a
museum come in as a neutral agent you
have the ability to build those bridges
that aren't necessarily in place this is
not an academic exercise is not the most
interesting essay but it is a really
great project about collaborations that
just don't happen after school that
don't happen when you're stuck in your
own discipline and in that way to see to
use the curatorial gaze to look at the
city as I think a very interesting
exercise but the word curatorial on its
own I think should be the word that's
been invested under investigation today
because I think that is very complex
complex word because it inherently
describes a certain type of a choice but
I don't think everything is a choice you
use it just now to say that you curate
text or you curate sentences or or
something and that is the way that we're
describing this word it's choosing as a
designing is it what is curating and I
think because we are an established
museum we have the ability to ask
ourselves a question I on my own have
much limited autonomy to ask that
question and I think that is why it's
also an exercise of scale I think it's
interesting that we are all talking
about that from a different perspective
you've sees it does very well looping
back in does anyone else want to respond
to that maybe a pivot or an Maria
because you started to talk about I
guess the point that you made about
autonomy without morality because I
think that was something that I think
there is something we probably both
share having worked also some things
together on projects that have to do
with city administrations and so on and
so forth and I guess it's pretty obvious
to all of us that
architecture is just about the least
autonomous form of practice actually
today it's maybe the form of practice
that has the least or the least
recognizable value and that 99% of what
we do is read about compromising is
about actually negotiating and is about
actually taking in much more than in
fact designing or or imposing order and
I think that all of that is something
that we that we have to accept because
that's the reality but what I really
liked actually in the u.s. position is
the fact to actually you still have
faith that architectural knowledge has
something to contribute to all of this
not there is a form of agency that we
can still you know recuperate and that's
something that I think we very much
share we share this kind of hope out of
almost despair of our experience in fact
actually with clients and particularly
when these clients are institutional
clients is almost worse than when they
are in fact actually private clients
actually I would say that is worse in
many cases so the question is that
probably for us is what almost is always
like this kind of quest for a form of
hope that we can really recuperate this
agency and another thing that actually I
think you said is absolutely spot-on is
this question of understanding the
ecology in which we operate and and I
think it's fantastic the work that you
guys do actually with technology we
don't quite have the skills to do that
what we try to do is to look at the
economic side of things but I think that
two things kind of meeting you know
trying to understand what are these
conditions that make us in fact actually
so not autonomous and I just want to say
one other thing I found really
incredibly meaningful and somehow both
heartbreaking but also interesting when
Marie explained actually how she was
looking for her niche and she said my
niche is going to actually make me
autonomous as much as I can make it work
within market conditions and I think
that is exactly I think it's a very good
observation because that's what we are
all looking for now how can we create
this niche within market conditions that
are not always in
in our favor so so yeah I would say that
yeah we really I would agree we don't
really believe that autonomy as it needs
to exist but it's definitely a horizon
towards which we try to I have to say
that although I have a lot of respect
for curators because there are workers
like anyone else I'm a little bit
suspicious about the whole idea of Korra
toriel as a kind of big widows now not
even practice because I think as a
practice as a value but really as a kind
of condition a lot of people now used to
describe how our world works then the
reason for that is because it is exactly
this kind of ability of artistic
practice and to a certain extent false
architectural practice that is also
often used by institutions to I would
say economically downgrade the work of
artists and architects because the more
actually anyone anything can be
architecture and anyone can be an artist
which is great of course and of course
it has a lot to do with also
democratization of something that until
recently was very elitist the flip side
of that is that artistic work an
architectural work doesn't add value and
and the skyrocketing precarity that is a
reality of our profession is also the
result of this kind of sixties 1960s
ideas that you know anything could be
art and architecture and I think now
this is a very institutionalized
statement and position very powerful
institutions are actually are really
using this ethos as a way to increase
actually precarity but also to increase
the validation of those institutions and
so for me the question of autonomy is
also a question of self validation I
mean how we can find strategies even
within those institutions that somehow
are not just in a kind of blind way
creating value for
for the the system but create value that
can also be take back and I think this
is actually why the curatorial it's a
very interesting battlefield I mean I'm
not saying that it's something we should
reject but we should question this kind
of paradigm because for me the corridor
today in our own profession is the real
social factory is the factory in which
in fact exploitation is often being
advanced it's funny because I always had
to refuse to have the word creator but
no one could call me anything else
because they could not say that there
are not buildings therefore what are you
doing but it's interesting that we are
talking about kora toriel with the word
autonomous in the world when the word
autonomy somehow crashed the art wall or
the architecture world was in the search
of something that stood in front or in
relationship to other disciplines that
actually could be identified as such and
could actually stand in moments of
somehow inability to articulate the
values to articulate the power something
and to say you know this is there is a
particular idea that actually needs to
be respected that needs to be and the
student needs to be valued and so the
problem within that root of autonomy is
I can have a singular argument that no
one else could understand that was
actually taken for a ride within
architecture
left us in this place where we are right
now that is on the side of the road in
which no one understands in which that
the space of autonomy what actually that
would with what is the value that we
bring and that actually did not only
happen in architecture I seen it happen
in many other fields and that's why the
figure of the creator that one who
actually articulates the tries to make
sense that tries to actually bring
people together from different
disciplines from different areas who
actually ultimately brings visibility to
the labor structures as a way to really
bring that artwork into another space is
something that I find it paradoxical the
worst moment of my career career was
when actually I was invited to a
conference that was called creating the
curatorial and I wanted to really get
out of the room
like it's totally unacceptable but so
the question here is to understand the
symptom of the usage of that word of
like we are creating and cheese we are
creating a text we are creating a word
so because we do need to understand the
agency ultimately and that I think is
well was brought like what is that what
are the questions that we are asking
what is that that we are trying to
address
regardless of that disciplinary label
that we carry and so for me then the
question comes in to ultimately what is
that that that we want to use that
autonomy for and in this case you clear
it very clearly let us look specifically
into questions of labor right talk about
agency but then the question is of
course trying to understand how that
entire new universe that is emerging in
front of us with algorithms and AI is
actually making a there a product of
capital or actually can make a product
of life or a product of engagement of
some of the values that we carry so the
question here to me is that how do we
abandon that they have autonomy and how
to actually write the new questions
because I think out on Amin and of
itself is ultimately as a space of
strength and space of power if you want
and and I think idea city in a certain
way project that they know obviously
very well was always about what are the
ideas right what are the ideas that each
one of those cities wants to put forward
and how does the school of architecture
like daaa tries to not be an autonomous
institution in itself but actually tries
to understand itself outside of its
boundaries and so I start asking the
right question so maybe as a way of
shifting the conversation to the
audience I think it's time for you to
ask the questions and maybe to even make
your own little two minutes
articulations of autonomy so if I if I
may add a question thanks to all your
your presentations I mean I would like
to link the notion of authorship to the
question of autonomy and authorship not
necessarily a singular act of isolated
imposing my ideas not at all
before the shape is critical there is
doubtful authorship but authorship as a
sort of taking responsibility for having
ideas so ideas City ultimately I think
the idea is related to the brain of
individuals and the individual as you
are all individuals sort of related to
the power of your brain whether this
relates then to mechanisms and
autonomous mechanisms of machinery like
artificial intelligence and so on but
ultimately I'm questioning my role your
role as authors is authorship still a
concept or are we giving up authorship
and employ I was speaking about the
let's say institutionalized them crisis
of of the profession perhaps delegating
to to the curator but that doesn't
matter curator is maybe a different form
of authorship but I'm questioning the
idea of authorship do we still believe
in that not as a heroic role can be a
very modest a very humble way of making
a contribution but do we believe in
authorship autonomy or not well as much
I enjoy of course like anyone else to be
at the author of my own work I also have
to say that if you really study the
history of architecture there is nothing
more damaging than the whole idea of
authorship I think that for me
architecture really started to go
downhill when this obsession with outer
shape which actually was clearly stated
by Elham Battista Alberti became
actually the main tool through which in
fact I intellectual labor was elevated
at the expenses of craft of manual labor
so of course we all enjoy to be the
Alpha and as you said to take
responsibility for what we put forward
so there is absolutely something
rewarding in being acknowledged as an
author of something but we know that in
our
on outer ship architecture is a pure
democracy because we know that behind
the face of the architect and the name
of the architect through which a
building or a project is identified
there is an army of people who often
actually are really producing in fact
the architecture and precisely because
their authorship is not acknowledged we
have the labor consequences that we all
know are very problematic in our
profession so I think we have to be very
careful about other because it's
something that definitely satisfy our
ego and all of us have an ego of course
but historically speaking it's been a
tool not to really downgrade the agency
that actually produce architecture and
not just architecture if I may add and I
agree with you that the curatorial is
problematic in terms of institutions
100% and I believe that authorship is
very complicated to assign to a curator
the same in a way as its assigned to an
architect it's a branding exercise for
inherently a fancy term of a decorator
in but we do live in the reality that is
today where auto-ship is like you said
it is kind of very much important to
have yourself in order to make a living
right so I think the curator role and
the curator as a word has basically
become part of a branding exercise to
help people show that they have an
individual take on it look if I work for
an institution I have no need to put my
name on anything it's a new museum a
dear City program and I waited I work I
really have no interest and who puts the
best ideas forward as long as the
program is great but when it comes to
something on myself I need to think
about what my own feasibility is and how
I fit into the structures and economic
systems etc and all of a sudden I have
to be like oh my god I do have
authorship because that is the system in
which we were we work so it's authorship
like how you said it's linked to
individuality and that is one of the key
issues that we are facing today I
believe how we deal with individuality
in terms of much larger processes I'm
very happy for the entire discipline of
curator to be reduced thrown off the
entire world as long as I do still keep
my job in a way
right so that is the complicated system
sorry it's totally cool yeah I I think
sometimes these conversations they
become amazingly cyclical like and to
take Evers point about asking questions
but I think somehow we need to find
mechanisms to ask more appropriate
questions no that's not it's not me
being a bad boy it's me just sort of
asking if authorship like like was just
mentioned was something about
individuality could we construct
frameworks that allow for co-authorship
can we say that things could be
collectively written instead of
curatorial 'i authored i mean i think we
I don't know I'm the more and more I get
into this world the less and less I
really believe in language I feel like
language has become a kind of crux in
which we feel like we understand each
other and actually when you see work and
I think that that's what's amazingly
powerful in any form of creative
practice is that somehow the narrative
that's attached to it is separated it's
useful sometimes that have that filter
but realistically its autonomous on its
own it's in the world of its own and it
has possibilities because of that and
the only reason I'm stating that is
because I think that everything that we
speak about is a paradox we want to have
individuality we want to be able to
participate and to go back to Maria's
point I mean I use technology but I
don't foreground it you may think that
not from my presentation but
realistically speaking that's the only
field that's the only thing that I can
speak of that is a framework that has a
possibility to be inclusive if if we
create frameworks to be inclusive and I
think those are the ways that you can
resist things and you can deal with
accelerated
it's ideas and I mean ideas by
themselves are I used to work with a guy
who said everybody has ideas who gives a
 about ideas now not all of them are
good and to be honest with you not
everybody is committed to them and I
think like the things that we can
benefit and I and I obviously have a
deep love affair with history as well
but four very different things because
I'm not looking to see if I'm original
I'm looking for friends that can help me
sort of think about this kind of
continuous experimentation and for some
of us because in a strange way like I
don't know maybe the students EPP and
Marie and Marie and myself as people
that are not practitioners in a sense or
we're very academic but actually we all
have worked with planning commissions
and I'm still waiting for some day that
this National Park in Greece will maybe
sometime happen before I'm 80 years old
but and that's if I get there but these
things are just so much part of the
practice I just mean like language about
what a curators role is today is maybe
not the same in the seventies maybe it
had a very different kind of agenda to
sort of break certain orthodoxies the
curator today may have a different value
what we mean about curation at the scale
of the city is is much more about
maintaining certain forms of diversity
which are actually being problematized
by a lot of things
partly technology for sure capital we
all want to have a job but realistically
it's not about us the project of the
city is not about us individually our
moment in time it's about actually how
we develop a framework and that's why
cities are beautiful projects it's it
they resist anybody's individual idea
time somehow is a medium that actually
is probably the most beneficial thing
for us to discover and I just think like
I only mentioned that because I think
like everybody here in the audience as
well has to also feel a certain
responsibility to do that because
otherwise and we have committees and
committees take decisions and not people
it's this it's that we we somehow move
away from actually taking responsibility
but
I think any of us would probably say
that we feel burdened with
responsibility for every action that we
do for every interaction with students
we're trying to nurture something and
that's why I think I don't know I have
to be blindly optimistic because to be
honest with you everything says other
and if that's the case and I should
retire in Greece and grill tomato plants
and some watermelon and call it a day
and I say that with like a sense of
urgency right we're in a place like the
architectural Association were any ideas
open we were just talking about going to
schools prior to this in the states
where amazing infrastructures of
institutions brilliant people but the
level of conversation right now is not a
conversation it's kind of just you know
it's not a dog it's terrible and so
that's we have to address one elephant
in the room because I mean there's this
word autonomous yes and we have an
author of who has written extensively
about autonomy yes it's about who
possesses the means of production no and
yes in the presentation they show I mean
I think it's a tricking and that's why I
want to ask a question there's something
of sadness of desperation that
architecture is not capable of doing
this know if you should American Korea
Maria said and I completely subscribe
for me real hope comes only when you
really try to be very aware about the
conditions in which we produce
architecture I think for me Steven is
more desperate to be simply to live of
illusions about hanami that are grounded
into into nothing but when you actually
realize the extent in which you know our
profession has been historically
producer then I think there is real hope
that a counter strategy or or something
that you know can be discussed and can
it can be also achieve as a group not as
a single you know Alfred
can be advanced so we really feel that
on the contrary we were hoping or we
would feel that our product the
presentation was full of optimism also
let me make one footnote if it wasn't
you know crystal clear I think what the
rhetoric was trying to do by showing our
delightful Albrecht Durer is that
essentially this is a world and together
with the word authorship because the two
can go hand-in-hand indeed that has been
put to the foreground of the discussion
by a bunch of bourgeois white male in a
specific moment in a specific place and
we are anything but that so maybe the
time has come to do the same thing that
those guys actually did back then and
try to find a new framework maybe new
words maybe there are no words sto said
before I don't know what but I think
that kind of realizing the placing will
in the place in which we are and how we
got there and how a specific class got
there and how specific guys in a
specific moment in time and in a
specific culture actually got us there
is quite crucial because front for the
point from the point of view of a woman
for instance for me this word makes no
sense I mean I'm sorry from the moment
that we are born it's like I mean
there's no way we can be autonomous even
in so many different ways so what is the
world then that defines this if there is
a world what is the practice that
defines it I think that this is this is
the question that's why actually when we
discussed actually bringing in this case
study we both agreed because we were
like okay it's just so interesting to
see how historically situated actually
this world is and how maybe doesn't
really describe what we're looking for
anymore also it's interesting
Durell actually was a very successful
artist one of the most successful not
only in terms of his work which is
incredibly amazing but he made a lot of
money he was very rich and he had a
beautiful life he travelled a lot and
still actually he was ensured that
basically the success he achieve and
which was not only his success but the
success of a class an emerging class of
bourgeois artists was really grounded
into something he was confident with and
I think that that that really shows that
from the very beginning you know our on
fashion is grounded on very unstable and
fragile structures and I think that to
remind ourself that doesn't mean that we
just fall in despair but we that we
become much more aware and find actually
this room for for autonomy but to pick
up on what Maria said and what he I said
about language in general I think we do
tend to become quite obsessed with with
words and sometimes yes they're very
context-specific they're very
historically specific but also they also
subscribe to certain systems of
understanding like understanding of what
is an individual to choose an autonomous
individual is a very sort of one could
say Western sort of understanding of the
importance of the author or the
individual in art when a lot of other
cultures it could be interpreted
differently or if we take even sort of
that level further to sort of a
political understanding of not only
autonomy but let's say sovereignty like
some in our understanding of like what
constitutes an autonomous individual and
in in in many sort of systems the idea
of agency only only depends on whether
or not you're able to to have that
agency whether like Aaron would say
about citizenship whether you have the
right to have rights and if there's no I
guess maybe maybe the question is an
issue of control and it becomes then a
paradox of like do we want control as
authors over work do we want control
over ideas or are these are we within
systems themselves like distort the way
that we understand control like
I was speaking about this topic with a
friend from New Zealand the other day
and we were saying like his idea of like
him as an autonomous or more
specifically as a as a sovereign
individual as a New Zealand there's very
different to an Americans idea of
individuality and sovereignty based on
sort of the system's the political
systems in which constitute what is what
defines autonomy whether property is
important to to even have a starting
point when it comes to having agency or
and I guess what's interesting with that
I find interesting with with where we
are now technologically is the
digitally everyone seems to feel like
they have a level of agency because
everyone is able to see each other in a
certain sense but and then this issue of
curation as well everyone keeps talking
about how you self curate on Instagram
curate on various platforms but it does
that really mean
autonomy it is that something we we want
or is that an a yet another construct
that at the end of the day we're all
sort of participating in a totally like
collective system that just values the
individual as a social construct rather
than a reality well who scripts the
algorithm is the real curator yeah
exactly I mean on that point as well
like for me this paradox of authorship
authorship comes into this issue of bias
and when we talk about like these
autonomy as well in in in in tandem with
objectivity like this like the fact that
these technologies or or even the
autonomous person they also exists
outside or other people is is in my
understanding pretty ridiculous because
everything is interdependent and yes you
work with an economy yes you need to you
need to make money to set up a business
etc etc but to some extent those things
to be debated like whether they're
negative whether they're positive but I
don't think it like I think sometimes we
obsess on this on this dream of like
self determined individuals when we've
always been sort of very collective and
it's more like this framework that maybe
we brought her we started talking about
its just rethinking the way we react in
systems and the way that we we implement
agency that could change our
understanding and maybe change these
words stop obsessing about
thank you Richard wolf could I just
thank Riku long for your generosity of
letting us into your gallery a few
nights ago to look at the work of Denis
Scott Brown and those beautiful drawings
and my question to you Marie is do you
feel it is only when an architect draws
that they are autonomous I don't know
why are you obsessed by drawings I mean
I love sculptures but drawings are easy
to shape their easy to transport
easy to display on a wall and they're
more easy to sell than a video actually
so especially if they are bad
architecture but I found also that and
also the curve is more so drawings
I mean it's voice I touch it with when I
did the exhibition with eundel builder I
mean I still have this wooden element in
the basement and I don't know what to do
with them so I'm not using the basement
anymore but what I like with drawings
where with the drawings that that I show
that so the one from by PIV Touhou or
the ones by Philip and Florian for
example it's like they are they are
showing what they think about
architecture they are showing their
reflections through this medium of
drawing with that drawing architecture
actually something like that and I
really like this kind of this kind of
where we are out of the frame and this
it's we have between art and
architecture and
like to be in this kind of gap with
those artworks and and I were so alike
that people are a bit lost because
sometimes they think is too artistic so
they don't understand and sometime is
too architectural so they don't
understand neither depends where they
are so so what I really like this kind
of gap accident where we are working and
I don't fit the type of creator I'm
making exhibition I mean if you go in
the art world you never hear that's much
this word like that it's like architects
are using this word at the end of each
sentence like I will say you know
at the end of each sentence it's it's
really strange in the art you got
characters they are doing exhibitions
and they are thinking about how to do
exhibitions and how to show the work of
an artist or a group of an artist or a
reflection or movement but that's it so
but it is a protected title yeah it's
it's not anybody that gets that title
like when you work at a museum
there's sorry when you work in a museum
you start as assistant curator then
three years in you become its associate
etc so it is it is I mean there's so
much colloquialism within that term and
I think that is kind of funny because I
don't believe in a hierarchy of the
curatorial but it is in art world like
people salute you when you have the
title curator versus project managers
but in all fairness project managers are
often we're doing a curatorial work than
the curator yeah but maybe that's why I
did well with independent creators yeah
yeah well I was you are raising I think
a really interesting point for me that
that somehow brings together Murray's
experience and and mine in that actually
I have a small publishing business
and I think both in our case is a we
really try to be in a way autonomous
from institutions when I started and
such the project that I discussed
actually also with Murray from the very
beginning the big question was like
should you find funding from
institutions and everybody told me
you're never going to be able to make
books if you don't have grants and you
know big institutions actually behind
you and then my answer was exactly
Maurice no I mean as long as actually we
have a product that somehow encounters
Anisha you can find a way to do it
yourself but then of course all the
families you know conundrums start now I
mean you are only as autonomous as the
market allows you to be autonomous and
so on and so forth so I don't have an
answer for that but I have to say that
this you know we its attempt to try to
be independent if not autonomous I'd say
independent from institutions is really
difficult in some cases because of
course you have to find other ways to
make things work but at least for me
until now has been very very important I
always refused people who can who came
even already with grants that told me
you know I have this X amount of money
making a book that's that's not what I
want to do I want to have a much more in
a way simple and direct relationship
with the people who buy books I mean if
they don't buy them that may be the year
maybe they shouldn't happen you know
what I mean because they don't encounter
Andy in the summer so that's why I have
huge respect actually for what Marie
does in terms of actually really on
purpose being a commercial gallery can I
ask one question um if we start with
your new definition of where he takes
you from Hans Holland when she was just
referring that are hit everything could
be architecture everything is just
regarded as architecture and the same
time of the same period more or less a
little bit later
Manfred dutifully he was just referring
to architecture is that referring to
architecture that is not relevant
anymore to the capitalist mode of
production etc so my question and
observation more or less is what
architecture brings to the table
especially to the people
design all these kind of machines and
algirdas meaning that in the end why do
we need architects to deal with this if
not because so far we are not talking so
much about the architecture as
containing corporeal space anymore so
I'm inverting am just doing that what
you're doing the negative and I'm asking
you why do we need architects in your
own kind of discourse why the discipline
is still irrelevant and not just a
stratagem of evasion let's say of
talking about a picture that's cool
can I ask a question just could you just
tell me where you're from
you have agency so I will respect that
and I'll answer anyway
realistically speaking I think
architecture is very important because I
see architecture as something that is
fundamentally spatial and I think my
definition of architecture is not one
that is somehow privileged because I'm a
registered architect because I'm not
it's not because I'm a resident artist
in Somerset house because it doesn't
really matter but it is because
fundamentally I think we've collapsed
everything into this world where we
speak about things as everything one of
the things about whole line is that the
provocation was provocation a
provocation was a in a moment in time
when it was set up as a way to have a
very social and cultural critique about
the status of what constituted
architecture and I think as a conceptual
project I think that can manifest in
many different mediums and one of the
things that I bring that back is not
because I'm like a hippie lover of the
60s and 70s is because I feel like those
same provocations today are actually
very meaningful when he says in some
sense architecture will have to go
beyond its own discipline and
that discipline will have to absorb
other things I think it's fundamentally
about acknowledging what makes this
moment in time ours so that we can
participate in that because
realistically speaking even in terms of
practice maybe because I'm older than
you I think at least more gray hair when
I was studying art or my brother was
studying art in architecture and all
this kind of stuff everybody wanted to
get beyond the screen everybody wanted
to move away from these things we were
beyond the image but everything has now
been collapsed we don't speak about
space we don't speak about actually the
the idea of bringing things together and
I think architecture as an environment
or as a definition of thinking of it as
an environment enables this and through
that I think we speak about time and we
think about agency and we think about
that stuff beyond the kind of humanistic
approach I don't really believe that
algorithms are dictating our world I
think we are not really sort of
responding to the idea that these things
are obviously ever-evolving it's not
about robots it's not about these things
actually I wanted to talk about paradox
because there was a guy who his name is
Warren chalk he's another one of those
characters and he wrote an article in 75
here and it was titled robots and trees
and if you don't mind me reading this
it's literally like less than two
sentences we must construct a living
paradox the experience of what it is
without naming it brings about the
freedom of what it is and I think that
that kind of plurality of thinking about
things in a much more diverse and
speculative way I think space kind of
enables that as a medium and beyond that
to be honest with you if you're reading
sphere and labyrinth or if you're
reading an issue of Bell I could care
less what I think is really important is
this kind of ecology of ideas I think
have a place and then I think technology
allows us to make that place meaningful
and bring that back into the world of
ARCA
if negroponte 'is world was leaving
architecture like a lot of those guys
were like a lot of the radical
architects the Utopia guys they left the
practice of architecture to be more
ephemeral to be this or to be super
corporate and lead their radical ideas
on the table
I think we've witnessed that world and I
think actually architecture the space of
the city urban is a mobility
infrastructure these are all part of our
practice and I think with the
densification of cities and what's going
on an amount of stuff that didn't build
probably in the last thirty years
probably eclipses everything that's been
built before so how do we sort of cope
with that and how do we do that in a
meaningful way and I think architecture
is fundamental and everything that we do
and it's me
if you just go towards this extreme
plurality where the second root of the
word autonomous is law which is a
collective contract and if everyone in
this room right now declares autonomy
there is no law so how do we even like
communicate with this kind of plurality
how does one architect talk to one
another I mean this I mean like are we
playing like total extremes like we're
gonna move into the jungle of complete
animalistic survival because that also
had laws too the reason I'm saying that
is like if we really believe that with
all of the things that we have we are
actually constructing better ways of
understanding if what we're talking
about is knowledge not just about going
to school and getting degrees and
specializations then we should be able
to kind of conceptualize frameworks that
allows for diversity without normalizing
everything it's not about optimizing the
world so that it can be faster cheaper
bla bla bla we have to sort of invent I
think new terms of reference and I think
that's motivated by actually actually
having a shared kind of understanding of
the world that you're operating in
because fundamentally you have to
respond to that but I also think with a
certain degree of optimism and a certain
degree of responsibility I mean you
shape a bit of the world that you
influence on a daily basis now it's not
about you do whatever you want and I'm
not sure that the legal world is the
world that I would always look to
because it seems to me especially with
institutions and everything else you
know we're in a world of liability and
it's about like not taking any risk why
don't we shift the conversation and say
that actually if we continue this way we
have the most risk you want to talk
about environmental issues in ecology
you want to talk about social
responsibility you want to talk about
the nature of public space any
conversation I think is more than
appropriate
I just basically think like unless you
accept the world as something that's so
positive and great that's the way it is
you should actually try to give yourself
some responsibility
to actively engage that and I think why
not architecture participate not dictate
but be an active participant in this
world now I think that I mean it's an
interesting discussion perhaps something
that we don't acknowledge is that there
is a profound antithesis between the
concept of autonomy and the concept of
architecture I mean the word are care
from which actually architecture comes
from means actually command means
actually something that rule and
actually you know I don't agree with
this I mean of course here we should
have have tunnels or to do this but I
don't agree that the word normos means
law I mean this is really actually the
way the Romans translated the Greek or
the Normans Nomos is not law in the
sense of law it's actually an idea of
orientation and idea of order that a
community actually give to itself in
order to settle or to inhabit a
territory in that sense
normos is always collective this
actually for me where the modern artists
and how much SAP the whole thing because
the idea of autonomy within the modern
idea of artistic practice is by
definition individual and this actually
why you know we through the example of
doula we had question this this is a
body of this problem that from that
moment on autonomy becomes simply a
professional liberal if you want
aspiration and I think that for me for
us for me and Maria the question of
autonomy is to go back to really the
idea of normals and the idea of creating
actually the conditions in which a
community or a class or in a collective
subject can you know define an idea of
space and then actually well perhaps
this antithesis between architecture and
autonomy would be not an antithesis but
perhaps
think that you know has the possibility
to find a common ground
perhaps on that point I wanted to come
back to something that that you said
earlier about the weak foundations of
architecture and a question is if that
is something unique and productive and
something we should cherish or if it's a
fundamental problem that we need to fix
in order to survive as a profession
because teaching in a place like this
one often asks oneself so if you teach
architects to teach architects to teach
architects and we create this sort of
bubbles where where it's confusing where
we're meant to lead if you take the
other professions that don't have this
weak foundations like medicine or so
with when you talk about medicine again
within medicine obviously the aim is for
it to reach outside in architecture
there is this confusion around where all
of this has meant to lead if it's meant
to lead to buildings that people use
often the people that we teach here that
end up doing a lot of buildings they
don't come back here in fact so the
question is is this a fundamental
problem that we should work to its
fixing or not I think is I think it's a
very good point and on one hand of
course you know thanks God you know
architecture is not this kind of
monolithic discipline that you know
architects starting from there in a
sense we really try to pretend to
systemize so I think the idea that this
this project a certain extent failed an
architecture had to open up itself in a
more self reflexive way and also in a
more exposing its problems and its
limits I think it's certainly something
we should cherish and not try to to fix
at the same time you know if we look
this issue from a professional point of
view we also know that you know there is
an erosion of the profession as a you
know something that has a relevance
within society and often actually the
argument is exactly the
the weak status of the disability that
you know doesn't have any more big
narratives that used to have in the past
so for me actually it's really a
question that we can only approach the
electrically on one hand we have to
acknowledge that - you know to say
everything is architecture and therefore
you know opening too much the discussion
in very vague terms might actually
backfired from a professional point of
view at the same time I think yes we
should on the contrary open up the fact
that our discipline from the very moment
it was theorized as a discipline has
fundamental limitations and fundamental
structural problems I mean also to make
a very very concrete example of
practices that in the last few years
we've been looking at that we thought
were interesting were those cases of
collectives of arti the architects and
builders for instance who try to come
together reaching this divide that has
been somehow been artificially created
five or six centuries ago that's not to
say that whatever was before that or any
kind of non-western pre-modern practice
was necessarily good but that's just to
say that maybe we have other ways to
reorganize actually this division of
labor that has made such a theme as
autonomy fundamental for us today
because maybe we can displace the the
question on another level and there have
been in the past few years quite a few
experiments quite small for the moment
of collectives that try to then re
manage these the practice of building at
different levels and in different ways
and we think that those experiments are
actually really quite interesting and of
course within that quite a big role can
be played and I think that's also an
interesting question by technology you
are probably all aware of the world work
of mariokart Pope who of course believes
that then we can proactively use
technology exactly to bridge that gap
that has been artificially created what
he calls actually the undertand paradigm
so there are possibilities I think that
there are also some very very concrete
possibilities that's why again I should
example of
of Murray's gallery for me is a saw it's
always such an inspiration because it
really means that even within the
conditions that we have out there we are
not going to change capitalism anytime
soon we might not even want to do that
to be honest but we can we can in a way
reformulate the way in which actually we
practice and maybe the most immediate
case that comes to our mind is really
the case of these collectives that try
to go you know from the managing and
yawning the ownership of land to the
design passing through the whole phase
of building and so on and so forth
to try to rethink actually well the
division of labor that has been created
artificially so for instance I mean in
dogmas worked in the past few years with
collectives of artists for instance and
you know there are quite a few actually
start building practice is also here in
London it's all quite small but I think
you know we have to look at those
examples that actually are an
inspiration and different disciplines I
think that's for me the key issue here
that we take as a starting point to
architecture it's actually the slowest
of many of the disciplines that we work
in one of the funny side projects to
keep me working autonomous and what is
actually probably the largest project
I'll ever do because it's a code five
years ago I wouldn't be comfortable
saying this at the AAA but times have
changed and it's a a vintage coat that I
found that a friend of mine who works as
a distributor really liked he was at a
point where he had built a network that
he wanted to build his own brand and he
asked me can I use that coat that you
found it wasn't a coat that you could
sell or easily wear I just randomly
found it at a notic store so we
collaborated with a group of people so
what that means is no designer no
investor no actual hierarchy and started
building this brand that we present it
and within nine months is now sold
worldwide so if you take this as an
example it's it's a really interesting
exercise because you work independently
not from within the structure but none
of us have experience in doing any of it
so we just kind of went under on to go
with it and it's brought a lot of these
desires for autonomy back but it is much
faster discipline and a much wider
discipline
much more about people and than anything
else I think that is something that I
find a little bit problematic about this
conversation it's very theory heavy and
it's very kind of linking at history I'm
happy that you bring up recent recent
examples but I think what you're not
talking about is shop architects it's
like the largest architecture company in
New York that owns decides that they're
building and developing and makes a
profit of it so there's a lot more
happening outside of academia that I
think we should look at to re to really
understand where we stand now and I
think also as students where are you
sending now IQs this autonomy make it
your own because otherwise it's not
gonna it's not really gonna go anywhere
I think actually we have kind of run out
of time if we have one more question
I agree with all this and the whole idea
of all becoming intrapreneurial but at
the same time if we bring it back to the
scale of academia the scale of the
institution I think it's very important
to pause the question what are the
problems we need to address now as a
collective collective here because still
we are part of a school we work as a
collective here so I'm just I'm I'm
trying to understand how all these
questions which are being posed in terms
of practice or practices outside how
this can actually start fitting back and
you form to a great extent what we do as
a community as an institutional
community because it's easier to talk
about the scale of the individual and
what can we do maybe maybe the answer is
not there maybe the answer is more here
the position series was created as a way
to try to break those niches that I
think not that I encountered but talking
to each one of the community members of
this institution and I was given I
wanted to know what is that that we
stand for I wanted to know what is that
each one of the postgraduate
to Stanford and want to address so that
in fact this idea of autonomy is one
that somehow has been produced and
reproduced to an extent that I think is
detrimental sometimes to some of the
strength that we carry but again I think
it has to do with the bow color in
terminology what is that that we mean by
autonomy and what is that that we
actually want to do with it the way in
which these tables or these stocks have
been organized and the way in which the
themes have been brought is to try to
take some provocative positions and and
see and try to articulate them and try
to pull them through and so to see what
is that that we say when we are using
them right what is that that we actually
stand for and I think it's it was very
deliberate to actually try to bring a
pure victorian maria together with you
because if one tries to figure out what
is that that we mean by autonomy in
terms of the statics or in terms of the
city or in terms of form I actually do
think that ultimately both of your
agendas very clearly are trying to
understand what is the power of
architecture in as a code or as a form
of behavior as a form of agency or as a
historical accumulation of power
structures that actually can and should
be disentangled in order to produce new
forms of collectivity ultimately is that
what we are doing here the school but I
don't have the feeling that that's what
we all collectively agree that we are
doing sometimes we would try to position
ourselves against each other and so the
positions that we have within the school
are kind of detrimental to the agenda of
the school outside of itself so somehow
this is to me and an act of positioning
ourselves as a school that ultimately
believes that architecture as a
discipline that has the responsibility
and the privilege to articulate all
those different conversations that are
happening outside and try to contribute
to all space that is more ethical that
has actually that is driven by many
things that I think we all would agree
is something that has to do by
redesigning algorithms and behaviors and
really looking into power structures and
to understanding architecture not only
as built form but also a social form and
that sometimes from a small gallery that
tries to defy andrÃ¡s define the space of
of capital production with our capital
reproduction to two projects that can
try to construct new walls and
understand that media is in fact a
medium by which architecture also
produces itself or as an act of korah
toriel articulation of ideas and people
around the world that ultimately Louvre
lose their notions of authorship I mean
I am the one office at some point that
was called offices in which technology
was unable to enable that kind of moment
of total freedom to really produce this
architecture and those walls that we
imagined but so my answer to you in
behalf of everyone is that we are not
alone in in that quest of trying to find
the agency of architecture I think each
one of us within the school is doing and
and this position series that manager
has organized the thing is trying to
have that that conversation so I wanna
thank the speakers I think we have a bar
that is ultimately the space where
ultimate autonomy can be gained beyond
that beyond that I don't want to finish
with that note I I want to invite
everyone for Thursday we're all the
academic stuff but also everyone within
the school community is invited to
discuss what is the project the
pedagogical project that is a school is
producing and I do think that this talk
and this conversation today can easily
fit in into that per Vittorio is going
to give us an introduction and I look
very much forward to have you be in
these rooms sorry of appearing too many
times it's it's ok it's ok it's ok it's
like I don't Friday we are now
I want to thank you all of you thanks
thanks to the speakers
[Applause]
