the task for this lecture and the title
for this lecture is coming from an
invitation from Evan and others when
they relaunched a files to speak about
the subject of experimentation and
experimentation for me is something that
not only is it important it somehow
drives everything that I believe in and
with that the reason for that is
primarily to do was the idea of trying
to somehow situate what it means to be a
designer or an architect in the world
and to understand what that really means
and the role that design means in a
world that is completely uncertain
latent and constantly evolving so the
pieces of paper and from my students
there I tell them not to read anything
you're going to excuse me after 18 years
teaching here I'm going to read
something for the first time and just as
some small summaries from the text
because in some way it's well book and
the beginning of that article and the
end of the article what this is all
about the title is really based on a man
named John Baldessari
who recently passed away and yeah he
said I will not make any more boring
arts and the reason that he said that he
literally passed away like three days
ago
was at a moment of kind of critical
self-reflection and his own practice and
in a certain way
I'll speak to it by just reading what I
wrote in the summer of 1978 john
baldessari drove 123 paintings he had in
a studio that he made from may 1953 to
March 1966 to a local mortuary he
proceeded to cremate them the ash
produced baked into cookies that would
later be placed in a vessel taking the
form of a leather-bound book in one
action shedding his practice from the
orthodoxes of medium specificity while
at the same time creating the
opportunity to conceptualize the new
questions of arts and his practice
within the discipline
the creative impulse at times the man's
acts of arisia beyond action style or
statement experimentation as the only
means we have to question and challenge
the habitual what is the consequences
the pursuits to challenge everything
enable our understanding of the world
through this pursuit a year after his
action baldessari declared I will not
make any more boring arts and what this
statement expressed a life's foray into
pioneering what became known as
conceptual at experimental practice
demands more experimentation this word
within Architecture haunts and yet
always has stood for something that
attempts to demand more to expand the
finite orthodoxies of what is taught and
the assumptions made in this world it is
an action that Ford's understanding even
in its failure an offering of the
struggle to create it is the opportunity
we construct to engage in challenge
things it is at the heart and attempt to
ask more informed questions of the world
and our participation in it
experimentation and method and practice
is enabled by curiosity the desire to
create and evolve our understanding it
is beyond building style economy history
or discourse or architecture with all of
its paradoxes remains a space for
interrogation through this action and
time it challenges us to see history is
something plural rather than linear and
constructed experimentation gives agency
architecture in space we may agree on
this and even with this agreement we
don't really say very much space like
time is construction concepts that have
no finite form or understanding though
govern much of what we spend our time
attempting to relate to time is our
medium we live in practice and time and
yet this is also not finite the
acclaimed physicist Carlo Rovelli speaks
of time as something elastic our world
understood as moments in time
our observation of the world is ours a
radical constructivist approach to
philosophy that in summary can
understand the stood as follows
everyone's observation and understanding
of the world are their own and
inaccessible to others be that man or
machine if we expand on the statement
the obvious appears that even our most
objective pursuits and science are math
by necessity acknowledges assistance
bias and its capacity to observe and
understand these biases are as much
embedded in human as they are in
non-human observations in learning to
understand this one needs not only to
look at just recent habit-forming
tendencies of how AI is practiced but
girdles and completeness theorems that
lend themselves to understand that even
in our attempts to compute the world we
must acknowledge that within
mathematical logic and philosophy this
attempt in itself is limited if not
paradoxical constructing the means to
understand this dynamic and evolving I'm
gonna stop for now and I'm gonna sort of
continue a little bit with that
let's do like this I'm still doing stuff
this is a quite famous movie that
premise the fact that future was always
something that was being speculated in
architecture and urbanism Blade Runner
has been obviously source than many
kinds of things but the future and Blade
Runner took place in November 2019 so
the future is in our past and the
science fiction for sure it's something
that to be honest with you is still
looking in the rearview mirror as
McLuhan would say so one of the issues
speaking to Blade Runner was the
anniversary and all of the things that
were happening was that Blade Runner has
officially caught up with the real world
what does that mean there was a lot of
conversation that Blade Runner spoke
about the world as this topic
conversations about speaking to things
and then being able to sense and
sentient beings all of these kind of
things and it takes place in Los Angeles
which is supposed to be in a certain way
the product of ill human engagement and
somehow urbanization was deemed to be
like that if we look at Los Angeles or
if we look at basically what's been
happening recently 2019 you'll start to
see like parallels to this idea of
dystopia but very real very changing
very permanent and we're also going to
see the relationship between mediation
and what those kind of implications
happen if you saw Facebook recently with
the Australian fires you would see this
image and everybody knows it what they
don't know about the images that the
image is a 1-month mapping this wasn't
one real-time snapshot from NASA this
was a compilation of a month it doesn't
change the severity of all of the things
absolutely not it just shows that the
complexity of what it is when we say
that data is the new money or when we
say all of these kind of things our
ability to sense and understand
is is really challenged who also was the
immediacy to actually kind of understand
the complexities and the challenges of
what we're doing the sixties and
seventies had the whole series of kind
of radicals who are somehow speaking to
this and one of them maybe challenges
that we have today is also to revisit
maybe some of the conversations not
necessarily the projects as a radical
group called ant farm this is a project
called media burn and they were speaking
in a certain sense as an action to some
of these kinds of issues of mediation if
we speak about people like Yves Klein at
the same time when I would be speaking
about the world as a provocation that
will raise everything at the surface of
the entire earth until it's completely
flat and fill the valleys and mountains
and pour concrete over the surface of
all continents this was a provocation by
Yves Klein but this is a reality that we
know today most of these kind of
visionary or utopian kind of ideas that
somehow I dismissed from the 50s 60s 70s
and some sense have taken form but one
can question a vision was a really big
part of that at the same time I think
there were certain conversations and
ones that I think when we sit in between
a context of crisis and I think we live
in an age where yesterday's news
seems to have kind of come and gone we
feel sometimes that we don't have the
capacity to really engage to be able to
have agency in the world and agency
doesn't come by everybody sort of
shouting the same stuff agency comes by
a recognition of actually understanding
what we can do to participate to us
challenge to a system to a crisis and in
particular to architects I think ooh in
a certain sense seem to be riding
different kinds of trends this is a kind
of dedication that there's a lifetime's
work to be able to meaningfully
contribute in some way and collectively
I think it's super important and this
was talked about in design in many
different ways and there was a quite an
important book by a victor papinek
what's always used as a subject to think
about design in more generic ways in
terms of the everyday but papinek speaks
and designed for the real world as
design must be innovative highly
creative cross-disciplinary tool
responsive to the needs of men it must
be more research oriented and must stop
defiling the earth itself was poorly
designed objects and structures this is
a man who was obviously very deeply
connected with ecology and social change
and many of the projects that are spoken
about wasn't a visionary kind of
platform of discourses well not
visionary just because they propose
things in a megalomaniac way I think
they were visionary from a different
perspective I don't know if people know
what this image is but it's an image of
a gorillas hand now one of the issues
about a lot of the conversations about
nature and ecology needs to be honest
with you there's probably a limitation
and language when we speak about some of
these words about what we actually mean
so this is a hand of the gorilla and the
gorilla has a disease a disease a
pigmentation disease meaning that it
loses its firm when it's lost its firm
you may find something that appears to
actually kind of have very close
characteristics to maybe some of our
little digits as well what does it
really mean when we start to really see
ourselves much more a part of something
an observer not only of some kind of
world in nature and all of these other
aspects of environments and systems but
actually deeply embedded in it systems
today I think in some ways have been
talked about the lots and the
conversations that we had but they're
also a problem at times by what papinek
was speaking about in terms of the real
world what are we talking about when we
speak about matter and materiality how
the things go out in the world what are
the things that we're actually looking
at and what you're looking at right now
is water when we speak about nature we
can consider a sort of idea of taxonomy
when we design things we design things
without not fully understanding what the
purpose may be at the time why because
we are trying to construct
a certain kind of approach which is
prototypical which means that it could
be context aware and context specific
but they would have to be able to take
on those constraints and one way of
looking is also to start to understand
how we sort of work on these kind of
challenges how we see matter as
something that's not innards materials
have life cycles are also part of a
system people that were also very
important not only important to the DRL
Institute's that I think I could say was
Patrick we would share that like in
Stuttgart with FRA Otto and others we're
setting up kind of research paradigms to
explore things the conversations of
those kinds of attempts and I'm going to
read a little bit more but I think it's
important to somehow situated who are
also responses to kind of post disaster
post-war sensibilities that were trying
to provoke I think realities of working
in moments and time were resources well
not something that were taken for
granted and one the social impotence of
actually doing more was the less was put
out in the world and one trying to
understand how the built environment
integrated itself within larger kind of
structures some of them social some of
them physical and obviously societal in
all aspects in this book actually
there's also an article that fry odo had
actually asked the Vienna Friedman
there's a chapter and adaptive building
and adaptive architectures and in the
context of self building and self
planning the the scale of the
implications of what was actually being
discussed was actually looking at the
scale of materiality all the way through
a building in the a a for example if you
look at the go upstairs there's an i l
on bamboo and that bamboo research was a
research just trying to explore pliancy
build ability looking at different kinds
of materials and their properties these
are two pages from
that bamboo research man fry out on the
Institute on the right you can see that
it doesn't look like bamboo it turned
into research about steam bending and
different 'pliance ease and on the left
is a project that may be familiar to a
students at hook park which is that same
strategies were actually implemented in
one of the buildings that they have a
fry or hoe and others basically are part
of our extended a campus when we think
about some of the things today I think
one of the things that new tools have
sort of offered us but this is a new in
any way is the ability of looking at
time and it's also the ability of
looking at sort of aspects of how things
can somehow use a digital materiality
and think about behavior as
opportunities to actually think about
how organizational systems could
actually offer possibilities creating
spaces have semi autonomous or
autonomous abilities to be able to
participate problematize and offer
something the digital world in many of
the things that we've been working on
specifically in my studio was most often
a poor and others have very much been
not necessarily just working within
digital behaviors but trying to manifest
those in more analog voice trying to
develop the control system some of the
prototypes that you see and things like
that demand a kind of aspect of control
which is not necessarily always very
one-way
control is an illusion we believe that
we can sort of control things but
actually systems and themselves
materials all kinds of aspects of
complexity enter whenever one thinks
about this when we start to think about
the notion of tools we should also have
a kind of expanded sense of what that
means today tools does not mean software
tools are actually instruments that
allow us to integrate interrogate
explore be curious about and we make
them to help us make that not only
accessible but also to extend our own
capacity
so in the 70s for example you had
something like the Whole Earth Catalog
and it was an attempt to basically
catalogue all the tools in the world and
that attempt lasted about five years and
the issue of that obviously this is pre
internet and all of that stuff in a
expanded sense was really to make that
available to everyone with the idea that
if you make things available to everyone
the interesting things not only happen
but you get a better understanding of
actually what is it that we're speaking
about what is the world that we're sort
of operating in and this image of this
is of Earth and so forth it's also very
similar to our poster for tomorrow's
open day the reality of a lot of these
things I think is really important but
also the curiousness of maybe some of
the language that was used in the first
catalogue of the Whole Earth Catalog you
have these two quotes in the
introduction we are as gods and might as
well get used to it reads the first
catalogue statement of purpose a realm
of intimate personal power is developing
power of the individual to conduct his
own education find his own inspiration
shape his own environment and shape his
adventure with whoever is interested a
realm of intimate personal power is
developing blah blah blah and this is a
mistake but let's just say it's up there
twice for emphasis
a recent New Yorker article revisited
the Whole Earth Catalog and and it spoke
to its woman named Anna Weiner at the
height of the civil rights movement and
the war in Vietnam the Whole Earth
Catalog offered a vision for a new
social order one that issued
institutions in favor of individual
empowerment achieved through the
acquisition of skills and tools the
latter category included agriculture
equipment weaving kits mechanical
devices books like the kibbutz venture
and utopia and digital technologies
related to theoretical texts such as
Viners cybernetics
cybernetics and Hewlett Packard's 9/100
a a programmable calculator this is
basically how that was really executed
sending stuff in clippings from things
very honorable kind of way of data
mining and sourcing and yet the attempt
was to reach out and to be global what
super minimal means this kind of process
of actually thinking and doing became a
lexicon of actually what was at the time
if that kind of gives us an idea of what
the tools at that time was today to be
honest with you we may have an other
means of doing that so somebody asked me
if I have Elan musk in the presentation
today is one of our critics because I
guess I'm a technophile and some utopic
this topic and very real ways are using
deep fake technology in some very funny
ways at number one the beginning who put
Elon Musk's face on Charlie Sheen that's
how I roll I have one speed I have one
gear go put Kevin Hart's on mr. t I just
want to shake some sense of you kiss and
swab Tom Hanks for Keanu Reeves in force
go momma said they'd take me anywhere
she said they was my magic shoes all
right Forrest oh yeah now facing for
those that don't know what deep fakes
actually are always this is basically
algorithms playing with our faces
superimposing things if we try to take a
litmus test of all of those things even
what constitutes an image today is
something that's questioned the reality
of what that actually means if it's
generated if it's real and the
strategies of the thinking behind all of
this stuff I think is important to
somehow consider and we're at a moment a
lot of Architects are basically speaking
about constructing new images or post
images and there's a whole idea of
conversations about the role of the
image today it's almost perversely a
kind of antithetical to actually a world
where images themselves somehow been
rendered to actually not speak to
something that's legitimate and film
directors have known this for a long
time but for us I think it puts into
question how we work on some of these
things and the studio to be honest we've
tried to explore very different things
we've had teams that are trying to look
at how brain sensing could potentially
sort of offer different ways of
communication and how those things could
somehow be somehow explored within
models that are machine learned and what
learning actually means to a machine
versus learning for us as it stands
right now are very different reward
systems in a certain way that reinforce
habits and so even opening up this
conversation of learning and trying to
understand and train and work through
these things to problematize things that
are not necessarily given are really
important challenges today last year
this was one of the projects basically
trying to work on some of these problems
and in the studio in general I think
that there is a desire to actually see
what is offered by is working within
systems that actually offer us the
capacity to actually question actually
what is intelligence intelligence in a
certain sense and a lot of the
conversations at least in my studio is
not something that's attributed to a
thing itself
one could say that intelligence is a
product of the interaction between
things if that's human if it's non-human
between human and human between humans
and machines and machines interacting
with other machines these are attempts
attempts in the last five years that
we've been sort of working on and I
think one of the things when we took on
the subject of constructing agency was
really about trying to understand where
agencies somehow in somehow embedded
within strategies of living with an idea
of self-organization within the tools
that were sort of working on and how to
sort of open those things to be
something that's public and shared and
Sarge a analicia studio that is sort of
being problematize in a certain way by
using game engines as a strategy to
basically develop different ways of sort
of engaging those kind of conversations
with Patrick and Pierre Andreya the idea
of the crowd was in the work environment
as being something that's changing
within a finite building with kinetic
features or something that's being
looked at in our studio like the article
that I've put forward and premise I
think a lot of those things is about
sort of speaking about what does it mean
to develop an architecture that's
self-aware that soft structures that
doesn't believe in blueprints or master
plans so in some way this kind of
conversation is not coming out of
nowhere I think over the last 20-some
odd years I've had the opportunity to
work for people and even if I respect
them quite a lot and I respect the act
of building buildings within a research
paradigm to be honest I felt very
important to separate at a certain level
the way that we sort of explore research
at the moment everything is called
research everybody in the school does
research every piece of design is
research and I think the reality about
research is that it doesn't necessarily
guarantee results it's not easily
describable and it's only through a
failure that you actually achieve
anything
and without risk which to be honest with
you comes very much in terms of bringing
things out in the world that becomes
very difficult to evaluate how that is
sort of put in the world I started my
career post DRL Peter Eisenman's office
and pretty young at the time being given
over to of six buildings that were
basically being designed and put on site
from a competition and the challenges of
scale and things like that that we're
speaking about offered up a lot of
conversations and I'm not gonna talk
about formalism or even my small sort of
for a and za has office one in 2003 with
the dis competition and it's not a
critique of that work but it was a
conversation at a certain point that
really spoke and a lot of the things
that I do with my brother at the same
time also working here as a as a tutor
to sort of open up a conversation that
was from my generation now if I'm really
honest with you my generation as I'm not
really sure what my generation is but I
did to work with my brother quite a lot
and he's not an architect and he was
designing interfaces and he was looking
he's an artist and one of the things
that we spoke about was the idea that
space was our medium and in a certain
sense space is basically what we define
architecture and time and we found I
think over the last 15 years plus had
the opportunity of developing projects
and the projects for a lot of people are
not architecture even my mother which I
gave the thanks to will look at a
project like some of the stuff that I've
spent a lot of time on and basically say
I used to understand what you did as an
architect when your art Eisenman's
are you still doing architecture and
it's something that I think is an
interesting question because in some way
this idea of expanding the definition of
what architecture is was always
something that was very important
because in some sense I didn't have an
answer and I think a lot of the pursuits
of the things that we do and why we work
in a way that we do is in a certain way
to sort of problematize and to test so
what does it mean to make an any box
what does it mean to put it out in the
world when the simplistic ways how does
it learn how does it interact with
people
what is the emotive relationships two
things these are kinds of questions that
we couldn't have conceptualized all from
the beginning but we used a lot of
installations and worked with some ex
students and was my brother and other
colleagues they try to sort of figure
those things out and then those things
take on a life of their own this thing
has been touring for 60 years and I was
just told I just got back here but it
sets up situations and the situations
for us have been really learning tools
because in some way this isn't about
making kinetic sculpture and this isn't
about conversations that are happening
around it but you see that there's a
culture of discussions that are around a
lot of these things some of them focus
on technology like I mentioned in my
last comments other ones are
speculations about the motivations
behind why one does what one does and
for the longest time a lot of these kind
of robotic projects and the aspect of
cuteness was discussed today but also
this idea that these things are pets and
we're gonna replace animals and all of
these other things the same time as that
project we were working on a national
park with Renzo Piano as an invited
architect artist group which will be the
first National Park in Athens to
basically deal with the illumination
concept for seven hundred and sixty
acres
and that also being developed with two
kind of peer structures the challenges
of those things what an artificial kind
of garden could be to think about how
some of those things actually are and
this is kind of my moment of self
justification that I say that diamond
architects even if I'm not licensed and
probably are in trouble by saying that
but we work on buildings as well and we
work on things a lot of the things that
we do on each project in a certain way
makes the Manns that sometimes make
building not the answer maybe the thing
that my brother and I are probably the
most engaged with was the first
opportunity we had in Trafalgar Square
and a public space to make an
intervention and the curator at the time
which I always use this project as an
example basically asked us what our
intervention would be and we said we
wanted to animate a built environmental
conversation and we said your father's
Square was always a space for people to
protest and to celebrate and we felt
that public space today was an important
thing this was in 2008 and the premise
of it was just to speak about two
technologies one really old and one
really knew one was mobile SMS texting
and the other one was smoke signals
which was a 5,000 year old practice
abstract smoke the idea of using the
city as a canvas and to hold
conversations through that the
conversations of planning that took a
year to happen tools that we had to
develop because we had to speak to
issues of rioting and things like that
these kind of things are things that one
starts to understand the context of
those things we did it again in Detroit
and since we did it in Detroit
there's a light biennial now that runs
every two years because the idea of
developing a context even if it was for
two and a half hours for three nights
could have lasting memory in terms of
the kinds of conversations what an event
actually was in a certain place we've
developed strategies for event motive
rooms we've done stuff with 3d printing
like edged lounge and though I hate
furniture if I'm really honest with you
we decided to do one just for the hell
of it
conversations about how you could take
our key texture with you
textiles which could be in your pockets
it could come out and could be cast or
have compacted earth strategies for
deployability and to using I think as
Patrick would say the art world in a
certain way to be able to test things so
in a lot of ways the developing
strategies to think about how these soft
cast techniques could be actually
constructing architectures people
recognize the guy with the ponytail that
Sanjay just so I can tease him one of
the things about work here which I think
is really important and I think it's
very important in terms of the
conversations today in the relationships
between schools and practices but
practices in a very expanded way is to
really think about the community and how
they can participate in sort of
developing things so if it's vehicles
for working on glass a lot of the things
that we're doing a lot of the challenges
that we're doing this is for Somerset
house where my Studios based trying to
make a lattice structure of 1,500 glass
orbs I'm not gonna use the word balls
today I think it was used enough and
that environment just like the DRL I
think is something where you know it's
working with very modest means we really
don't have much at the same time we have
everything because we have belief in
some sense that people are coming with
the motivation to try to explore ideas
and whatever forms they are so the
prototypes that you see on the table and
so forth are proof of concepts but
they're really learning tools there for
us to basically demystifying a lot of
the things a lot of the technologies and
to enable I think a certain form that
the architecture can participate and
engage with these kind of information
rich environments that are shaping our
lives
constructing frameworks that can allow
for change and can embrace the unknown
so if it's flying stuff if it's
developing these kind of self assemble
strategies and noticing by putting
things in the world that people find
sometimes things cute and maybe that's
not a bad thing if somehow that makes
that an aspect of the project itself but
realistically speaking a lot of those
things and a lot of the issues around
robotics also challenged a certain
preoccupation of what what is it in the
world that we're speaking about and some
of the fundamental people that worked in
automation and robotics at MIT at the
same time with things like the
architecture machine group and so forth
were people like rodney brooks and in
1997 there was a documentary basically
called fast cheap and out of control
that basically asked him about the
status of robotics and how that was
somehow seeping into the everyday and
the role of automation and all of these
other aspects things that people are
very much afraid of taking your job
doing this doing that and I think the
conversation with rodney brooks
particularly to robotics because he also
moved away from automation as a very
linear idea of production in an assembly
line format and spoke about i think an
aspect of robotics that to be honest
with you basically we're speaking about
the very many populations
small nimble some will do the job some
will die but in the end
job will get done he says but one other
aspect he said is that it's going to be
harder to distinguish what is alive and
what is a machine and that boundary may
become in some sense meaningless I
mentioned that Frei Otto documents and
with a Frei auto document I just
mentioned a little bits about the
Friedman piece Friedman at that moment
in time was talking about free planning
he was talking about participatory
systems and he was really somehow
speaking to the fact that a lot of the
things practically within architecture
were not adaptive but it's practically
any building can be adaptable it can be
used in many different ways but who
should decide how it should be used
evidently it is their future user now
the future user cannot explain the
preference causally to an intermediate
expired like an architect or a planner
and if this expert is supposed to serve
great many future users this
communication difficulty grows
enormously an architect or a planner
cannot know because of his communication
difficulties what to do in order to
satisfy the future user that's however
we turn this problem the solution of
crisis of the architecture leads to its
simplification of a condition a future
user himself has to decide and the
future user in some sense has to have
agency if you take some of those
concepts if you look at the owner
Friedman's drawings they've quite
simplified ideas grids and people are
basically filling those things he had
concepts of flat Reiter and others which
basically were trying to develop
instruction manuals to allow people to
create space we know that a lot of those
things doesn't necessarily always enable
people to do and I think we learn from a
lot of these kind of experiments but I
think one of the speculations in the
studio anyhow from the kinds of work
that we're doing is that if we construct
things that actually are not giving
options like you're designing a Nike
shoe and you could change colors but are
actually problematizing themselves
spatially
put those things open up possibilities
for people through their engagement and
interaction to sort of create space and
I think the behaviors that we actually
see I think are in some sense from our
perspective opportunities to basically
mitigate some of these things and the
idea of the collective of the shared and
the participatory not necessarily just
being about people building their own
spaces but things themselves interacting
participating also with human
intervention and then a certain sense
constructing things I'm gonna finish
with one project and just one small
paragraph and I'm sure that everybody is
destroyed and wants to get out but I
think it's important to turn the
attention a little bit to the city and
the city in terms of urbanism I think
has always been both a model for a lot
of self organizational strategies a
desire about what future living actually
is and also sometimes a problem of how
we sort of deal with some of that stuff
and these kind of ideas of what the
vision of the future was was not the
speculation of great leaps of faith this
was basically what was being worked on
in 1913 now those things weren't being
realized I've spoken in the past about
some of this kind of image constructions
about what future visions are this is a
TfL image about London is supposed to be
in 2026 and even in places like where I
work in Somerset House the London Mayor
comes to an opening of an exhibition of
the project that I will show you that
that develop of my brother and minima
forms and other colleagues called
emotive city but with the premise that
he's trying to keep culture in London by
in a certain sense supporting the fact
that first artists residences in certain
sense would be in central London when we
speak about the idea of the city a lot
of the issues around the subject from my
perspective is coming from challenges
with infrastructure and the relationship
between architecture and infrastructure
and if you look at visionary ideas of
what the city was frankly
right with broadacre city also spoke
about mobility and you see flying
machines and if you look at the cars
that were designed there were single
occupancy mono wheels and in some way
maybe that was fantasy at the time but
there is also I think some very
interesting kind of correlations were
things today so deployability doesn't
necessarily mean take a house and just
sort of drop it somewhere we've had
those conversations in the 60s and 70s
but I think the challenge of mobility
and the challenge of a lot of these
things is through mass migration issues
through disaster complexities and all
kinds of things the necessity to think
about things prototypically exist you
see these kind of ideas of mobility
within the city if it's balloons and
it's basically being communication
devices and Internet like Google was
sort of launched or if it's drones and
what Amazon is speaking to there are
basically speaking about a certain
challenge if you think about how many
Amazon deliveries you guys had Christmas
time probably a lot if you think about
the nerburn ization like New York which
is supposed to be a city where those
Amazon deliveries are supposed to be
driven through this kind of idea of
consumption you have 1/2 million
deliveries let's say the drones do you
know I'm not good with math right now
but do you understand that you would
have a hell of a lot of drones doing a
lot of stuff in really compact areas so
some of the conversations about these
things being scary your world is going
to get really frightening if you think
that drone delivery packages are
something that is just gonna be all joy
and the infrastructure is behind those
things I think we're going to open up
something very different it's not scary
it's not good it's not bad but I think
there's a complexity there that nobody
is speaking about and autonomous cars
are really easy because they're on the
ground and all they're doing is what
you're a bird driver does every day so
yoruba drivers not really driving you
he's basically taking instruction and
directions using ways using other kind
of car
is the Whole Earth Catalog if I also
want to just give a little bit of
history was very influential to people
that set up their B&B Facebook a whole
series of these kind of startup cultures
that were looking for these kind of
infrastructures as well the challenges
of urbanism we always talk about it in
terms of congestion and parking and
streets and how many people can fit in
the tube line and then we also have also
an understanding of the world which is a
little bit different from this world but
just like issues that Hilbert's on our
core and other people would be looking
at we also have this world where the
conversation about how things take
decisions and the role of autonomy and
all of these things also have a lot of
issues and impacting the way that we
deal with legal structures and a whole
series of other things technology is not
something that's outside of us
technology is us and it has all of the
complexities and burdens through that
the challenges of how we read things in
the studio I think have always tried to
look at that coupling like Frank Lloyd
Wright's monowheel
and this was a project and the DRL that
took the idea of a shared automobile and
something that could be like a Barclays
bike distributed within the city the car
itself would solve structure and the car
itself would construct a charging area
by looking at spaces that were not
occupied as a distributed system and in
a certain sense construct spaces for
temporary kind of occupations the issues
around some of that stuff
computationally it would allow us to see
these things and maybe more of the pure
form about what's controlling what
amount of wheel actually is and so forth
and I think I'm going to end the
conversation a little bit with a role of
how architects discuss this today
Remco was a pretty famous person in this
building and pretty much everywhere else
and Rams idea about smart cities and how
these technologies are impacting
basically basically said to the fact
that smart city is not very intelligent
he called it stupid
and he may be right but what's wrong is
then to speak about the rural as a
somehow antidote to this because we see
in the history of cycles of occupation
things are always migrating between in
and out of the city runs problem was a
smart city is not being addressed his
critique is not necessarily proposing an
alternative and in the studio I would
suggest and I think the DRL has
suggested in some different forms if it
was the parametric urbanism or others
that computation in some way may help to
be able to deal with these kind of
complexities algorithms basically run on
the back end of everything that we do
this isn't something that is new the
reality of those things is that it
doesn't necessarily inform a lot of the
things that we're doing spatially that
has to do outside of our human behavior
and a lot of the strategies of learning
I think are contingent about focusing on
models that are not about learning what
we do in our habits like chatbots
looking at Facebook and Twitter feeds
these things are easy or if you go to
Nokia labs and stuff like that they're
basically mining a lot of social media
to basically get a window into how the
urban environment is we understand that
that data is data that we put out in the
world it's not data that's necessarily
driven by the world itself so
conversations that were happening like
within the studio and so forth were
somehow constructing strategies in our
case for what we tamed in a motive city
and in some way we spoke about this idea
as an augmentation to all of that
we just recently showed this in Taipei
and very quickly to understand a lot of
these things a lot of the data that
could drive almost all aspects of our
human engagement the government's
basically put that out there so you have
live data that can drive everything
agriculture civil administration
Environmental Protection News they have
all of these things as information
that's real-time animal live streamed
and in a certain sense are there to be
actually used but very few people engage
in that without really with an
architecture to try to understand maybe
how other people are seeing these kinds
of bits of information so we tried in a
certain way to see how communication was
being featured with the idea that if you
would allow people to engage with each
other through solely their behavior on
everyday environments that you could
organize a strategy for what a
self-organizing city would be I'll end
with with the last paragraph in 1984
Andrea Giulio Andre Juno sori and
Valhalla Vale interviewed JG Ballard and
was asked what is his greatest fear
about the future he stated I would sum
up my fear about the future on one word
boring and this is my one fear that
everything that has happened nothing
else existing or new or interesting will
ever happen again the future will be a
vast conforming suburb of the soul
reveille would say that there is no such
thing as future in physics Marshall
McLuhan was suggested to consider the
future is actually our present because
we find ourselves living in the past
considering the future present we may
agree we live in an age where science
fiction has become fact our contemporary
age is as radical would change latency
and uncertainty becoming the new norm as
we prototype our collective presence we
may consider that there is no
architecture without experimentation I
will not make any more boring
architecture you will not make any more
boring architecture
and we will not make any more boring
architecture I'll leave you with lecture
title that Wolfe Prix basically showed
in a lecture that he gave here about
seven years ago and he basically said in
two days tomorrow will be yesterday I'm
so even when we speak about the future
and two days after the review all of
this stuff will be in the past so thank
you very much for your attention
