okay welcome to the architecture
Association public program this is part
of the open seminar series planned the
planet tonight we are gonna discuss
possibilities of adding to the Gaia
theory a completely different level it's
a real pleasure this evening to have
with us I just asked doesn't need an
introduction just a few elements of
reference father figure someone who
allowed you to enter scientific real
entry Watson Cole Road daisyworld
the model with completely
self-organizing planet with Jim Lovelock
so what we discussing this evening is
the direct lineage project and how to
now revise it updated and maybe
completely transforming the hypothesis
has a very computery stick early
two-thousands notion of 2.0 it's like
with the internet 2.0 but you will see
it has nothing of that taste tim is a
professor of climate change in system
scientist Sciences at the University of
Exeter and is the founding director
of the new center for global systems and
which is an enormous endeavor to
transform how I think in action in
particular transformative action at the
time of radical transformation and MIT
in the new climatic regime the session
is structured very differently from the
previous one where we had a lot of
people at the table and it was really
realistic it's going to be quiet
we're going to focus going in depth into
this idea of presentation it will be
followed by a conversation between the
two of us and then as usually something
that we want to make clear this is a way
of to think together the challenges that
we're facing and it's initiated and
sprung by the action initiatives to
radically revised the way we think
architecture the way we practice
architecture education and the way that
we imagine intersections multiple
problems of so what's the end of the
evening we share wine and bread
but before we start please join me in
welcoming Tim Lantern at the
architecture Association thanks for
having me thanks for coming out this
evening I guess we're all sort of
familiar with the notion of our own
creation the Anthropocene and I want to
give a little bit of a historical
backstory to how we come to be in this
predicament of our own making in the
first place so this is a spaghetti
diagram I do drew over 15 years ago but
it's it was a summary of the last four
and a half billion years of Earth
history things are going on above a
timeline in the middle that are the
changes in the Earth's environment
things are going on below the timeline
which are profound and transformations
in the evolution of life including some
so-called major transitions in evolution
where new levels of organization as
biological beings come about and then
there are some some arrows some
connections between the living and the
non-living parts of well I don't you
might say a system you might say your
guy or I might say anyway after all of
that a spaghetti
I'll give a little brief summary of the
fact that we can boil it or a lot of
this down into a series of pivotal
moments or revolutions in the coupled
evolution of life and the nonliving
planet so basically these revolutions
I'll talk about briefly each is
contingent on the previous one each
comes about because of some
extraordinary evolutionary in
some lineages or lineage of life this
ultimately leads to new waste products
that transform the world and then after
some turmoil we see the refined if you
like of stability and a new
configuration to the whole system and we
can only be here this evening to to
ruminate on our predicament now and how
we should shape the planet going
forwards because of these past
revolutions so anyway to begin with life
has to solve a profound problem of
cycling all the materials it needs to
build its bodies if you like that must
have been the pivotal first revolution
for the biosphere to get hold of the
material cycling of all the elements
through central elements so the second
revolution in one lineage of what we
call bacteria and extraordinary
metabolism arises that splits water
molecules and throws out oxygen as a
waste product so the organisms that
learn to do this didn't do it for their
produce oxygen for their benefit on the
contrary it's a just a nasty damaging
waste product for them that ultimately
they completely transformed our world
and the atmosphere in what I called it
what I call the oxygen revolution taking
it taking the situation towards oxygen
being an important part of the
atmosphere actually after that
revolution we still wouldn't have enough
oxygen to breathe that took the third
major revolution in earth history which
is
after the oxygen revolution we have the
beginnings of complex cells scientists
call them eukaryote cells where
multicellular creatures build build out
of those eukaryotic cells but the first
complex animals and then plants and
fungi only come about much more recently
in Earth history in this complexity
revolution and that's tied up again with
environmental turmoil but also creates
finally the kind of atmosphere that we
could breathe or if you like could allow
us to evolve and now so that was the
book and that's partly about past
revolutions but the topic for tonight
perhaps is how to view our present
predicament and whether we can find a
workable narrative which is that where
now we can accept that we're profoundly
transforming our planet the Earth System
Gaia could we transform it in a way that
there is for the for the benefit of our
generations and future generations the
flourishing of humans but that would
have to be predicated on the flourishing
of other life forms as well so I don't
know how familiar you are with the Gaia
hypothesis so I just want to say a bit
more about what the central realization
was of my scientific hero Jim Lovelock
in the mid 1960s he essentially realized
that the atmosphere that we're all
breathing now is an extraordinary
product of life it's far from what you
would expect on a world of physics and
chemistry which gives you an atmosphere
like Mars or Venus they're dominated by
carbon dioxide and a relatively
chemically dull atmosphere instead we
live on a planet and we breathe in the
atmosphere that's rich in oxygen but
also has other gases methane hydrogen
that reacts incredibly quickly with
oxygen and should all have disappeared
if it was just up to physics or
chemistry and the only reason they
coexist in some extraordinary chemical
cocktail that we're breathing is because
other living things are making them and
remaking them all the
time but that atmosphere and it's
peculiar composition is stable over
geologic periods of time so not only is
life totally creating the atmosphere we
breathe it's also the hypothesis goes
that acting somehow to stabilize this
unusual atmosphere now we also have
learned in the intervening 50 years that
there have been a number of stable
configurations to the atmosphere and
this is just a crude summary of how
oxygen levels have had these oxygen has
been stabilized at different levels
through earth history have already
hinted at just to emphasize I suppose
that the times of abrupt change
represent on that diagram a couple of
the revolutions I mentioned as I said
each contingent on the previous one each
necessary for us to understand how we're
here this evening now I don't want to
give you a big science lesson so suffice
to say that it's an active field of
research still to understand how things
could have come to be this way and in
particular how could a relationship of
living beings interacting with their
nonliving environment have come to
result in self-stabilizing properties
self-promoting properties of life like
the cycling of nutrients or the
regulation of the climate across a whole
range of scales so we are still working
on an understanding of that but we have
some understanding and it's it's a
plural understanding of which tries to
blend a form of scientific thinking that
you had Lucy refer to as complexity
thinking or complex system science with
with evolutionary thinking that
recognizes that information in its
transmission
memory are pivotal to the to our
understanding how we're here now and the
history of our planet so that so much
for the past you might say that that's
that's the picture of the past as we
begin to understand it in the field I
come from it's it's through some
extraordinary it's still being
understood processes as I said that we
can be here as a species transforming
the planet everything that's gone before
when we provide direct tried to
rationalize it scientifically we presume
that although dolphins are very smart
octopus are very smart and colonies can
solve complicated problems we don't
think any other beings aside from as
ourselves as a species have a sort of
conscious sense of how they're
transforming the world so everything
that's gone before it involves things
that scientists like me would describe
as feedback loops and I'd use the
language that we call cybernetic I
talked about self-regulation but it all
happened automatically and unconsciously
it still created some magical properties
for the planet but the thing to talk
about tonight is that we're here now and
we're I think this in this room
collectively aware that we've we're
transforming the world we're
transforming the composition of the
atmosphere we're transforming the
climate we're transforming the lands
Fitz we're transforming the oceans we're
transforming this thing this guy a
phenomenon and we're aware of that
so with perhaps the first species that
has this collective awareness of the
collective consequences of our actions
and we have that partly through
technology of course we're monitoring
and sensing planet all the time
and I think at least some of us are
perhaps consciously altering our
behavior because we think our previous
behavior was perhaps collectively not
not sending the planet on a good
trajectory and that consciousness all
that self or self aware collectively
self-aware feedback is is what's new in
in what I'm badly calling Gaia 2.0 and
so the question is in a sense could
humans or are humans adding some level
of self-awareness to the regulation so
this is a idea I've been just stating
with my friend Bruner at all so another
of my intellectual heroes and that was
perhaps a topic for tonight is to
reflect a little bit on self-awareness
self-regulation what form like that take
brunet would castigate me for having a
disembodied brain in the bottom of my
diagram because this conscious
observation of actions could only come
about through whole whole beings whole
human beings in conversation with each
other I suspect so we should put a
little picture of a community whether
it's of architects or scientists in the
bottom container
Brina would ask who are the humans if we
are going to achieve this new layer of
self-aware self-regulation who are the
humans playing this role what sort of
consciousness could be expected of them
and if we think it's a reasonable
project for action as well as cogitation
might in which bits of prior Gaia
and which elements might you learn from
if we were collectively trying to design
create plan whatever language you prefer
a better future for ourselves in a guy
or two so I can say a bit more just say
a bit more about what those lessons
might be and there's a very naive top
level things that might seem obvious but
if we want a flourishing future on the
planet there's no better example to draw
from than the biosphere that's been
creating its own flourishing for over
three and a half billion years and it
does it powered by free energy from
sunlight that's a sign of bacterium one
of the first organisms or colonial
organisms that produce oxygen that's a
first monument to the cyanobacteria down
at the Eden Project in Cornwall which
was a response to something we wrote in
that book saying we should put up a
monument to these extraordinary
creatures and this is a quick summary of
how energy input to the biosphere and
then the human part of it has changed
over history but the simple message here
is of course fossil fuel power is not
the future if it wasn't blindingly
obvious already solar power and the
associated renewables are the other
future of the flora of a flourishing
humanity and it's not such a bleak
picture right now the price of solar
energy and wind energy is competitive
with coal power in China it makes
economic sense to put up a new renewable
power station rather than a coal-fired
one in China today and in within 20
years it will be economically the right
thing to do to shut down an existing
coal-fired power station with useful
capacity left in it and replace it with
with a renewable energy capacity so
that's obvious we need so we need a
renewable energy future but the thing
that gets less attention is that we we
would be wise to build a future in which
we imagine remaking everything we want
or need out of what we already have so
in the broadest sense of the world the
word
a future built on material recycling so
this is a graphical representation of
how the the biosphere recycles materials
in an extraordinary way
so without life just the fluxes of gases
coming out of volcanoes the abiotic and
the scale is logarithmic and on the left
those are all the massive fluxes of
gases of materials being exchanged by
the biosphere today and that's that's
why that's why the biosphere is a
thousand or 10,000 times more productive
than it would be if it was just relying
on the inputs from the volcanoes it's
all bootstrapped itself into the current
flourishing that allows us to be here so
again basic message if we want to plan a
flourishing future it would have to be
based on extraordinary cycling of
materials including the built
environment and that would take some of
the free energy we've captured from
sunlight because you can't cheat
thermodynamics now another element would
be we are in the process right now of
finding carrying capacity on this planet
and there are different population
projections but they they're all set to
max out and at some point some of them
as soon as 2050 others around the latter
part of this century with an open
discussion as to whether it will be 9
point something up to 11 point something
billion people if it's on the upper
projection as this little rescaling of
the countries shows where the countries
are weighted by their proportion of
global population this is a situation
now with massive inflated density of
people in China and India this is what
happens by 2100 you see around 3 billion
of the extra people they are projected
to be are projected to be in Africa
particularly in sub-saharan Africa
so I guess you're they are well some of
you know the architects not me but but
but an architected future has to ask
questions about what kind of planned
environs or unplanned environs
as those extra three or more billion
people going to live in they're gonna
look like that which i think is Dubai or
are they going to look like that which I
think of some of the worst slums in the
world Nigeria are there gonna be
something completely different again so
few more words other things we might
take from Gaia or the biosphere is that
it all runs on different living agents
forming networks networks have changed
that ultimately have extended their
influence in space from the microscopic
to the planetary in scale and in time
from seconds or milliseconds out to
three and a half billion years so never
let anybody tell you that I can't have
any influence as an individual because
innovations that started in one tiny
invisible bacterium have gone on to
change the world and the reason we're
here to have this conversation so life
is profoundly networks in case that
wasn't already obvious that's the
network of pathogens among animal
vertebrates
that's a network of fungal hyphae
connected to one little is a large
seedling I think so I would say we've
got to think about how how we form
networks and how we exchange information
and the biosphere it's all about
horizontal information exchange rather
than hierarchical information flow and
restrictions of information flow which
humans have got very good at so the
biosphere including bacteria and what we
call archaea fantastic exchanging
genetic information whose horizontally
and solving problems that way social
insect colonies also built on horizontal
information exchange more than on
hierarchy something we would call header
our key
so I think if we look at what is
happening now in our collective response
to the climate environmental emergency
not surprisingly with we're not seeing
some imagined top-down global global
governance somehow materialized instead
all the interesting action is coming
from the bottom up
it's from networks of human agents
connecting together connect informing
forming networks that connect to other
networks you may school kids out on the
street transition towns movement cities
mayor's coming together it should also
be obvious that the biosphere is
regulating it's it's material
environment and if we're in the business
of discussing planning and architecture
we also need to think essentially about
how its its ecosystems human or
otherwise that regulate improve their
environment that tend to flourish in the
long run over ones that degrade their
environments and we've done a lot of
degrading our environment so it's pretty
obvious that we need to reverse some of
that in our world today and I'm quite
excited I don't know if you are about
the movements that are popping up around
the world where communities are coming
together to redesign their own what we
call in the academic language social
ecological systems their own connection
to nature if you like so that's
happening in the southwest of England
where I am it's happening in watersheds
in North America where different
communities are exploring different
visions of the future and it's even
taking form in digital platforms I quite
like this one which is a vision maker in
New York City which embeds all the
historical data on how the city has
grown and its parks have changed and
land as being reclaimed and whatever
but it allows you the user to go into
that digital space and explore a vision
of how you might wish it to be for the
future
meanwhile I'm afraid we're of course
playing with fire you might say in
changing the climate we're changing the
climate against the backdrop of an earth
system that isn't particularly stable
this is 650,000 years of repeated ice
age cycles carbon dioxide's in blue
temperatures in white there's a sawtooth
shaped pattern to that trajectory anyone
who knows anything about Electrical
Engineering or or maybe cardiology knows
that a sawtooth oscillation is not the
sign of a stable system it's a sign of a
system on the bounds of instability
where in this case at the end of each
ice age there are kind of tipping point
changes in the climate that propel
extraordinary change 5 degrees of
warming 120 meters of sea level rise at
the end of an ice age and now we push
the co2 up to there and I had another
button I'd show you in my lifetime on
current trajectory the co2 goes off the
top of the slide so that is bound to
cause some convulsions in the climate
one of my favorite subjects is to try
and disentangle what what those might be
but that none of us should wish for
those climate tipping points instead we
should take it as a challenge to think
about how we find or refined a stable
global configuration or relationship if
you like with the climate as well as the
rest of the biosphere and the way we
understand how stability has come about
in Earth history those billions of years
through a very crude trial and error and
the relationship between life in its
environment there
random changes where life transforms the
planet maybe for the good maybe for the
bad if it's for the good great it's a
stable configuration it persists if it
was for the bad which it sometimes was
you saw tumultuous changes life played a
role in triggering things called
snowball earth events in which the whole
planet froze over and eliminated all
life but it reset the system and you
could go round the algorithm again
eventually the planet or the biosphere
found stability locked in it persisted
but this is a very very crude algorithm
and not one as humans we should wait to
unfold for us instead our challenge is
perhaps how do we are we gonna have to
find and design instead of stabilizers
because we're busy destabilizing the
planet now you have to raise our sights
and ask ourselves well how on earth what
does the plan for that look like so to
finish the simple version of the
historical narrative here is one of new
levels of biological organization built
on top of the previous levels it started
three and a half or so billion years ago
with the first cells and they're
learning to recycle all the materials
they needed around 2 billion years ago
it took the form of more complex cells
around 600 million years ago it took the
form of the first visible invisible to
us if we'd been there macroscopic
multicellular life forms maybe a hundred
hundred and fifty million years ago you
see a new level of organization you see
insects forming colonies and buildings
starting to build a built environment a
termite mound in this case 6000 years
ago in human form it's the first
city-states again a built in planned
environment and then the question for
the rest of the evening is well what new
level of organizational form are we
planning next
[Applause]
thank you very much Tim I think you're
the only person I know that can do six
and a half billion years in 20 minutes
subtlety's previous discussion on the
market Emperor character of contemporary
global thinking we are moving very
quickly from a linear notion of the
evolutions to a more historical and
condition in science in particular
climate science and khaya science so I
would like to start with the discussion
around the story city of your interest
because we as we previously discussed in
the minutes before the roundtable it
seems so many levels that what you're
doing is natural history but it's a
natural history that is decoupled from
national history yeah and I'm interested
in understanding from your perspective
from your better from your trajectory
how does that operate how can you
imagine and
such a amazing overview of the tipping
points that have made nation is
historicity without reverting to the
conditions of establishment of that very
same discourse well like you I don't
think you can I think it's natural for
me to ask how things came to be I think
that I'm perhaps very old-fashioned and
more like in a tradition of natural
philosophy that was the beginning
tradition in in Western Canon if you
like but that got lost in the 19th
century approximately when a sort of
phylogeny of different disciplines
fashioned off in this country and
elsewhere and left us ill-equipped for
for the predicament the Anthropocene
predicament we've created so I think
several of you probably heard of
complexity science and there's a kind of
a view of the world as complex systems I
think it's one element of what we need
but it's also a little a little a
historical and I believe it has to be
combined with an evolutionary
understanding of how things came to be
which is to say we have to really
wrestle with and understand the
importance of information and memory and
learning in the development or evolution
of our biosphere and of our own
situation to me that's perfectly natural
but I have to say it's a minority
perspective because most of my
colleagues in say climate change science
have only been trained to think about a
snapshot of the world and its troubles
as we see them now and I think that
might be true in other disciplines as
well and we miss something if we can
only stare at the press
and through the snapshot lens of the
present yeah
so I not try answer the question well
but I feel firmly that we're in a time
where we're all recognizing that if
we're going to get out of an apocalyptic
apocalyptic narrative of our creation
and when we're going to get onto a
different narrative we all I think
understand that that requires
transformational change that requires I
would say revolutionary change certainly
evolutionary change and if we don't
understand how we came to be here and
the processes of evolution that gave
rise to it where we be flying blind
trying to to envisage or conceive of a
credible way forward so if we need to be
more aware in order to start influencing
back Gaia my question is what happens to
all the descent about that when what
happens to all the troubles around what
means to have such a how agree instance
very much in the idea of a city disagree
and the fact that it's 6,000 years ago
that we have settled the condition I
think that actually what we have there
is just
moment in a very complex history of
becomes institutionalized but we had
settled systems
far before that we have little
archaeological traces so the social
structures of the settlement where
somehow predating the condition of
agriculture in the form of money and so
even just the last minute of your
billion years is extreme so my question
is really about how to imagine a debate
about this guy of token zero unfolding
across a variety of very troubled humans
people in the humanities well exactly
many many aspects of any history always
going to be contested and I think that's
fine as long as there are some as long
as there are some broader truths within
there that might use for the be
extracted so I would like to think that
what I said about solar energy and about
material cycling are harder to are
harder statements to contest and any
particular argument about when a
particular level of organization did or
didn't come about so I would say that
partly we don't want to get yes well
certainly we we're as intellectuals will
always be arguing over over some details
and that is fine and healthy and that's
part of having keeping a diversity of
perspectives I certainly tried to
navigate this space carefully because
it's extremely dangerous to go out
advocating an agenda for society that's
built on learning lessons from nature
because that has
very bad history and some of you will be
aware instead if it's to be a reasonable
proposition it has to be unbend by the
idea that the kind of nature I'm talking
about is a different kind of nature to
the one that we're trained to think in
terms of in the least in a Western
civilized tradition so what I mean is
we've got that's why I talked about Gaia
to begin with we've got to first
reconceive the nature of nature in the
sense of its other living beings trying
to create their own conditions for
survival and flourishing and then having
these extraordinary extended
consequences by drifting off your
question of many levels
could be a shortcut in the proposition
and that is that we ought to organize
ourselves in order to somehow be in sync
with nature what starts and being quite
obvious in your description is that that
is not the modernist project
precise which is built on an idea of
cohesion of combination on to a specific
part of the earth yeah I skipped I
decided not to give you all a few slides
on the notion of Dominion and genesis in
the Bible and Milton Friedman and
everybody else's who've who've pursued
this tradition five minutes well we've
at least died of great I shouldn't say
we but at least I grew up in a in a
tradition that was telling me that from
Christian writings onwards that the
where the superior species and we've got
been given dominion over all the other
living things etc and we see that
tradition turning to the modernist
project that still presumes that
explicitly or implicitly and I never sat
well with me let's put it that way so we
have to question that cultural framework
and presumption and in our wrestling
with our current predicament I think
because otherwise we just end up in a
fairly futile situation where we decide
we're going to put monetary values on
things we call ecosystem services and
the magic of the market and invisible
hand is somehow going to rescue us from
the problem that it's created so we have
to ask deeper questions about the nature
of the world and then how we change the
nature of our relationship with it to
conceal interfering with all the times
of naturalizing the market of
transforming it into a self-organizing
model of ecology it seemed and that is a
moment where there is a number of
frictions and there's a tension in the
work that it seems may be important to
start unfolding you're not proposing
that we should mimic nature now I am
suggesting a new politics if there is
one coming or happening around us is
built from the bottom up it's built from
the people us coming together wrestling
with a predicament of our own making
which is that the climate is changing
and convulsing around us and if it
hasn't hurt us and hisses yeah it's a
it's going to
and we weren't expecting that it's the
byproduct of it if you like of this
tradition that we were told or soldiers
was that we had dominion over it and we
would just like all other living things
passive adaptive actors on a stage set
by geology or divine providence you
might as well say the world in the first
place but I'm not trying to promote a
glib agenda then of take model society
on nature but rather let's reinter agay
the nature of nature and then when we
look at current predicament
perhaps it's like going back to the
start of the Western philosophical Canon
where as I understand it it's a while
since I did my philosophy lectures in as
a student but there's the people of
Athens gathered around the fountain in
the marketplace I believe and they
wrestled with how to govern themselves
and their City and that's I think the
predicament we are heading into and we
should perhaps embrace we need to get
back into that mode of being where we've
got to rethink how we govern ourselves
and our relationship with other living
things and if there's a if there's some
politics in this it's that the other
living agents are need to be in the
political equation there we depend
entirely upon them but at some level
they don't depend on us but they can be
harmed by us and they're also they're
trying to create their own conditions
for flourishing
we can't flourish without them so we
might be wise to bring them in so that
in whatever form it takes we need to
bring you to convene them in
conversation
for me that was the discussion seems
dominated by how many people are talking
about coevolution
you are clearly coming from complete
different position you're talking about
Gaia and interesting how the idea of
local devices of transformation Gaia
conditions then somehow triggering
multiple conditions of cohabitation
rather than coevolution about the
relationship between in your mind youkai
of 2.0 policies of more koop cognitive
capacity and we can discuss later if it
has to be human only cognitive capacity
and these guy devices so I guess the
premise the foundation there if it if I
haven't made it clear already is that
whether we were conscious or unconscious
being alive we necessarily transforming
our environment as as conscious
sensitive thinking human beings we're
also of transparently obviously always
trans transforming our environment
I believe we at least have the capacity
to design instruments of that
transformation that I might call Gaia
devices that might be desirable to lead
on certain principles or values that are
fairly uncontested ly gonna promote the
long term
sustainability and flourishing be they
devices to get excess unwanted carbon
dioxide out of the air and turn it into
something valuable or be they devices
that take parts of our built environment
that's decaying or being rejected or
been stuck in a land floor and turn it
back into something a value to us a
long-term sustainable value it's yeah
it's it's suppose it's a vision of using
a little bit of our click to their
awareness and ability I believe to you
some interplay with foresight of the
consequences of our actions to
deliberately design some instruments
that can help us through these
transformative times towards something
we might agree on is a flourishing place
to be rather than what I believe would
be essentially the collapse of
civilization if we carry on business as
usual the introduction we put in the
event this evening we were thinking how
do we go about this in discussion the
only thing that we came up with was a
reference to Cuvier yeah when the Baron
was trying to explain the very short
lived history of geology to his fellow
revolutionary citizens in Paris and he
could only think of explaining the
revolutions that made the earth in terms
of the political revolution that people
were experiencing so it's like a sort of
a deja vu situation the beginning of
geological scientists trying to
disentangle themselves from
the Providence and the Dominion
conditions somehow again mirrored in the
contemporary forms where we are trying
to disentangle ourselves from what has
happened in between so I'm interested in
understanding how you can imagine a
revolution what you call tipping points
in the middle of them how do you see the
transformation happening from within
with difficulty I suspect it's a lesson
from history I think some of his passion
I'm not alone in the room thinking that
there's some that we in the middle of
something now how whether we've widely
advertised that to each other or not
depends on your perspective but I think
you've answered the question yourself in
a way that it is inherently difficult to
fully fully perceive a transformation or
a revolution that you might be in the
middle of possibly because who knows
what the outcome forms are they might be
things that are hard for us to imagine I
guess we have enough clues though in
simple terms to say that what I've
called carrying on business as usual is
not a sensible or viable strategy so at
the very least we might intellectualize
a situation as oh dear okay if I can if
I stay subscribed to neoliberal
capitalism I'm committing my kids and
they're eight and ten by the way to a
massive shitstorm of climate change and
all the mass migration and horrors that
that's going to bring this century if I
can be blunt
or I could conclude intellectually and
emotionally that that isn't a very
sensible place to go and I can't look my
children in the eye and say that's
sorry but that's that's that's what your
generation has got and then we just
intellectualize and say well if we're
gonna if there's something really bad
coming if we don't change our ways then
we have to create some transformative
change it now way of mode of being which
is sort of the question because it's
basically saying you end up backing
yourself into the actual corner where
you the only viable and human way
forward is to to want to incite change
anyway so that's a slightly obtuse
answer to saying whether you can
recognize you're in the middle of change
but but it's a it's a reason it's the
way I would verbalize to you in the
simplest thing but most blunt terms why
I feel we have to want to want to incite
collective change now many levels a lot
of work resonates with the entire
practice of the IPCC language Gaia but
many levels it operates for many it
could be easily taught together in sort
of gigantic technical modeling and I'm
very fascinated by that it's not a
negative condition but first I'm
extremely fascinated in the origins of
that way of thinking somehow bring us to
this institution
[Music]
people from your work on Gaia so that we
can start approaching this beautiful
four-letter word attentive because we
tend to associated with all the other
stuff but I want to make it clear that
it's not a mechanical it's a very
organic entity exactly so a couple of
answers here one is what I'm trying to
convey yeah is a more yeah organic view
of the world in simple terms a more more
organic than the tradition of complex
systems thinking which derives from
cybernetics which is of course a sort of
you might say enlightened but still
machine view of the world and still
carries a providential echo with it if
you start talking about the world in
terms of feedback and cybernetic
terminology because it seems to imply a
designer I mean someone had to design
any self-regulating human machine there
nobody designed Gaia at least not until
now
so at that level to rationalize it one
has to think much more organically about
memory about about evolution about
filtering or selection about how
complexity comes to be from this into
continuing to play of the living living
surrounding and so that I think marks it
out a little differently as an
intellectual project the other thing
that might seem a little bit more than
you want to know but right now I think
there is broadly speaking three versions
of Earth System science one is Gaia
which I've already talked about enough
one is a very abiotic a very devoid of
life definition of what the earth system
is it comes from the tradition started
by the space agency NASA where there
could equally be a Mars system or a
venous system or in any other planet
system and life just isn't part of the
definition or equation but that misses
for me the most important thing in in
the system within the third approach is
one we would associate with a big
organizational program that was called
the International geosphere biosphere
program that is by the by the important
point is it is framed around what what's
habitability for humans and how humans
in altering their own conditions of
habitation and the mistake it makes is
to fixate too narrowly on the human and
forget that our conditions of habitation
are gifted us by all the other living
things and so you make some mistakes if
you Zone in too narrowly on oh let's
just fix on what how humans change the
world and what's good for humans
we need I believe that although there's
some value in a lot of traction in that
particular view of an Earth System
science and it's one I sort of semi
participate in and it led to these
concepts like planetary boundaries that
you might have heard of I honestly
believe it's too narrow in its in its
compass and it's making a dangerous
mistake to forget the rest survive
you've started Bane I think the
beautiful world biosphere biosphere is
the title of little book by who sort of
transitioning from Tsarist Russia into
revolutionary Russian he thought where
if we are to be revolutionary completely
we need to move from on the evolutionary
or evolutionary ladder from the
geosphere to across the biosphere to the
noosphere the sphere of knowledge and
the idea was that model entire rational
life of the revolution on to the people
called the earth system how did this guy
from the Nazi okay in particular guy of
2.0 from the sphere because that clear
trajectory clear stepping level of
higher complexity on to that it seems to
me that aspect achievement is needs to
be unfolded a little bit in
understanding that yours is not a
rebranding or renaming not yet another
digit of the
tell us more about I hope not for sure
because I think that what I'm trying to
articulate is a flourishing future and
the getting there from here necessarily
needs this needs to be driven by bottom
diversity of bottom actions and
bottom-up networks formation with
learning by doing with different
networks in different cultural or
geographical context starting to learn
from others mistakes or successes I
absolutely don't believe in any notion
of a plan top down attainment of
collective consciousness or global
governance or anything like this
personally I think that it might be
unworkable it would probably be
politically very unpalatable and I would
associate some of the newest fear
thinking Taylor de chardin I'm not sure
whether I can accuse vanevski of it
more in that vision or version of the
future the other thing I would say is
that although vanevski had a key insight
on the impact of life on the material
world his his book if you read it the
biosphere
it lacks his it lacks the histor history
city I believe I think it's very a
historical and that's a crucial
difference with Lovelock and the gaia
tradition as well as the fact that
Lovelock and gaia recognize that it's a
two-way into play but it's not just life
influencing the geological world and
it's also the geological world of course
influencing life but it's the fact that
the totality of that coupling is gives
rise to a phenomenology that you
couldn't guess that if you can only see
one side of the equation or the other
last question about the idea of the
network I'm gonna be I don't know about
to be straightforward it's just a
renaming of
that is the tradition and that we have
to cooperate locally and form societies
around cooperation which has somehow
structured entire probably catching me
in territory I'm not as familiar with
this as you are but I would say that any
just listening to the question John I
would say that any language of
cooperation or competition is still
basically over lease prescribed by a
Darwinian and neo-darwinian and social
Darwinian program that is part of the
modernist modernist program and we are
conditioned I think through our
education to put the world into those
boxes but if for example you we go back
to the gaia again three humans we
shouldn't shoehorn that into presuming
it's some great global act of altruism
or cooperation nor should we be vex
totally by seeing competition or
something that would destroy its
workings it needs to be seen as the pure
waste products of one being become the
resource or food for another
and absent any kind of value-laden
Darwinist in rapping of it we need to
somehow extricate ourselves I'm afraid
from that that kind of narrow
evolutionary framing because remember
the modernist program remember that
that's that central to it and that was
part of the central conceit of parallel
between the workings of nature in the
workings of society that we need to
break out of that in my view for what
it's worth we need to break out of that
particular version of how society is or
might be or should be modeled on nature
into a very different view of both
nature and society now
please come join so that we can have a
proper discussion
Alex fine thank you very much
there's a writer who's written about the
improper scene who says that the
entropies pre-trial hearing for
assessing culpability in the context of
our current predicament and whether or
not you agree with that it seems to
highlight something that a lot of people
find problematic with the Anthropocene
which is that it overlooks the
possibility that some people are more
responsible than others so certainly the
UK has probably played the largest role
in developing industrialism and and so I
want to get your sense of whether Gaia
theory and also theories of tipping
points and overlook that notion of
responsibility not just of humans but of
particular humans and some humans more
than others very good question I would
say that there is a danger in the
tipping points were which I would align
with this this is complex systems purely
dynamical systems perspective of the
world that it it forgets politics and
power and those elements and that's one
of its dangers and I kind of hinted it
the problems of that narrowness in the
planetary boundaries framework or the
whatever else I'd like to think that the
kind of Gaia and Gaia 2 idea that we're
throwing out there is it it absolutely
has to recognize and wrestle with who
the perpetrators are of any given
situation in their relative weighting I
mean that's certainly the way I think
about trying to understand earth history
some beings had far more culpability in
certain changes than others and I think
you're absolutely right you have to we
have to look at our current situation
and our own
ethical predicament or position in that
life and I'm glad to see we at least
seem to internalize that a little as a
nation with recognizing that we really
should go zero as soon as we can I think
that's a tacit acknowledgement that we
know that we were a larger part of the
problem than the current one percent of
emissions year-on-year that we represent
and instead I forget the precise
fraction but I suspect our fraction to
keep our contribution to cumulative
emissions is a is more in the tens of
percent than a few percent so our
responsibility should be according in a
in any politics yeah
um for me what remains a problem is the
anthro pants / centricity of outlook on
the whole thing I lived in Papua New
Guinea free year there was a 7.4
earthquake people find that absolutely
normal and especially within the
nation-state we expect to be in control
and in a sense maybe that's partly a
false expectation maybe we have to learn
to live with the uncontrollable you know
ours is the only planet in the solar
system that is based on tectonic plates
for example you know and the long term
understanding of the physicality and
violence of our planet and learning to
live with that you know in many
societies use materials to float in
floodplains or whatever you know there
must be ways you know Vikings had ships
that could go in rough seas okay so two
things here firstly yes there are some
convulsions that come from the inside of
the earth or meteorites from space and
the biosphere or life or the capital
Oilers had to learn if you like to
respond to those convulsions and some
human societies have also perhaps all of
us have ever learned how to a degree how
to cope with that but we've got to
distinguish here between the things that
are might indeed be truly from the
outside from the things which are
ultimately where we're the cause or part
of the cause
in either case you're right to highlight
that there are some changes now
including climate changes that are human
caused that are unavoidable and we've
got to be able to learn by doing and
learn from experience as we're presented
with situations which are alien to our
experience up to now what I mean is
we're gonna see some some we've may have
made a commitment already to term many
meters of sea level rise
we've may have made a commitment to have
to move my major population centers that
only grew up in the last 50 years in a
planned architected way and we may be
experiencing already some extreme
weather events that are outside of the
range of recent human experience so when
presented with new experience or new
predicaments we have to trust in evolved
to some degree trust in our evolved
capacity to learn to deal with that but
I believe there are ways we can give
ourselves more capacity to deal with the
unexpected
and we could perhaps talk more people
from the audience can come in listen
some more thoughts on what those are but
I think a wise approach to the present
let alone the future would be to to
collectively improve our capability to
deal with some new forms of surprise do
you think we can how quickly do you
think we can start a serious budget on
carbon well if you think if you
recognize that I mean this is a glib
answer and it isn't the whole solution
by any stretch of the imagination but
but just read regenerating the forest we
degraded over the last two centuries
won't solve the climate problem but
might be how to restore 100 billion tons
of carbon which out of the 500 plus that
we've emitted so that's a so-called
nature based solution in the glib
language of my colleagues and it's not
the only one but I do that already to a
degree and we could do it well if only
we could change the politics which is
always the answer we could do more of
that tomorrow
so in other words we need to change the
incentive schemes that would in which in
that case would invest indigenous and
local populations in the preservation
and restoration of degraded forests in
the tropics because they got more
benefit from being part of that than
they did going with the oil palm
plantation or whoever was coming in to
top all the illegal loggers or whoever
was coming in to chop it down to pursue
that particular example but I know folks
across town in London who have built a
busy building
enough incentive structure to have
working with those communities to have
that become a reality so in that
particular case it's it's happening now
and it can happen more but it's not the
whole solution
thank you I have a feeling that there's
a missing I'm missing a certain link so
and that's the relation between the
Greenville reinvestigation
reinvestigating the nature of nature
which seems really important the kind of
political imperative the social
political imperative of rescue
operations right now which seems less
this seems to me to have less potential
where I don't fully understand is the
link between those the demand to create
new levels of organization because it
seems to me that the demand to create
new levels of organization kind of
contradicts the possibility of
reinvestigating the nature of nature oh
good yes and maybe I scrubbed that slide
oh it's gone anyway I don't yeah because
I think there was too much of a too much
of a sense of progress shall we say in
the way I like to frame that and I
perhaps miss miscommunicated what anyway
I was conceiving of because I what I
mean these the emerging networks of
cities and mayors and transition towns
and whatever did the real where the real
action is on the on the climate crisis
that to me is a
and what I would call a new kind of
organization yeah okay let me see if I
can give a more thoughtful answer I
think you've kind of nailed it the
reason I've been hesitant to write more
on the guy owed to idea which needs a
better name is I think it was essential
first to do some work to unpack this
frog program of needing to re-evaluate
the nature of nature and then we might
be in a more informed place to talk and
think about what a flourishing
future looks like and with which if any
bits of nature we might learn from as
I'm trying to navigate with the help of
my friends here the junior editor and
others I think a delicate project where
I have no I have no idea
it's at some level what the outcome or
the or the any recommendations really
might be I think I think your point is
partly well that's all very nice but how
does it sit with the narrative of crisis
climate emergency we've got to change
now in the next 30 years which I'm also
someone whose work is kind of feeding
into all the time I suppose what I would
say is I feel we're going nowhere if all
we can do is see the apocalypse that's
coming which I'm quite honest and clear
about I hope
or a narrative of basically retreat and
consuming that's consumers consume this
I do believe we should consume less in
most of us in this country but I think
we aren't getting anywhere collectively
because we haven't collectively had a
discourse about the flourishing
sustainable future that we actually want
to work towards and and the pathway or
the many pathways we could trace from
where we are now is our there so
whatever I'm doing and it's pretty
incomplete is trying to if you weren't
doing it already trying to find some
other people to join in that work and
basically can we can we collectively
come together on a positive vision of
what a flourishing and sustainable
future that doesn't ransack the rest of
the biosphere or Gaia look like and
what's the political project to get
there from here the misleading term here
is organization as you speak it's and I
think it's more coalitional it's more
between sort of knowledge that are
systemic and knowledge --is that are
organic in materials maybe where I got
stuck was with the term organizational
which I think of it's very systemic
right okay I'm certainly finding myself
in situations where terms I use one way
my audience to be especially in settings
or all the time so I then end up feeling
horribly hamstrung and almost unable to
open right now
I suddenly realized that my terminology
that has one meaning to me takes a
completely different meaning and there's
of my of the audience and this is
probably a case in point so we don't
need to review what I really think I
mean by that I'm happy to always nuance
my language I think I'm trying to get at
the language of the tall would say
active networks so I'll throw our
organization if you like but to a
scientist it just doesn't carry their
baggage it carries to you which is
really interesting and that's my problem
being by I'm a scientist by training
I think my kind of an extension of hers
I kind of wrote it down because it's
something that I'm looking into in my
research as well so the universe in an
operational sense is binary and
anthropologically speaking social human
behaviors not but I feel like we attempt
to mimic the universe or nature by
trying to be and we don't afford
ourselves this base to operate outside
of a deinstitutionalized system and the
systems rise or the overlapping moment
of the binary in the non-binary or our
insistence to make it work is what
resulted in the rise of the Anthropocene
so how does a new organization solve the
issue when I feel like the issue lies in
an existing organization of fabricated
disparity or just the insistence to even
organize on a world skill
so well images you showed earlier about
you know the population disparity was in
you know borders and how it kind of
changes with the projection that people
migrated to Africa it comes up a lot in
my research and why is this solution
always within you know a new type of
organization and not did deconstruction
that logic well put I mean the problem
as you put it I think is this cultural
tradition we find ourselves in that has
made some blood separations that are we
are living in the consequences of so
that's why I chastised myself for the
disembodied brain diagram because that
is the classic my body split where the
mind would be associated with the gray
matter in in the brain and it's and
that's that was a bit that's wrong of me
to use that imagery because it's
meaningless
and the problem here is we separated
humans from made sure he separated mine
from body etc etc etc we don't need to
have another lecture on that I hope it
comes across at least in my answers or
discussion that what I'm really talking
about is reconnection I'm really talking
about interacting networks of living
agents human or otherwise
and all the interesting a lot of the
interesting stuff that we've been busy
forgetting is in the interactions of
those networks and and in the free will
if I can use the term of all the
different living beings creating trying
to create their own conditions for
survival and flourishing which is sort
of part of the definition of being alive
so
I think my language is flawed I'll go
away from this evening on with that
message but that's that's the program
that's what we're if we obviously with
it already that's that's what I'm trying
to wrestle with is okay well you can
have different kinds of acting in
networks we have some agency to make
some decisions about what kind of
networks we want to form and play in and
those are conversations or the actions
we should be having there's a design
there's always going to be a planned if
you like element of that with our human
agency so then it's about okay what
other agents do we do we give value to
in the planning and design process of my
supposition is it can't just be the
other human agents it's also got to it's
also got to be some of the other living
ones do you believe that humans have any
agency like the corporations and I think
if you convinced yourselves if you
commit yourself that we don't then the
battles lost which is a funny kind of
answer isn't it as I said somewhere
along the way remember that one tiny
bacterial cells we need a very strong
microscope to see could ultimately
completely transform the world and the
same can be true occasionally and
obviously it's not the norm that have
also presumably one or one group of
human agents and if we just end up
convincing ourselves that the
or the system or the government or some
other thing which is all this illusion
of society that the tour has been trying
to tell us is just a made-up fiction
unless we can snap out of that
presumption that there is this thing
this society this thing that is
constraining us and we can't possibly
make a better future then we're done for
public because we are we are whatever it
is we are in and it's those rules were
written by whatever the rules are they
were written by some humans and they can
be changed by some other humans in
principle
so let's reach change it this is the
conclusion of this amazing discussion
thank you Tim all the way which is not
as closest and many people in London
think thank me thank you for joining us
and we we do have drinks on the other
side of the hole but I just need to do
some little entertainment here we have
to thank the graham foundation for the
support of this evening and all the
series and this is a series it's called
plan the planet because it's the
continuation of ongoing project that we
initiated a few years ago the
misunderstandings around a major figure
in architecture that initiate all kind
of systems thinking and system theories
and somehow should be held accountable
for all mistakes instead of
on a pedestal as many other people among
which the notion of self-organization
thank you very much Tim it's been
amazing
