hello everyone and welcome to the second
lecture of our summer diva victory
series I'm very thrilled to be welcoming
dr. Michael Weinstock today Michael is
the director of emergent technologies
and design graduate program I'm very
excited and he has taught at the a for
many years and across different parts of
school including the undergraduate
diplomas school
technical studies and he established
mtech in 2001 and he's also involved
with PhD supervision and he's the
academic head as well so he has been
involved with everything at the a and he
also was my PhD supervisor when I
completed my PhD and okay okay that's
enough time so allow me to say welcome
Michael I've also swept up so it's not
all important jobs okay so I want to
talk to you tonight about utopia and
every architect thing so know what
utopia is not many of you would have
read the founding story Thomas More and
I'll talk a little bit later about that
just two aspects of this talk that I
want to emphasize one is how strongly
the idea of utopia as some future
unattainable City and it's nearly always
been a city has been in urbanism and
then development of architecture over
the last hundred years and perhaps more
controversially how strongly in my view
it's linked to migration and the migrant
step and for those of you are kind of
not familiar with either of those
dynamics I'm going to attempt to play
their health
100 years of architectural history so
it's gonna go fairly fast okay so these
fantastic learnings are 104 years old
yeah
1914 done by Sam Taylor it was how old
are you
yeah 26 okay he was 24 when he did this
he died a few few months later in the
First World War but what he was talking
about was an architecture of calculation
a dynamic of a city that's constantly
being reinvented and renewed and he also
said something that I'll return to much
later that every generation there was
its own city and what he meant by that
was not just physically but conceptually
as a dream as an aspiration and every
architectural history when I was taught
architecture you always started with
coughing still compulsory in some
countries that kind of more or less
deleted it all across Europe
so those of you may be from the
subcontinent I still have would have
been taught this and we recognize this
plan it's kind of ordered its everything
that he would say is against what were
their city was at that time and we would
have been out here all of us in on the
periphery and the elite would have been
in the towers at the center and aircraft
technology was coming in the future so
the white cross in the middle is
actually must be an airport which if
you're a pilot that's you know fairly
ridiculous thing to do nonetheless this
is the conceptual model of a 1 million
person city at the same time this is
drawings around about the same time
that's proposing a more socialist driven
utopia terms of morphology you can't
tell the difference so one is supposedly
elitist and to do it order
this supposedly is a socialist utopia
the buildings are enormous scale is 600
meters long and it's also a city for 1
million people and although it seems
quite sweet systems some buried and some
on the top surface there and these are
the detailed drawings for those blocks
completely undifferentiated everyone
identical every unit within them
identical the dream of the new city is
carrying with it already the seeds of
what we found so disturbing in
contemporary architecture is the loss of
identity and the vyd individualism and
these both these sets the drawings and
these concepts originated in europe in
the period from about 1920 to about 1930
so many difference going on in fill a
little bit more advanced this is
actually what's called a map painting
which is partly a model and partly a
painting there was made for a film
science fiction film for 1930 but as you
can see everything that you're beginning
to think about as a contemporary city is
present in the culture if not physically
its present culturally by then massive
buildings enormous scale mass flows that
are organizing there are no connection
to the individual buildings and
interestingly there are no people this
is a very important film it was partly a
comedy and partly a tragedy it's
difficult to get hold of it's called
dreams of things to come it's 1930 most
of you will recognize that foyer design
as sort of late 90s
you had a bit of gold a little bit of
curvy frills on the balconies and you've
got your typical New York or anywhere
else
interior atrium space and it's also what
you see much of 50 years later in Blade
Runner the vision of the face of the
media this controlling the masses pillar
not expressed in those terms with any
kind of cultural analysis shows the
first articulation of these ideas comes
in student drawings of architecture and
in film and the literature more
powerfully perhaps in filming and
literature at the same time 1930s
ecologically across the world they're
known as the dirty thirties these are
the first human produced ecological
catastrophes architecture still has this
dream of a future city of everything
shiny and in a great Liberation's
the drawings suggest loss of identity
uniformity conformity to geometrical and
social principles what's happening in
the world whilst this is going on are
the first big disasters so this is the
dustbowl arguably the first documented
human produced disaster this is what
people were saying Steinbeck wrote his
most powerful novels at this time about
the fleeing across the United States of
vast numbers of people to escape the
dust box the large area the southern
parts of the US his whole agricultural
system collapsed and you had enormous
movements of people running into
hundreds of thousands of people either
to the west to California or north to
Chicago in New York in those areas not
to be outdone we have what arguably is
still considered quite a clinic
beautiful
kind of plan those indirect Moses will
know Frank Lloyd Wright
well you might know but not know is that
Frank Lloyd Wright was also proposing a
system of governments for this city
there's only one kind of person suitable
to run these capacities with an
architect preferably him but if not some
other architect and the drawings are
great in a way and very powerful when
you see them an evocative of their age
there's a kind of unspun unthought out
technology they're supposed to sort all
out all of this but one phenomenon is
really clear is there's no boundary to
this it doesn't end it unrolls like an
endless carpet right the way across
3,000 miles of the u.s. continent Geddes
very important figure in urbanism was
paid by General Motors who funded the
New York's World Fair in 1939 and this
is the first time where there's a
deliberate attempt to unify the future
the mother car industry and urbanism now
we know Coke was funded plan bas an of
course is it a car driven city was
funded by the motor car industry at that
time but this is the first time it's out
in the open and really explicitly and in
some ways it's completely gorgeous and
in others this is the seeds of what
we've inherited and you can see from
Andy's amazing model and the people
sitting up there how much effort went
into this the models are quite seductive
they're not a million miles away from
what Santa Leah drew or having I said
any of the others and these are
imagining a far distant future 1960
in that case and you sure will recognize
the kinds of cities that we've already
started to see
organized by round transport flows the
latest very near the center always in
towers and the rest of us out in their
periphery
less and less well connected and the
motorcar was seemed to be how this would
all come about and this is the
agricultural vision where every plant
[Music]
ecological truck control is absolute
temperature moisture content amount of
sunlight there was no technology to do
that but that's what they write and
that's what they drew this is coeval
this is exactly at the same time if you
read in the novels and look at the films
of that area whilst architects and
Urbanists are preoccupying themself with
this further dream we have yes we start
to see good documentary evidence of this
massive flood of people the hokies many
of them were called and they carried
with him their own version of utopia
they were escaping oppression racism
poor farm work to what they saw is the
freedom of what California was the land
of sunshine and great opportunities and
visions of kind of future freedom
coupled to ideas of founding and
building their own City and some did I
mean there are many small towns in
California
Britany will tell you they were founded
and built by the refugees or the people
fleeing from the Oklahoma dust bowls
these are European this is the Basques
anyone from Spain here this is a
worldwide phenomena you go into late
thirties the beginning of the World War
two he's arriving in Britain people too
poor or too old to travel themselves
sent their children so one of the
strongest features of what we call
deeming with
it's always the young hermit it's the
young who carry the stories of the hold
that they turn them into optimism for
creation of future cities so by the time
we get to just immediately world war two
the new city that exact phrase the new
city if you look up architectural
history you will find almost every
architect has got some version of the
new city publish some drawings or a book
or some text called a new city there was
always a technological euphoria in it
they didn't know what if future
technologies would be not predictive
they're just assuming that they would be
entirely beneficial to society they're
organized and layered by infrastructure
they have multiple levels normally
associated with different speeds high
density blocks all identical no
boundaries it could go on forever and
agriculture has become urbanized
agricultural plans look exactly the same
as city plans called on which tree farm
plans as though they were city plans
farmers never driven like them what I
know farmers ever drew plans but and we
don't know of any nonetheless we could
see this kind of strange kind of
inversion where people starting to draw
productive landscapes as though they
were part of the city
so he'll be Siemer
who did the original high-density
socialist blocks 1945 moved to America
gave up socialism became a good
capitalist do exactly the same things
but he gets more kind of credibility he
actually did to be fair to him some
really good work on the Chicago must
apply but he makes this kind of quite
new recreation of himself but his
architecture and urbanism remains the
same and there it is this is the post
social services
capitalist version and it's identical
and urbanization is integrated with the
agriculture and it's really hard when
you read the text you can see what he
means it's really hard in the drawings
to see any difference between what is
supposed to be productive farm
landscapes and residential in some sense
that hinge of is where ecological
urbanism maybe starts where there isn't
really a significant differentiation
between forms of the city and forms of
agriculture at the same time a great
deal of human mathematics effort what we
now see think of is the birth of
computation lies in the calculation of
how to set the whole city on fire so the
early mathematics done in the UK first
and then in the u.s. there's before to
create the Tokyo hostel which was an
attempt partly successful the large
areas of Tokyo had very very large
numbers of wooden buildings and the
calculation of the air flows and the
temperatures and so forth were the first
significant big scale urban calculations
kind of shocking but that's what it is
and of course whole new ways of say
we're moving life from cities this is
Cosima then there aftermath of that okay
um this is a photograph taken the same
year I was born
[Music]
you have more power in your iPhone than
the whole of this and in fact this
laptop I have here has more or less the
computing powers of a rat brain so we
should not underestimate this kind of
journey but this is the first
significant birth of what you will now
take for granted as your working method
strange mathematics that precedes this
so today we're breaking codes and making
firestorms partly also in the US history
there none of code talkers which I'll
tell you about on another occasion the
dream of the city also goes through a
strange inversion after the war very few
people are now draw architects drawing
or try to make new cities they're trying
to make buildings that incorporate city
ideas so within this which is an amazing
building and if if you're here for
Europe any length of time go to
Marseille and go inside you can stay in
there you can hire one of the little
apartments that have potassium it's
really quite beautiful and it has within
it kind of streets shopping arcades kind
of garden on the top and so forth the
stuff you learn in school you will
change your mind about this if you can't
stand the paradox is although it's in
one way a kind of part of a bad history
it's actually a beautiful building it's
amazing to be in the English weren't
quite so good at it
partly it's the Sun well it's difficult
in this year because it's like hot is
here sunny is have ever the english
version of modernism this is a Robin
Hood estate I dismiss sense was pretty
grim there's a kind of sourness to it
and he never quite worked and English
never quite liked it and they didn't
build it very well and is surrounded by
roads and you can't get to it and it has
some resemblance or supposed to to the
habitacion on its interior organization
but it was over scaled too big for
orientation and he never really worked
and although they tried to preserve it
it's not homologous Tokyo Bay very
important we're beginning to see and the
metabolites the first Restatement of it
which nano is not just organized for
flows they're there but all the social
programs and all the government programs
are located in there not the residential
elite and everybody else kind of lives
out in the bay and the inversion is that
if the richer you are the further away
you live from this central spine Kenzo
tange
yeah Mitaka started in metabolise so
these are all government buildings parks
kindergartens schools they don't look
like that they look like an a completely
massive blocks and so forth but no more
beautiful part I think is this kind of
outer buildings which are residential
and so forth super studio is when more
or less I started to get interested in
architecture ran about 60s everyone's
growing their hair long and taking too
many drugs and maybe that's this stuff
marches right across the world if they
had no hesitation it's not like they
make a drawing that there we saw where
some of the earlier
get expatriate particularly Frank
Millard right well as a suggestion them
it's not grounded back there completely
this is their big idea this stuff
marches right across the world it's the
same everywhere it's undifferentiated it
has color enclosures and things it's
something really weird about it has no
interior no it's all surface and these
tribes of people that are just into all
the images are about tribes of people
nomads who are wandering endlessly
across it it's a very sixties vision
that technology would completely
liberate people no one would have to
work everybody would just roam around
and keep living but it is impulsive a
really intriguing some of the drawings
are really enigmatic they weren't
explained at the time and was a
deliberate attempt I think in some of
these they're really quite pretty
provocative of some kind of strange life
or excavations of life we also start to
see drawings from other groups how to
zoom in this case there are all interior
where there are no exteriors where the
whole world is occupied by one singular
building in which you just knew in
through their spaces and those are truly
frightening particularly if we look at
the right-hand side this is he'll be
signer from both pre-war and post-war
the ultimate thing endless repetition if
you look at the right-hand side of
living units that are absolutely
identical it was argued that that was
libertarian to do with everybody being
equal but it's kind of quite scary and
nobody really understands what the
drawing on the Left means but it's
something to do with kind of playfulness
that somehow comes out of univ b in a
uniform creek kind of sense of freedom
most of you will have had some
engagement with the Situationists
we start to rebel against all of this
but these are visions of a city that is
arguably led to collage city ideas so
where it's only experience that unifier
provides a city but again is predicated
on migration on movement of individuals
these are the individuals experience
rather than collective ones that go to
make up these maps and this argument
gets played out on both sides very
ferociously in New York this is the foot
part of the fight between Jane Jacobs
who was too deep here Jane Jacobs big
idea was that there are localities that
people bombed themselves to a place they
live most of their lives in one place
she was talking about lower Manhattan in
places like that maybe we wouldn't
necessarily ourselves identify with
sense of place and this other
extraordinary move to inhabit the
infrastructure so this supposedly is
high-speed infrastructure so lower
Manhattan Expressway the drawings for it
and again there's kind of
underestimation or a way this strange
way of drawing the kind of vehicle air
traffic but if we look at the ratio of
the transit spaces which is big big
channels underneath and the elite would
kind of live JJ Gibbs argued against
there isn't any way across from that
side to that site if you live in one of
these territories and they get vaguer
and they're drawn more and more weekly
and they're less and less connected the
city becomes subdivided both by transit
infrastructures and separated by
economic status the elite if you're rich
or to do with the government or
processing you live in one of these on
one of the towers can
today and the other peep everybody else
lives out there somewhere so speedy cook
as you know our key ground I love Peter
cooks I'm gonna be sort of respectful in
the way I take this apart and I loved
these drawings on our suit and I still
do but I remember cuz I came into
architecture late having had another
kind of life before then I was
completely shocked give him one of these
beautiful drawings was a small yellow
pipe on one corner and everything
arrives food arrives through this little
yellow pipe city doesn't produce
anything in its most extreme you got the
walking city of run hair from are
keeping there's a whole set of ideas
many of them producing and around this
buildings these drawings when I was a
student were around here Peter was here
and one Herriman and people like that
was still talking about them
it's a machine so you can say this
there's a kind of connection back to the
earlier utopian dreams of the new city
it moves they don't seem to be any
people it doesn't seem to do anything or
make anything giddy change his mind
another set of drawings later completely
contradicted this in one sense these are
powerful powers of the history of ideas
about the city that you inherit in
another there the start of the complete
disconnection of what I did architects
to talk about and what happened in the
world and in my view this is around it
does not be this fault but this is
around the time where architects stopped
having any credible audience and city
governance or any influence
and I love these things I think they
were great ideas but if you say these to
your mum or to your Prime Minister or
your Minister at home he's gonna say
what the you know city's done said
he's done walk immunizes Kenneth you
know what's it for hmm so
a machine idea that we wear maybe
there's still something really really
powerful also comes begins at the same
time mrs. parlo Soleri and the word
arcology he's not famous in the same
sense of some of the others I think he
deserves to be he spent his whole life
in pursuit of one idea the mixture of
architecture and ecology which is how
ecology and he built it at first almost
by himself with the help of a few
deranged students in the desert in
Arizona and gradually this became the
word became powerful accepted at this
and nowadays you guys inherit programs I
landscape urbanism and so forth the
whole spring out of this single idea but
it's still a machine it's still
connected to Peter Cook and the other
things we've seen and his principle idea
is this machine is kind of an ecological
machine it produces its own all its own
energy pull its own food it's entirely
separate from its context and it's
totally did everybody who lives inside
it is sustained by the machine and in
his later life this is not his drawing
or his model but it's you know by
followers of him and and to do with
ideas that he started this is an idea
that these kind of threads can go across
a landscape be occupied if there is a
critique it's a relief there's very very
poor if any relationships between the
interior of this and the exterior
nonetheless I think what's really
powerful and what you inherit for the
future and what is now technically more
possible is the idea that you can create
nature too you can design an ecology
this is still considered controversial
in architecture although biologists will
tell you is perfectly sensible but isn't
but you have to evolve it you
in initial condition which will change
over time and you can more or less kind
of push it in a desired direction but
not control it directly you can't design
it in the same way you design a building
but nonetheless the idea is there and
some of these are kind of quite
interesting and quite powerful at the
same time this is to do it agent agent
orange was invented more or less at the
same time as he invented the word and
the concept arcology Agent Orange is a
defoliant used in Vietnam war very high
science at the time
it lost two generations it can't be
removed the birth defects and I'm not
gonna show took any of them I think um
this is taken in fairly soon after the
first deployment of Agent Orange birth
defects are now in the third generation
plant defects in the 20th generation
they're deeply embedded in living tissue
DNA across multiple species human
invention okay beautiful much later I
think we're into the early 80s now
returns the idea of Arcadia now Arcadia
is an ancient idea if you go back to the
ancient Greeks it's a kind of postural
heaven on earth the Greek version is
highly ordered hierarchical there are
the gods and there are humans and
there's a kind of progression to it in
the US and in the UK 18th century a lot
of postural paintings mainly dealt in
small architectural creations smaller
states country estates a circle on the
vision of Arcadia mrs. Peters version
those small transformation of a small
English town into one monoblock
so Hilbert's i'ma is standing on this
grave going thank you very much but it
has you know is this general concept
attached to it that in Peters work he
keeps the living entirely separate but
it's just his massive block placed in a
productive landscape so this gets to
your generation right yeah you got where
the computer games for this yeah you're
smiling because yeah okay
have you met William Gibson so here is a
guy who said the future is already here
it's just not evenly distributed they
said things are really important
poink and there comes first in
literature these are the first person to
write and use concepts of datascape
information flows the idea that humanity
if you look at that image on the right
is only partly to do a living flesh and
that what then was called kind of
cyberspace we don't think of it like
that now is something a human creation
that is now gone beyond the singular
human intelligence that's it's both kind
of wonderful and or inspiring and
frightening and there's a degree of
independence to it the impact of that in
architecture is quite slow but quite
profound literature much sooner this is
one of them this again is not an archive
is an architectural vision in the future
it's not drawn by an architect's by
famous illustrator and comic book
artists graphic artists we sign our way
they don't say coming my generation said
comic book artists a graphic artist and
it's taken from a short story by ballad
and as a young student who lives in this
endless city and he decides one day to
see how far he can travel because
everywhere seems to be the same and he
goes sir how serious our kind of
arguments and encounters on these kind
of trains and through lots and lots of
different spaces and endless kind of
densities with strange gaps between them
until one day he realizes that his
return to this space that he left in
some sense this is a manifestation of a
dystopian vision this is the beginning
of manifestation in literature and in
heart of representations and thoughts
that show the city is something to be
feared it's unpleasant
it's an oppressive it's dystopian
something to be fled this is part of my
long argument with Patrick some Patrick
Schumacher some of it's been online and
we have various making some very
friendly I've done it for years but
we've had kind of discussion discussions
in this school and surf school so and
this is something you all have to
wrestle with as I did in a Salif didn't
and you did we want to be individuals
and the whole kind of cultural Drive of
architecture is to be how do you express
yourself as an individual you do by
making new forms once that was if we go
back to the turn of the previous century
that was an act of rebellion and in my
view now it's just simply to glorify
your own brilliance we have cities
without boundaries services without
interiors our desire to make what was
called the well-tempered environment has
been corrupted to spaces that they're
just gaps between the bed
there's a famous example of an architect
who was here and gave a lecture here
when he was asked to that public space
he said well it's just that stuff in
between these wonderful buildings I made
everything comes from somewhere else
nothing is we recognized has been grown
or made you know city cities don't have
any purpose anymore of production and
what's really frightening in
contemporary politics particularly in
this country that the move against
people migrants migrants are always
others they hate to steal your jobs your
wife your husband to take away anything
you event but even more frightening the
others are seen as transient people who
don't belong you're a citizen of nowhere
what I grew up with in the early sixties
and some of the sixties drawings I
showed you with a principle idea about
the future of cities the principle
utopian dream was about endless movement
in the last five years is has turned
very viciously the more you move the
less rights you'll have the more other
countries will claim you're a citizen of
nowhere the stories you carry in the
dreams you carry of the city will become
difficult and to give you some examples
flying to Los Angeles the fly in
Brittany smiling she's done this many
times it's a brown carpet takes about
thirty minutes if you do it in daylight
the flyover this it's completely
undifferentiated there is some places
like a highway five if you live it over
here you're gonna have to drive several
miles before you can turn right across
to the other tent there's a very nice
book called edge
city which you should read about it's
about California urbanism in particular
but it's going to apply and does apply
to many cities around the world where
infrastructure like this is supposedly
to do at connecting places but actually
really really divides Frank Lloyd's
writes every man every person willing to
say nowadays to their own acre these
have become quarter acre plots and
subdivided again and again and again to
smaller and smaller spaces
I love and lo this Mexico City
extraordinary thing about this is
actually a really nice place to be in
some of these places but everywhere is
the same and unless you're a resident
and grow up there you have no way of
navigating online parts of many parts of
Japanese city you have no son who lives
in Fukuoka many Japanese city cities
don't actually even have bother anymore
with street addresses because is so
difficult to navigate they nominate a
person or a group within a certain
territory to be responsible for guiding
people for delivering the post and so
forth for fire protection and Delia
scary right it's it's totally on
differential it's endless
it's not anyone to blame for this I'm
showing you the consequences of those
early dreams couple hundred years on
what was theory what was a dream
speculation is built and it's built
everywhere
Dobis arm is darkness and a lot of the
world lived like this a lot and we
forget that a significant fraction two
people don't live in us it you tend to
think of the civilized world a cultured
world a world of architectural
production as over there but for the
majority of humans is here and we are
irrelevant because we're only dealing
with a few rich people left and the cost
of this lecture my iphone my laptop my
computers and how you know all that
stuff is this and this the rare earth
metals these pollute this particular
pollution has a half-life of 500 years
that means it's 500 years before it's
half as toxic as it is now and you can
see this landscape is nothing is living
nothing is growing and our civilization
depends on these rare earth metals you
can't build a computer without them you
can't build a digital watch or a phone
at all we have whole new ways of
destroying cities this is Shinobu more
recently in the Middle East and we have
this massive amount of material that we
produce and we don't know what to do
with it and we pile it up or throw it in
the ocean or we burn it in their crates
whole new problems whole new toxic
things there are people who live this is
from Goa by taking apart some of the
products of
our civilization and they live short and
difficult lives we produce more than the
earth can replace we produce more than
we know what to do it and we don't know
how to dispose of it and by leaving it
running around or whatever we do to it
we're creating more problems this is
very little of the earth that's left
untouched almost all of the earth's
surface in some way is engineered now
not all of it to this extent this is al
meriya the greenhouses if you had orange
juice for breakfast
well you had tomato salad this is what
it takes to produce it in the numbers of
humans that are alive today the reversed
territories of the earth they look like
this now if you fly into the Netherlands
you will see great part of Holland ups
like this a lot of southern Spain a lot
of countries in your protecti
increasingly son and one of my favorites
from Beijing come speaks yourself you
ever go outside in the winter in Beijing
combining the toxicity with kind of
terrible cold temperatures is really an
experience you only want to have once
you feel like your whole face is being
ripped off by their stuff and Austin
so to return to Santilli every
generation must build their own city
it's not completely hopeless for your
generous but it is I think the major
task of your generation the synergy of
ecology climate and spatial cultures and
the reason is in a very short space of
time in the next 30 years which is your
professional life you go from now to
when you're either a senior up at there
running your own practice or you're a
big team leader in a massive practice if
people keep reproducing and there's no
sign a no one's gonna stop reproducing
cuz there's a lot of fun right at least
the first parties and I can't lecture
you because I have five children maybe I
can say he's don't do it but if that's
right in 30 years
we are gonna be two billion people more
and what does that translate to in terms
of cities many hundreds of cities there
are 20 million or more plus okay there
are interesting things happening with is
the ecological urbanism if I can say
that or the fusion of urban ideas and
ecology so Madrid is a really good
example which is once the center of
Madrid was once totally separated by
eight Lane seven Lane highways great
level of hydrocarbon fumes very
difficult across one side of City the
other and this is was a very nice plan
by practice go west a Dutch practice
urban plan there was actually built the
cars are all buried the cars are still
there traffic flows river was restored
and all the way along the river of these
kind of parks and green spaces which has
also greatly improved the local climate
and part
of hundred it's improved connectivity to
improve the quality of lives of people
on either side of it for Lara Manhattan
post 9/11 I don't know posts that big
Huracan there was an international
competition this is one of the proposals
for the greening some of the greening is
kind of slightly ludicrous making a lot
of towers and stick some green stuff on
nonetheless it's kind of slightly it is
problems this is for San Francisco and
but the idea that if you can reside and
produce edible foods and improve the
local climate by guessing you might say
something like an archaeological I'll
call it collage achill device which is
partly machine partly an ecological
machine partly residential and so forth
so there is hope that these ideas start
to be taken seriously the techniques
that are available to you are also
increasingly easy to mine to master so
it's a piece of work done we're evolving
taking from a well-known piece of
urbanism from Barcelona bisoder block
and how you would evolve this over using
evolutionary computation and we have
three or four researchers they leaf
knows very well you would be meeting
over the next days on evolutionary
computation it's an approach to design
which is fundamentally different
but in principle what you're doing is
breathing solutions you're not looking
[Music]
in the same way that you are right here
and I did in our magnificent state we
are bred through thousand generations or
more of humans you breed them in your
computer and what's really amazing about
this is you can produce all kinds of
differentiated structures but what's
really really important is at the same
time it's doing it you can be analyzing
and of generative mode so this is simply
looking at Skyview factors how open it
is
this is maintaining singular density
over a series of blocks and looking at
how much spoken space you can have and
how open it is to the sky
this is another computational approach
where you can be evolving the connection
so there's a whole series of media
levels upper levels you can explore
those and what that's this little
algorithm is doing is looking for which
one to put where which will give the
best kind of interconnectivity
now it doesn't absolve you from judgment
it's not that you do all this stuff and
say hey Peter says this is the best if
you are still making design decisions
they're just in a different place to the
traditional model where you kind of look
at it and say yeah that's it okay these
are evaluated they're measured and
you're able to say what the crucial
differences are again here what you're
starting to see here are four different
criteria and they're opposed you not
looking for one equally so all of those
well you're exploring is if I optimize
for two of them is slightly more
important than these two what does that
produce and so forth
and what we recently learned how to do
is how to keep track of multiple
generations so you can run now or we can
run and show you don't know if you can
do it so quickly beloved it's a longer
course situation you can run a thousand
generations on the left and you can
recall anyone and you have to date when
anyone the biggest problem is handling
the dead amount of data and we have
developed protocols or the PhD
researchers and the amplitude in average
evolved protocols for them most of you
will be familiar with these kind of maps
in this case the incidence of
photographs taken and where and how
networks connect and how people move so
connecting these kind of tools with the
evolutionary tools gives us we can get
mr. Rana
there's not going around but we can
connect those and evolve
co-evolved networks and urban morphology
at the same time we also inherit and
don't pay enough attention to the idea
of a engineered landscape most people
who grew up with something like this
wouldn't necessarily think of it as
engineered but it arguably took
somewhere between 1,500 and 2,000 years
to evolve this kind of system to
perfection and it is perfect it engulfed
a lot of manual labor but but still in
terms of production ecology stability of
hillsides stability of ecological
production of foods this is his name
perfection as you can get and these
things are worthy of mathematical
analysis and one or two of our students
have started to do that and started to
place them particularly most of our work
is being on we focused like some doctors
do on the most extreme biomes doctors
focus on extreme pathologies to solve
diseases and we think it's important to
study deserts mountain regions cold arid
to study
[Music]
Ecology's that are highly stressed the
logical grounds is everywhere it's going
to be highly stressed and we also want
to return I think in this part to utopia
now house someone outside if they knew
the founding the story of Utah and this
is it Thomas More and it wasn't a
perfect City
what's more people moved in and out to
be Sophia and Thomas motivation all the
time it was highly ordered it was
artificial it was created by digging a
big trench on the edge of a piece of
land that was separated by water pit not
very far and people migrated backwards
and forwards from the territory nearest
hurt into utopia and at times if the
local the nearest piece of land was
highly stressful needed people people
from utopia would move back and so forth
the architectural interpretation a lot
of it stems from some of the drawings
that were made from its first published
and not from reading it that it's a kind
of a dream of a perfect city highly
hoarded and so forth if you look at your
own family history I would doubt that
many of you can say your parents and
your grandparents and the parents before
them lived in the same place that you
grew up if I look at mine my mother came
from a northern island fishing village
my father from was was born in Germany
as I was his parents care were refugees
from Russia and if you go back two or
three generations there are these
trajectories right across the world if
you look at biological history human
biological history we are all to extend
migrants we done share we share the same
gene set cooler and the jun-hee's
inherit we're biologically brothers same
gene sir we're all in some say if you go
far enough back we're all people peoples
of Africa
my white skin of blue eyes are a
mutation to northern climates and humans
are always carried with them if the
humans and all that movements have
carried with them the dream of a future
city the fireside tales the stories on
the boats the dream of the future
liberation always seems to be identified
not with a rural transition but with a
burden and it still goes on today and
whilst we might think of these as poor
distress people and of course they are
and they need to be cared for and
treated in a more humane way they're
predominantly young from my perspective
they're predominantly the future well
what the future will be made with and
from and all countries around Europe and
I'm not going to talk about the horrors
of the u.s. up at all certainly all the
countries around Europe become
intensively aware of these moments by
and large what they're fleeing is
fleeing his oppression and poverty that
the unspoken part of the cause of that
is climate change so many of the
countries in Africa are undergoing what
ecologists would label as climate Wars
resources get scarce ax as ecological
problems become greater those in power
have access to powerful instruments of
money or warfare grab the few remaining
resources and drive everybody else out
historically that's the same cause and
goes back to their diaspora from Out of
Africa and a hundred and fifty thousand
years ago and yet somehow all the world
is connected you can reach anywhere in
the world more or less apart from a few
darker areas within 24 hours from here
you can communicate if you know how to
more or less right across the world in
real time you can talk to someone now in
Valparaiso
in Moscow or another earth as you do
right okay so what I want to leave you
is the work for your generation the
biggest bulk of work the architectural
practices and you will have is too urban
and if you wish to do it we have many
good tools and they're evolving right
very rapidly but my urge for you if you
do engage with that is not to forget the
migrant and the power of the migrants
tale thank you
