hello where the the professional studio
the Master of Arts and Master of Fine
Arts in spatial performance and design
I'm Terrell oriented director of course
and with me today is ela Surya and a
gibbous three generations of the program
and we're going to introduce a little
bit what we're doing and have been done
over the last 10 years we a course that
is formed on the basis of the creative
history of the school people who came
from there I have always formed
different kinds of fields within the
creative disciplines so not only working
in architecture was actually formed
completely new genres in the perception
of the different for example mark fisher
who invented the rocks page run arrow as
a good property designer but as well a
banner to me or like somebody like
thomas hardy as a writer studied it
there but actually form completely
different fields of work on this basis
we formed the course ten years ago in
2008 with a you project and from there
on led to no more than 30 different
projects across it both what we try to
do is bring people from different
disciplines together and work out so
everybody comforting and create jonah
defying projects that overlapped the
different disciplines all the projects
we do our plight and we are going to
explain that it is more
examples of the student work but mainly
we of course little bites people to come
and study together indicate fields that
don't actually have to be from
architecture see them more than one
discipline so most of our students are
architects and something else or
performers and something else we call
all of us slash people in a way so for
example my cell phone an architect's
slash paint will slash me did you line
them and it's pretty much true for
everybody on the team so you don't have
to have an architectural defeat you join
us you can come if you have actually the
inspiration and a bachelor any kind of
greater field or creative attitude
towards the field we come from so we had
jewelry designers psychologists
philosophers you name it and bringing
together really quite new
be working as interprofessional of
interdisciplinary meaning that you
actually work outside of your comfort
zone you become a teacher for your
profession actually bring us the course
is applied and what we want to do is
form networks that actually become
delivered in a professional level so
this is true for most part or all of
their may and the MFA the projects are
always delivered as applied projects to
do the fundraising forward you have to
do the choreography design you have to
write the music
so you actually cannot just to
concentrate on your own profession you
have to collaborate with professionals
on all the different fields in order to
get your own knowledge forward in the
end what we do it's a bootcamp for
networking what the students should come
out with is independent networks that
actually conform their individual
careers I think this is true as well for
all the different tutors on the course
here we have the network from all of us
who teach on the high these different
disciplines it's myself as a architect a
painter Tania as an urban designer and
routine music and production he produced
bands like Texas discovered histones and
as a couple of Grammys to his name David
Millman probably the best voice you will
ever hear and have ever heard if you
have heard them but as well an art
historian and the this kind of bridging
between those two disciplines makes them
very unique somebody like Mauricio Pauly
is a composer neurologists rare Reina
wise it is a choreographer
like result adhesion as well as a
choreographer and production expert for
things Heiko combi and which ornament is
actually standing right here in front of
us and so this team is leading you into
all this kind of fields have how you
deliver this to different programs at MA
and the MFA most of the first yeah is it
running in parallel so both of the
programs are applied programs where you
you base your work on things you
actually have to do yourself we have two
main events one london-based one because
of most of you are not from London and
one international one usually within
Europe or across the world which have to
be delivered within this delivery you
bring as a team work everything forward
together at some point then the MA was
going to bring the work forward into an
academic kind of research for us that
was really important to do this as a
kind of one of the course because
otherwise there is no reflection on the
work and actually is how can it develop
into something that would become the
theoretical base and a very kind of
important research for the next
generations of students of the course
but obviously as well the individual
who's doing the MA and he loves going to
talk about that a bit the MFA is more
directed something if you wanted a set
of your professional practice and
actually want to create right away yeah
your production company your network and
things like that
this can go in very different directions
and our alumni work in all these
different directions from stage design
to actually yeah theatre companies
choreographer companies and so on it's
force
this is developing for boasts together
in this certain way we have four terms
for the four them a and five terms for
the NFA one is running over one to a
year and one
over 18 months so the first term is
dedicated that's killing that's what
you're going to see yes well yellow is
presenting and then the second and third
term are dedicated to the two different
applied projects and then the fourth and
fifth term before the delivery of the
individual thesis setting up your own
career yeah and I hand on to Gila now
who is in October and yes she's going to
talk about her experience so far and her
decision to come to us thank you I'm
glad to see you here so my decision to
come program of the AIS was actually
based of my multidisciplinary nature of
my work previous to my studies at DIA
and my will to move beyond the formal
conventions of architecture which enable
me to reach some kind of certain elusive
accuracy that I strive for in my work as
an architect so I introduced writing and
film to become a stage to perform and
express my intent entire ion density i
indented ii as a creative person
therefore the choice of exploring
furthermore other remote and overlapping
disciplines was my main interest in
coming to the AAA is and eventually
choosing this specific program so
professionally I was aiming to explore
other means of expression which will
enrich my perspective and widen my
ability to think and create in so-called
open fields that are now well they were
unfamiliar to me but now they offered me
by the AIS program such as sound
movement
and dance also contributing to that is
the very creative climate of the a a as
an architect school but it wasn't only
the professional collaborations that
enriches me in the a is the studio that
I work in is very fortunately for me an
intimate and diverse collective of very
inspirational creators that contribute
to our making as a group but also foster
their individual growth so such
individual exploration started off the
year where tell and Tanya presented us
with a box to introduce as our identity
as a creator and thinker under the title
the art of resistance with it is this
year's theme in the AIS so Tom Park Mona
Kamino Sega luma she and I are created
very prominent work and manipulated the
artifact of the box to show our
background an interest in architecture
physics philosophy dance movement
writing spatial design and performance
from there we started the are the
workshops together in collaborations
within the group with the professional
teachers so the first one was a sound
workshop with Andrew Dean that they all
mentioned before we created an audio
guide that explored and redefined the
familiar space of the a a building in
choreographed soundscape we were we
implanted our individual experience of
this space we made statements about art
gender inequality and discrimination the
vague experience between nature and
man-made it was a welcoming journey an
audio guide that took our visitors
through the building as a source of
wonder
it was very directed prominently but
then again
gave a lot of freedom and construct the
most liberating structure if if that
makes sense this we believe created the
critical image do we strive for at the a
AIS and to take a space and architecture
and challenge it to with a progression
of an evolution of animatic anonymous
space to becoming a site-specific one
the second workshop was a film and
projection one with haiku Kallenbach and
we were experimenting in establishing a
film language exploring the body in
space through an individual lens and for
the final review in this case we
actually chose to create a path like
film installation from our own
individual films this was an an act to
perform and occupy architecture in a
familiar setting yet narrative in space
in a different structure such as body
space and thought and I would just
finish off by saying that we are looking
forward to our collaboration in logro√±o
in the next spring under the vivid
greenery of Rioja where we will be
taking part in consent consent Rico
Festival with that said come take a
journey with the AIS and expect the
unexpected thank you and I'll pass the
talk to my colleague that's right
second faith thank you so I'm gonna talk
about last year up for a bit so last
year were how we did it we formed
artists collective group under the
interdisciplinary Oh named Oh a and the
group defined itself as five Outsiders
in London exploring the possibilities of
truth and Trust outside their cultures
we had several shows and performances
that were presented in London and Spain
with collaborations with professionals
like new movement of David McHale Minh
and Robin hunt all the performances
revolved around defining the notions
of truth trust and integrity for this
year in March 2008 we will have 3
independent shows that will represent
our Emma phase two of us will be
collaborating on one project while two
of the other group members gonna be huh
we'll have solo exhibitions around
Hampton last year the we had two main
shows under the dirty title to be honest
and it was presented as a series of
events we had different concepts of
investigations that we were determined
to implement first of all was to achieve
a successful collaboration between
between the multiple fields of design
art to investigate the audience
participation in any performance we
present achieving and to achieve a
special configuration that suggests the
concept of viewing of multiple
perspectives we also wanted to challenge
the idea of delivering a performance and
a black pop box so we tried to implement
the performance in an exhibition space
so I'm going to talk about first and
girona we had our our last performance
which was a collaboration with las √°reas
and without sub architecture studio and
and that and that
Girona was a continuation of the to be
honest festival that was presented in
London in March 2017 and Girona was in
July 2017 we had it was a two-day event
where we presented a documentation
workshop and the performance called
hidden silence and the documentation
workshop students were from Barcelona
were invited to participate and it was
addressing the notion of how to document
make a trailer and work with performers
before before perform like while
preparing for the performance the hidden
silence was a performance that invited
the audience to reimagine how how a
story has been told the peers questioned
what has been experienced the valid and
forgotten forgotten and the narrative
and the memory audience were invited to
roam around the space
discovery the space and the performance
wide why the performance is happening
there now
okay then I'll move to London where it
has a performance or a festival of seven
day festival in collaboration with
doodle bar in London that questioned the
notions of truth dress integrity in the
world that lacked transparency and
authenticity through a series of
artistic collaboration the festival
presented itself as a commentary on the
manufactured truth of daily experience
we had a festival that was composed of
permanent exhibition under the title
called inside out a choreographic
performance thorough silence which
questioned the idea of rituals as part
of seeking truth the meaning of truth
and a talk called alternative facts and
collaboration with Robin Hunt who's a
journalist and David my comment David
McCartney finally I would like to talk
about our our our MFA research so now we
are in the process of developing our own
projects and MFA this part of the year
this part of this whole year is where we
start building our networks of
collaborators in order to present shows
in London this is one thing and we this
is where we try to find funding for our
projects expand or expand in London try
to build our own concepts concepts and
also the we define this as our beginning
of our career path because we will we
will have we will enjoy working in the
media we like we will we chose our own
topics and we were building our team
basically and then I would like to move
to ID
hello everyone welcome to our live feed
from the AAA my name is Eric Harris
oniony and I'm an alumni from the AAAS
program I graduated last March with a
Master of Fine Arts and I would like to
just discuss how the transition from
being a student at the AAA is continued
on to our now professional career
so we use the course as the step just as
t√°rrega was saying to reach out to
people that we would like to work with
and we expanded our network of
collaborators which led to really strong
partnerships it wasn't really happy the
fact that I am during the course I've
met kikiki missoula who is now watching
us and she is my partner in crime and
this is a great example of how we took a
project that we developed in the
architectural Association into a
professional studio which was called XYZ
nests and it was presented at Waterman's
Art Center us our forced in London
project and then we applied with it to
the UK our young artists festivals and
we basically caught produced they event
that went really well and it was a great
success with a full house
from then on we felt really confident
with directing managing and coordinating
a large-scale projects in a variety of
different cost tents contexts and
settings such as the Whitechapel window
space which we'll see later and Vicky
and I found it
ghazan tada yeah
is a platinum by and for practitioners
and educators from several creative
fields who collaborate towards the
conception and realization of
interdisciplinary projects our team
aspires to overlap the boundaries of
several domains mediums and genres dance
design performance art sound composition
to rating architecture and the visual
arts we aim to keep an open dynamic
structure which adapts to the nature of
each project performances exhibitions
installations publications etc and the
creators involved for every scheme
intertwine our diverse backgrounds
theoretical and practical skills
creating hybrids between our respective
practices and trying to find still a
home so this is a what you're watching
now is a project that we can Kiki and I
with our team because I'm totally in
Chrome production with the architectural
Association interprofessional studio
presented last year at Lehigh lace Dance
Theatre in roehampton university as part
of our earnest emissary theses which
involved a theoretical research on
psychology and specifically on ligands
mirror stage and was applied in the live
performance which was intermediate and
interdisciplinary it was around that
time that we realized that we have
developed our own signature methodology
for a creative design process of
collective projects with James to
identify activate and empower several
potentials it was composed of
brainstorming sessions art studio
experimentations as well as a unique
combination of work shopping and
rehearsing techniques based on structure
improvisation scoring and testing so
coming out from the program we will
really feel confident in being
methodical developing our own strategies
and carving an old career path we think
in multiple levels and be able to adopt
in different professional languages as
well as having experience in so many
different creative fields is a very
attractive advantage especially nowadays
when the ground is fertile for
interdisciplinarity learn to approach
the right people be versatile be
adaptive effective and to the point the
theoretical research that we have
conducted during the course is now
advancing through our positions our
academics and lecturers in higher
education so you can see over here parts
of like our rehearsals with the
prototypes for a performative costume
that I've designed and that's the other
year day one of our collaborators she's
a dancer and choreographer and also one
of the sessions that we had for
recording sounds for the sound composer
oz Bluebird as I was performing live
projections we now also deliver
workshops in other organizations and
institutions this was again in Hampton
University and for the future our goal
is to look for opportunities to travel
our projects being in conversation with
organizations and institutions to
support our practice these are images
from a most current project which was on
seas it was presented at the Truman
brewery judo bar and stage and we are
now quite excited to be returning back
to the AAA to present and host a
workshop for the open
week in February would love to see you
there yeah that's yeah for generations
still talking anyway and I think this is
one of the big advantages of this
courses were there's a real overlap of
generations and of kind of conversations
going on from different experiences as
well because it's absolutely about
networking and keeping this networks on
forever they're different networks which
kind of start building on top of each
other and I think this is already
started here I mean this is not
organized in a big way these people of
three generations know each other and
learn from one another and talk
constantly to another because actually
they share their experiences and the
different phases so intricate with one
another that actually a constant
learning from even from the first
generation to the like the third one is
in either direction works constantly on
and I think this is one of the
interesting things as well which goes
already to some of the questions we were
ended is what are people doing
afterwards and I think it's it's kind of
this is the boot camp for setting up
your company but it's not in this kind
of old-fashioned way that it's like
you're by yourself
and you can do things as a one-star
Apriori architect you have to have
networks and these networks need to be
dynamic and this is what everybody is
doing right from the beginning and this
is happening within the first term and I
think it's already in the in the blood
of people just arriving October and it's
literally part of the way of working of
the entire team from the musicians to to
the dancers everybody sets up in a way
that is a constant network which is for
us as well as for the students
constantly expanding since we have done
the new division of MAS and MFA's this
has accelerated enormous lis because of
the overlap of the different students
and because of the different
how it looks as well I mean I think
there's the academic edge to the MA
where he has the possibility of going
deeper into research into a field which
otherwise might be just always staying
on the applied level it's it's so
helpful for the rest of the studio
because there is a different kind of
feedback and different kind of pathway
that leads much clearer into academia
but it's based on on applied work as
well most mal hypothetical and referred
to theory like which is maybe far it
moved here there's actually Bazin on
experience and exchange with people who
take a different pathway same with MFA
you're not like in a different MFA
program maybe where you sit and do your
own kind of projects and our soul
fighter you have to build the network
around yourself and actually start your
career within the creative fields this
is actually very rare surprisingly
because everybody thinks they're
networking but they're and they're not
and so this is a real economic advantage
of knowing how to link yourself that's
why everybody has to do as well all this
different part of our organization and
all the different kind of little
difficulties one what doesn't want to
think about in creativity but this keeps
your back free and this is what makes
projects possible so yeah
throughout the course you're gonna learn
a lot of kind of hard core details of
how to set up things how to deliver them
and actually there's no way out because
those are live projects right like right
now so you'd have to deliver you stand
in front of thousand people who want to
see a product and so you can't just to
leave by another minute so there were
other questions as well and who can
apply I think we answer that during the
talk before but as well I think I want
to lead that on as well anyway why did
you apply and I think that that it could
be quite nice like the transition of
just seeing what the studio is doing and
actually doing it I think is for most
people quite revelation I think it's a
very
make program as you mentioned the
ability to choose between an MA a
professional ma and MFA is is rather not
only rare in academia but also enables
us to meet people that the source of
interest is so wide that you benefit
from it in your final program program or
project and being a written one or art
venue or a sculpture this is all very up
to you when you kind of feel like a
grown up in this program will you choose
your path and you have time to also
introduce yourself to other disciplines
so this is kind of like a structure
platform that you can increase or are
growing with your with what you come
from before so not only what you have
achieved so far but also I really felt
that the program embraces this urge to
remain in between fields and not define
yourself as just one having one label it
is true we all have slashes Manar
artists architects an educator and when
I introduce myself is like and people
ask questions like so what is it that
you do exactly
I am the response is I'm I studied to be
versatile I've studied to be able to
combine different fields together I
don't think many people can do that as
effectively and ask it actively us we do
because this is what we spent two years
of our lives Dean and
I think it's the exposure that the
program program gives it to the student
and here it's just like it places you
out of the comfort zone in a way that
you need to adapt to every single thing
you need to learn every single media in
order to at least have be able to engage
in a discussion even if you don't
perfect it so you you feel like your
hands-on on things and you can really
talk with all people equally and have a
equality and the collaboration rather
just being in a specified form like a
specified major or or domain and this is
where you become a more powerful
negotiator let's say or a collaborator
and an artwork and I mean this is great
because for me now as an MFA I can I can
actually collaborate or choose my
collaborator collaborators wisely and
and know what I want from each one of
them how much they should put in my
project and how much I want to
participate or pitchin so this is very
this is very important yeah and to close
um that like what we really learn about
is constant exchange and communication
so start that now I mean by all means
you you can come to London and talk to
us directly or we're happy to Skype with
you I think each of them had a long
conversation with me before a year or
longer before and I think and as well
the other tutors everybody is open and
accessible this is our business like
talking to people and exchange ideas so
if you have questions do not hesitate to
contact our wonderful credit admissions
department they will put you directly in
contact with whoever you want to talk
with one our team or even that alumni
and students so and I said yeah we're
all happy to exchange yeah and check out
the websites their social media there's
updates all the time from
yeah the network can't continue
I had like befriends us on Facebook
