okay hello so I'm first of all really
really grateful to be invited to speak
here today on behalf of the New
Economics Foundation and I think this is
such a cool event that you have put on
so thank you very much for that I want
to use the sort of five minutes that
I've been given to explain to you what
agree New Deal is from the perspective
of the New Economics foundation and
before I do that I want to give you a
bit of a disclaimer that how Neff sees a
green new deal and how I see a green new
deal personally might actually be
somewhat different from how other people
would conceptualize it and I think
that's completely fine but we should
just always keep that in mind so the
green New Deal takes its name from the
New Deal which was done by the Roosevelt
administration in the 1930s in the US I
don't have time to go into that now but
if you're interested we can talk a bit
more about that in the discussion so the
green New Deal is really two things in
our perspective it's a movement a
political movement that challenges the
status quo and ask for change and then
on the other hand it's a package of
policies and investments led by the
government that can deliver that change
that the movement asked for and across
these two aspects I think the main goal
the primary aim of the green New Deal is
to achieve rapid decarbonisation so this
is in response to the climate crisis it
is to just stop emitting carbon
superfast basically that's the main goal
but as we've sort of already discussed
before there's sort of really good ways
of going about that and really shitty
ways of going about that as well so I
think the green new deal stands for a
set of characteristics that you want to
be guided by as you have that transition
the first one we find really
here is to generate good green jobs in
the process and by the way when I say
first second and so on is not because
one of them is more important than the
other it's just that although they they
come to mind then you want to make sure
these jobs go where they're most needed
so for example in the UK there's huge
spatial inequalities that also intersect
with other inequalities as well you want
to keep that in mind in order to achieve
this it has to be routed in place so
again in the UK in order to make sure
the resources go where they're really
most needed
you can't just be sitting in London
saying uh we'll do some investment here
and we'll do some investment over there
and then it's done
problem solved that would be the worst
thing that we can do I think the guiding
principle in anything that the green New
Deal does really has to be
intersectionality and finally and this
was I think came up for discussion quite
a lot already in the previous session it
has to have an international perspective
even if you take the policy package as
being domestic policies we need to take
global responsibility and yeah how this
can be done is difficult but it needs to
happen
so across these different
characteristics you you can see the
movement and the policy is kind of
enabling each other and enforcing each
other
I also quickly want to say what I think
that the greener deal is not so I think
the greener deal and some people might
agree disagree with me on that is not
unfortunately a solution to all of our
environmental problems it also is not a
solution to all of our social justice
and political problems either but I
think the context that we're in
yes globally but definitely in the UK
right now is that we have a broken
economic system that doesn't work for
most people we have a crisis of politic
and we definitely have a crisis of
democracy so how we see the green New
Deal is that it's it's quite firmly with
the specific aim to decarbonize within
the wider transition and a wider system
change that is needed to address all of
these three different things so the
theme of this session is a new politics
and creating new alliances so in this in
relation to that I want to end on two
things that I think the green New Deal
has to achieve to create a new politics
so the first thing would be a new type
of policy design so how do we have to
design policies what do we have to
prioritize and the policies are there
certain mechanisms we have to build in
to achieve these radical decarbonisation
outcomes that we want to get but the
second thing and I think this is
actually more important than the first
is to create a new political process so
it's like asking the hard questions how
our decisions made who gets invited at
the table when you make decisions once
you're at the table whose opinion is
actually taken into the final decision
and I think this will really be a huge
struggle because it challenges the power
structures that exist and it challenges
where the money is at and is really
really difficult but it's the most
important thing that needs to be nailed
if the green new deal should deliver
what it actually aims for and also be
sustainable for the future
thank you
[Applause]
hi so I work for two think-tanks one is
called Commonwealth and the other one is
called autonomy we are there both to
think tanks on the left developing
policy in the case of Commonwealth it's
mainly about future ownership systems
and in the case of autonomy it's about
developing sustainable practices of work
and of leisure
I guess the project I worked on is
actually collaboration between those two
think tanks
it's called green New Deal city 2030 and
it's um it try to tease out yeah maybe
Thanks it's trying to tease out I guess
what what are all the issues that we can
actually visualize in the city before
even planning one back and we're good so
that's the drawing we worked on and it's
it's I'm nervous showing it to
architects I'm also a tech school but
this was really this is really something
for the public it was um please go and
check it out it's just look up green new
deal city 2030 it'll be it'll be better
than this it moves and zooms in and out
and you get a bit of a sort of utopian
description of what of what our city
will look like in 2030
[Music]
so I guess one thing is transit networks
low-carbon affordable healthy public
oriented ways of getting around which
means also shared cargo bikes high-speed
rail I heard somebody saying that
actually electric cars might not be the
solution I agree as far as sort of say
in the visual solutions are concerned
but if we're talking about shared fleets
I think it could be a very interesting
thing to look into then one is housing
and let's say all the the unprecedented
amount of work that we need to do to
upgrade and expand our building stock
and we need to use this as a means to
deliver good secure you unionized work
so that's that's that's something that
should really we should start thinking
about the kinds of jobs that were making
when we're thinking of updating our
building stock mmm
just one more one is energy systems here
we have an example of a sort of locally
owned biomass energy system which is
meant for recycling and collectivizing
energy from for a whole nail em nail her
hood so it's not just about clean energy
it's also about of affordable and
democratically managed energy one more
and at the base of all this will be a
did the democratization of fine of fire
and Finance and let's say make it easy
to access financial tools for local
initiatives will be key and that those
local in initiatives are grounded in a
green in the dust riyals strategy will
be absolutely key and that we need to
think that a green industrial strategy
will will will need a reshaping of our
working patterns and and and really we
need to move away from from a sort of
work centered so xiety which just go
jump to and that means developing new
forms of public luxury so that means
cultural spaces parks civic spaces
free social goods with which can make
our lives more joyful more caring and
ultimately just more rich in human
experience and that's something that
speaks to to what was said at the
keynote lecture about about its
tablished new modes of conviviality I
think that's that's that's gonna be a
huge part of the way we need to
understand our work as architects in the
developing understanding that developing
ways of being together is integral to
designing sustainable
existence for us all those are all the
points that the green you do City goes
through its the text is a lot more
eloquent than myself and it doesn't
stutter but yeah hello
hi everyone yes well thank you for the
invitation and obviously for the great
organization of the event I am here
basically to say that a green new deal
is a huge movement happening now many in
the US and now in the UK and I think
architects should be part of that
movement and especially on that
conversation because his it's not it's
nothing it's not something that is set
in stone but it's something that it's
working progress no it's already it's a
conversation that has been happening
between many people professions etc
politicians sorry economy is the
activist and I think it is important
that architects should be part of that
conversation because whatever a green
new deal means it will have an impact in
in space and and we do engage in that
conversation it would actually mean a
way to get away of the focus of the
profession right now of being solidly
driven by a private interest no service
provider no specific private clients no
and perhaps it will also force us to pop
to focus on the public interest and that
basically means that we should focus
also into the design of policies because
one of the things that we do
at least in the program that I run here
at the architectural Association in
landscape urbanism is to welcome the
premises on the premise that policies
design space more than architects or at
least we're talking about the whole
planetary space and and because every
single policies that is deployed it has
a special impact and we should be able
to get involved in those design and I
will show quickly an example of that but
just before that well as part of that is
this is the the palace the South Palace
of a Wales in an area called run the
Bulge and in here what you can see is a
forest green forest and new energy no
wing wind farms and and this is in an
area that used to be one of the main
producers of coal in UK and basically is
an area and that transition away from
coal in unjust transition where the
majority of the people were left behind
and it's now one of the most private
area and this is the landscape that you
see around the towns and that is
surrounded by this forest and windmills
but this is part of this is not part
let's say of the of the people that live
there because this this land that you
see around has been enclosed not part of
in like a modern enclosure because they
are not part of the management of this
forest and in women's so the question
one of the question we ask is what is
behind this so-called new green policies
know that are supposed to help us get
out of the climate crisis no because
these are all good stuff let's say and
and one of the things that we try to
push is the understanding of you know
the space
the energy production produce so for
example in this map this is shown the
coal production in UK at this time no so
these are all the calories they used to
existing in the areas before a toucher
finally closed and down at the end of
the 70s here you see how the production
of energy at least within UK transfer
into a oil and gas production so what
you see in black in the north part is
the North Sea and all the pipes lines
etc that transfer all the fuel into UK
and this and because of UK has committed
no the carbonized economy by climate
change by 2050 this is an image that our
students produced that what would be the
landscape no that the UK will require to
be a renewable no to use renewable
energy no so here you can see all the
space that wind farms solar farms and
biofuel and all the sort of energy will
occupied in the space but the problem
with this map is that this is focusing
only within UK No so this is only
thinking about well greening UK but what
will happen if you see these two the
lenses of the whole planet and this map
is showing basically that even though UK
is committed itself to decarbonize
within UK territory
it's just exporting the production of
fossil fuel away to the global South no
and so in this map you can see all the
concessions that I've been given in the
incentives or subsidies that ppl and
other companies are being given by the
UK government to actually extract fossil
fuels no so there's a double sort of
discourse so coming back to the South
valleys of Wales and this is how the
landscape is looking like right now no
and and this is a diagram that explained
it
shishun of this territorial explain in
the bottom my diagram maybe even if it's
too small it shows the location of the
calories and gradually throughout the
years the transformation of that
landscape into the forest know that I
showed at the beginning and in the final
diagram at the top it shows the
introduction of the windmills but this
is something very crucial because the
people that lives there they don't
consider this as part of their community
actually if you go to the forest is is
not a forest so what is not of course
because it's not biodiversity the trees
have been planting so close that they
don't allow the light to go through and
it's been used more as a wood factory
rather than as a biodiversity system and
also it's detached from the people and
if you see also soil sample say you can
actually confirm know how that is that
forest even though it's green and and
and how the touch it is from from from
the community so if you actually go and
see talk to the people in there they
don't consider that part of the
community so in a way one of the things
that we're doing and this is part
fantasies of our students is to to
understand how a potential green new
deal we should and we could involve the
communities within these landscapes now
so because right now even though they
are so-called green they are still
keeping the people away from them so
even though just coming back at the in
finalised my community beginning we
should be able to join the green unity
and the conversation we should be
critical and question who is benefiting
out of that a potential movement towards
renewable or how we should be able to
involve the community the people into
something that it's beneficial to
everyone like because basically as
christina was saying at the very
beginning
in a economy that is brokenness only
work for a certain amount of people so
if we aim to the carbonized economy if
we aim to transform it to something that
could be the green new deal and we
should be able to involve all of the
people education in ways
[Applause]
hello it's really cool to see the
Rhondda Valley presented at the AAA I
lived in the Rhondda for a while
it's exactly it is great this is a ham
I'm gonna use a lot of slides so I'm
afraid I'm sorry that they're all behind
you but if you could Crane somehow that
would be cool this is a hamsters baby
hamster hamsters until they reach
puberty double in size every week
extraordinarily fast growing until they
hit puberty and if hamsters continued to
grow at this pace by the time they reach
their birthday they would weigh
something like 900 billion tons and be
capable of consuming the entire global
corn crop within a single day this is a
animation actually made by NASA while
ago exploring the limits to growth and
we kind of understand this implicitly in
our bones that nothing can grow forever
if you went to the doctor and the doctor
said oh my god
you've got a growth you'd be pretty
alarmed by that but for some reason as
as kind of actors in the contemporary
economy we have this idea that the
economy can grow forever it's sort of
except there's an exception from all
other forms of thing that the economy
can grow forever and this is kind of bad
news because it's become very clear
recently it so turns out that as you
grow an economy you also grow its carbon
emissions and other effects and
externalities so this is a graph kind of
plotting that and in fact even over the
last two decades with huge effort being
made to decarbonize the economy still
the only time when actual carbon
emissions went down was that little bump
near 2010 2009 2008 where the global
economy contracted due to the recession
even then even if you could decarbonize
at the economy we have an energy problem
because energy consumption grows with
the economy and currently grows were
slowly about 3% a year that might seem
kind of like manageable to you but 3% a
year is actually
huge a huge problem 3% a year means
you're doubling roughly every 20 years
and you know what happens when think
double and double and double and double
they get very very big surprisingly
quickly and this is a photo of the Sun
which is the amount of energy that you
would need to power the economy within
less than a thousand years a three
percent growth so that is like quite a
mind-boggling statistic so what this
means is that actually economic growth
probably can't go on forever and there
are aspects of the green New Deal who
appreciate this but there are other
aspects you kind of see it as still a
growth project that we can make lots of
new jobs we can grow the economy we'll
just do it in a a yummy way rather than
a bad way and I think this is a problem
for architecture so I've just created a
festival in Oslo exploring the
architecture of D growth which is an
economy designed to shrink in such a way
that people's lives are better and the
planet is nourished I think there's a
good alliance through May between
architecture and D growth because growth
is pretty bad for architecture this is a
map of central London that the Private
Eye made showing all the buildings which
are owned in tax havens why would you in
a building in a tax haven do that when
you're more interested in how the
building is performing as financial
commodity than necessarily as an actual
building as a place to live or work or
play this is I'm afraid very small but
this is showing the percentages of
properties I think in Lambeth of new
houses completed that was sold to
overseas investors so some of them will
be planning to rent them out but a lot
of them won't they'll be thinking of
these buildings purely as financial
assets and let's zoom in on one
particular this 85% sold to overseas
investors 44% of which came from
jurisdictions with a high risk of
corruption so not not only architecture
as money but architecture is dirty money
and this is what you get a sort of
anodyne banal lacking in civic anything
high carbon building not exactly good
for London even if it is
and good for whoever which investors
have funded it so in the remaining time
I just want to explore some possible
metaphors
for what could be considered an
architecture of D growth an architecture
that is made for reasons other than
growing the economy well maybe it's a
bit like a maple something that is made
for a purely cultural reason that has no
economic validity at all and yet
throughout Austria and other parts of
the world maples are made every year as
structures that represent something to
the people who live there
maybe architecture that is made to help
us do something that's very hard to
express its value in economic terms so
this is a temple made by David best in
Derry in Northern Ireland helping a
community to heal after the troubles and
it was in fact burnt to the ground in a
sort of epic ceremony very very hard to
kind of quantify that economically maybe
it's a kind of architecture that doesn't
hang around for very long
that is like requires constant
maintenance and repair because a kind of
growth based architecture tends to use
very durable high carbon materials
sticks around for a long time but it's a
sound investment whereas this is the
mosque in Jenay and Mali which is made
of much mud bricks and then mud render
has to be repaired every single year
maybe not like the best choice if you
are interested in pure ly in economic
terms of how the mosque performs but
culturally very interesting because the
whole town come and repair the mosque in
this ceremony in this the architectural
expression of this these kind of studs
that are all over its walls actually
enable that as scaffolding maybe an
architecture of deep growth could be an
architecture which allows you to escape
the productivity paradigm so rather than
spending all your time working and
producing giving you an excuse to do
something else something unproductive
these are the hair hairs by Studio weave
which are sort of ordered or declare
like viewing platforms for sound just
now we allow you to listen to the
landscape not very productive maybe it's
a form of architecture which separates
the value of structures from the value
of land and I guess it's sort of growing
a growing number of people now talking
about how land is the primary vehicle
through which
we need to be thinking strategically
about urbanism and this is a project
I'll start really just looking at all of
the different ways that people around
the world have managed to literally tear
apart buildings from land it's slightly
tongue-in-cheek but I think there's an
interesting thing we could come learn
from from practices like this maybe its
form of architecture where materials are
not bonded together so powerfully so
this is a project where it's structural
columns but they're made out of gravel
in backs so there's no glue there's no
cement the whole thing is essentially
borrowed from the earth and could be
returned to the earth at any time
Paloma this is one of your slides but
this is I'm showing this to kind of
metal architecture which medals with
existing markets and existing economies
so if the market isn't producing
low-carbon materials
why not produce a line of hemp panels as
certain people in the room are doing or
as BC are doing in Belgium using the
earth mined from demolition sites to
produce new products maybe it's
architecture that constrains urban
growth this is an Australian proposal to
surround cities with burial belts
so you imbue a green belt with a kind of
with the sanctity of respect for the
dead which is one of the few things that
seems to cut through against the logic
of economic growth or maybe it's simply
an architecture that is made
collectively without any economic
motivation so I just included this these
are cans they found all over the world
they've been around since prehistory you
can't own a can you can't buy a care no
one there's no client commissioning a
can they just arrived people choose sort
of organically to start placing rocks in
a place to mark a root of a mountain and
then other people add to the can over
time worthless in economic terms but if
you're lost in the fog on the mountain
this thing can save your life by guiding
you on a safe track back to back to the
land what could be more valuable than
that thanks
[Applause]
hi so I'm Eleanor and I'm sort of here
amongst you I want to first of all
welcome and salute you for your your
stamina and your commitment on a Friday
the whole date will the whole afternoon
and just to point out that I think this
is what we will all need in abundance
from here on in so I think there's
already some learning that's been done
today as you sit here I also want to
thank the organizers for bringing us
together when I when I received the
email I I was both heartened by this
mobilization and also humbled as I'm not
really sure how I might be of assistance
so what I've done is during the course
of the day and as a kind of consequence
of only having free time on the bus
between school runs and tutoring and all
the rest of it I've written some notes
from the back maybe they're footnotes or
endnotes which channel some quotes and
tropes that you're already familiar with
it's titled General Assembly this is the
articulation of a new politics this is
the Alliance a General Assembly
if architecture declares then how can it
act if now we know then what do we do as
she said right here right now if we want
to decolonize decarbonize and design
this green new real this new ideal if we
want to dissenter it from dominance from
the tyranny of a parochial and
nationalist impulse then let us question
forms of freedom that he invoked and how
and with what might we fill them we've
been there before as John said let us
weave that learning web that he had
written that holds us together beyond
our brand allegiance from our petitions
from our round tables to become a shared
imaginary a share
action we've been there before let us
see how these imaginaries might chart
coordinates of as he asked where do we
land in this terrain of migration all
tried politics in this hothouse of
global warming again and again and again
how do we move from declaring to acting
I'm proposing three forms of freedom and
action we might discuss today and Beyond
over a beer and out of this room forms
that we've tried before they're nothing
new I want us to test the critical
limits of these inherited concepts of
ideologies of mythology's to layer them
with what we now know about the dangers
and delights of participate democracy
the objective is to build open active
institutions of mutual care of
reciprocity um cluster reciprocity and
redistribution to accommodate what some
would call regenerative dimensions
beyond human exceptionalism to
incorporate acknowledge and accede to
more than human agencies so what are
these forms and formats I am talking
about one radical pedagogy go read up
about it two radical municipal ism go
read up about it through learning webs
in a sense I would posit that these
source codes of these forms and they not
new they're actually all from the 70s or
even prior to that these formats and
protocols are already here in this room
you carry them how do your projections
of a decolonize decarbonized terrestrial
form attain an afterlife beyond its
declarations how do they become actions
projects propositions of a new polity
and I'm not using politics here there
are some of you who draw some of you who
write some of you who talk some of you
who build and unbilled recover broadcast
loudly act quietly deeply those who know
how how to articulate legal legal
leverage pushed
Nicoll limits combine disciplinary
dimensions you already know enough make
your hashtag shape your web form your
alliance don't ask for permission it's
over to you and to us
[Applause]
