good evening everyone thank you very
much for coming today my name is Ed
bottoms I run their AAA archives and I
just like to introduce our speaker
tonight we're very grateful to have
Mohammed Ali Sahib here today and to
talk to us Mohammed is an independent
researcher writer and academic he
qualified as an architect at the New
Jersey Institute of Technology and then
went on to do an MA in architectural
studies at MIT gaining a PhD at NYU in
Department in Middle East Middle East
Studies alongside writing and teaching
Mohammed is also the curator the British
Museum's Modern Egypt project where he's
responsible for building a new
collection a 20th century Egyptian
material culture thinking about the
lecture tonight I was very conscious
that within our own archive collections
we're all really or - - aware really
that our historic holdings relating to
Egypt are very heavily biased towards
material gathered primarily in the
specific context of Imperial exploration
when a number of a graduates and 1920s
30s and earlier became leading figures
in Egypt exploration society and worked
as archaeology
archeologists photographers surveyors
etc on many of the famous state digs
taking place in Luxor and Amman
exception and whilst we do have
significant collections which address
modernism in many other many different
parts of the world the archive is very
silent on Egyptian modernism and we hope
today that you'll be able to bring out
and talk about in address some of the
issues and then questions behind this
[Applause]
thank you very much Ede and and
tentative a a for inviting me it's it's
a huge honor for me to speak here today
so something happened in early 20th
century Egypt where identity was being
formulated and questions about what it
means to look Egyptian and to be
Egyptian and what it means to design as
an Egyptian were quite important
questions to ask somehow by the 1930s
most Egyptian cities at least the
downtown's of all cities including
provincial cities you know had buildings
that looked like this which is mainly
maybe not why you would expect to see
you know in Egypt but the trigger for
this was really 1919 when Egyptians
revolted a revolt that was driven by
nationalist politics that was partially
against British imperialism and that
revolt really questioned what it means
to design an Egyptian object to design
an Egyptian home to live in Egyptian
life and to be a modern Egyptian what
you're looking at is a cartoon from a
later political revolutionary event this
is a 1953 cartoon that kind of depicts I
think the aspirations of this utopianism
that kind of comes immediately after a
moment of revolt so both after 1919 and
after 1952 aspirations were quite high
and questions about identity were quite
wide open and and these manifested in
many different ways both in architecture
but also in terms of material culture
and objects that people use in everyday
life and even in things such as fonts
and typeface what you're looking at I
think is a nice illustration that
encapsulates that how to say the word
modern in two different languages in
English versus Arabic and aesthetically
really applied completely different
notions and ideas
and you know some of these ideas like I
said materialized into object some of
which are now here in London as part of
the Modern Egypt project at the British
Museum what you're looking at is a early
typewriter that was commissioned by the
Egyptian government sometime in the
early 1920s
so again immediately following the 1919
revolution and it was commissioned to
manufacturers in Syracuse New York
called Smith premier who were
essentially special specialists in the
making of typewriters for languages that
are used in different latin different
typefaces and different fonts and
different letters than than latin
letters so here is a machine that in a
way encapsulates that moment but as a
sort of a at the top of the scale this
is a state commissioned machine and so
this is the way it presented itself
despite the fact that it's a machine
made to mechanize the Arabic language it
identifies itself with this finally
paint hand-painted gilded lettering and
so again what you saw in that sign is I
would say not a conflict but in fact
actually kind of a synthesis between
different notions of what it means to be
modern and this manifested or translated
into architecture in buildings that look
like this this is actually a to two
villas that are interconnected into one
building that's why you see on the left
for two sisters what you see on the
right is a residential building in
downtown Cairo that was built or that
was commissioned by the governor and
Alexandria as his property in in in
Cairo and here you see another villa in
the district of Heliopolis which you can
tell was on the outskirts of the city
quite empty around it again by two
sisters interestingly today only half of
it is existent and it's turned into a
hair salon I believe while the other
half has been torn down by the well the
inheritors of the other person and it's
a tall tower directly attached to the
building and again here
another example from Heliopolis and I
think it's important at this point to
actually point out that all of the
buildings that you just saw except for
the building permission by the
Alexandria governor no longer exists and
not only do they no longer exist they're
also not really documented with the
exception of the few photographs that we
have of them published in magazines at
the time so the architectural profession
in Egypt has very early roots it starts
really to take to take shape in the
beginning of the 19th century with
Muhammad Ali coming to Egypt and form
and building a new nation and in the
beginning it was purely about military
and it was purely about facilities that
are necessary for the military and later
on in the nineteenth century Europeans
European expertise played a big role in
the development of the profession mostly
serving state commissions but also
elites in the form of palaces and palace
grounds and so on but something happens
in the late 19th century in the early
20th century 1897 for example was a huge
building boom Cairo was a kind of Dubai
of its time and a lot of development and
and building activities were taking
place most of this was still dominated
by European architects and when I say
Europeans I'm mostly speaking about
Italians French with some English as
well and Austrians however again because
of the 1919 revolve this this really
transforms and you have the founding of
a new class of Egyptian art that both
men and women mostly men of course as it
happens at the time and this is what you
see here for example is architecture
students in 1949 a bit later building an
architectural model of the export
grounds in Cairo which have later become
sort of the heart of Egypt's Ministry of
Culture and today this is where the
Opera House's
is located and what's really important
here too is to note that we're not
talking about individual cases of
Egyptian art that's rising after the
moment we're talking about an entire
transformation of the profession where
the main players are all Egyptian and
here are some of the prominent names
it's difficult to create a full roster
of who was really active again part of
the the lack of documentation and study
that this that this history has received
you know only the really let's say the
top of the list is known because of
their building activities and because
their names are documented sometimes on
the buildings themselves in the form of
Platts I'll quickly introduce a few of
those the ones highlighted let's just
look at once alumina has this is him at
the fan art school in zamalek and the
very buildings named after the buildings
are often named in anti-ro after the
person who commissioned them so there
are twin buildings right on Tahrir
Square today built in 1934 and then this
is another building that he built
further north west commissioned by a
woman named ng Zelda in 1937 any jeantel
these are quite art actually different
buildings and this is something really
important to note here that our cadets
did not necessarily because what were
used to what we were usually taught
about let's say European modernists is
that they had a very distinct
architectural style that they
implemented or there's a particular
growth or an evolution and their
aesthetic that somehow continuous and
and I think what's strikingly different
here is that while art that's had a lot
of their own ideas that they were loyal
to they were also quite flexible to
really essentially work for the the
person this permission in the property
so so the same art the depth within you
know the range of 3 years can create
both of these buildings another
prominent name is Mahmoud riad Mahad was
quite an important figure not only
because he was a very active art that
but he also served the state in in many
offices he was
point the head of the municipality and
he built a lot of buildings that were
for large insurance companies and banks
for example and what you're looking at
here is an example on the hard street in
downtown Cairo again built completed in
1952 and there you see him with uncle
film you know the leading singer of the
time one of his most prominent buildings
is the Arab lead again on Tahrir Square
completed in 1958 which again you know
from from a modernist history point of
view as we know it you know this kind of
fits multiple categories if you zoom in
and you looked at the portal the main
gate it's quite decorated with Moorish
patterns which you know you wouldn't
think aren't necessarily what would be
considered sort of mainstream modernist
at the time in the 1950s so it's a
building that sort of has the essence of
a building let the UN you know where
there's a Secretariat tower there is a
main conference hall and then there is
sort of offices for different kinds of
stuff in a separate wing with a grand
entrance so it has that kind of let's
say party or that kind of diagram but it
looks quite different when you look at
its details
I need Rob is another important
architect of the period he was also the
Dean of the School of Architecture at
our University for quite a long time and
he was the architect that built the
house of uncle soon in a location that
today is still remembered as you know
home consumed we need to write a type
see in Cairo and you say no when you say
I want to go to room everybody knows
this is the spot despite the fact that
the house no longer exists and as you
can see there are several features in
the house you know quite streamline
Moderne lots of trivy lines lots of
influence by nautical architecture but
the interior is really quite lavish in
terms of its minimal yeah it's quite
traditional in many ways and the
furniture would not be called modernist
by any stretch we were looking at in
this
so again this could be seen like I was
saying about the font and some sort of
conflict or inconsistency but in fact I
just see it as another definition or
another reading of what it means to
design and to build something that is
specifically called modern at the time
and again you know the same art that can
build a house for the most famous and
important at cinder at the time but he
can also design housing projects for
railway workers and that kind of
versatility is is important to note this
is the bench miss that style industrial
complex that he designed and Mahalo
Cobra which remains until today and it's
quite a landmark site Charlotte which is
another interesting player in this field
his buildings are particularly they
stand out for his curves that you see in
the balconies again which is something
that you would see from the period so
this is not necessarily what I always
want to remind people is when I talked
about modernism in Egypt I'm not trying
to show you something that you've never
seen before in fact I'm trying to show
you something that you should be able to
relate to what's really happening in the
rest of the world in terms of what
architects are doing their details their
ideas and sometimes the way they make
mistakes by combining things that you
would think don't grow together here's
someone that uses its supposed you know
uses brick as a kind of veneer which you
wouldn't think is necessarily something
you should do if you're you know pure
modernist yet he also combines it with
these rounded balconies and the
entrances in all these buildings are
really quite grand and they take the
scale of really 19th century kind of
apartment blocks so these are not
modernist entrances that are you know
constructed in terms of space with tight
stairs the stairs and the entrances
entire rows buildings from the period
despite these tons of facades
are really quite open and lavish norms
Aviv is quite different in in the sense
that he
really saw himself first and foremost as
an engineer before as an architect he
was a specialist in really in concrete
and used it as his as his play-doh and
and you know this is one of it one of
the examples of his churches they were
all quite playful in terms of form lots
of focus and form and you can see in
another example here in portside so
again not limited to Cairo alone but his
buildings legends as you can see are not
necessarily all following a particular
style but they all use concrete or
stretch the the ways in which concrete
can be used at least as technologies
were available in Cairo this building in
the middle is the first tall residential
building
it's 22 floors in 1954 Cairo which was
quite exceptional it's still quite tall
today in the context of downtown Cairo
and then a la Haram headquarters
completed in 1968 consists of two
volumes with quite a lot of high tension
concrete in this structure as well and
so all these buildings were really done
by a community of Architects that belong
to an active profession that not only
built but also engaged in professional
conferences that were often regional so
here for example is the Egyptian
delegation at the Arab engineering
conference that was held in Damascus in
1946 the first one is 1945 immediately
after the war that was held in Cairo and
the idea was that engineers and artists
and really part eight now that the war
has ended can really partake in the
building of a new Middle East and this
is hence the sort of the focus on the
region the third conference was done in
Beirut and so on so not only did the
these architects meet build but they
also published quite extensively this is
just an example of one of the magazines
produced at the time and many of these
are one-offs you know somebody wants to
try a new public you know publishing
entity and it doesn't work out so we end
up finding in the markets today as I
sort of try to do my research lots of
these
you know one offs but really there's
others that are quite a long history
including this one that I'll mention
I'll speak a bit more about it in in a
few minutes my Donatella Mara which was
established in 1939 and it lasted until
1959 and so I just before going forward
how you know the question is really how
did this architectural aesthetic become
so dominant and so prominent in the
Egyptian front that's despite the lack
of sort of the rise of a heroic figure
that you know something like a little
 or so on that sort of is known as
the Egyptian modernist the short answer
is that this was really a real estate
driven profession and that the
aspiration was not about being
avant-garde as much as it was about you
know using modern modern materials and
technologies available in Egypt at the
time in the most that they can in their
sort of purest form so there's what a
huge rejection between what these are
tips were doing to towards what European
architects were doing before which was
largely neoclassical inspired and very
much facade oriented and you see this
really quite clearly in the advertising
at the time it's all about materials
it's all about concrete it's all about
the introduction of steel into the
marketplace it's all the introduction
it's about the introduction of glass you
know in certain ways whether it's sheets
large sheets for windows or just
different kinds of materials so really
it's material driven based
unavailability in this particular
context but this this interest to sort
of design new modern but also useful
things was not limited to to space an
architecture it also went into object
design and furniture and so for example
ADL was quite a prominent company that
was all about creating modern furniture
out of metal for households and later on
expanded to serve offices and even
government offices unfortunately the the
really beautiful factory building was
just demolished two weeks ago for
absolutely no reason
it could have been you know a cultural
center or a co-working space for
designers and artists I'm not sure the
trade have been many options many ways
to utilize the building and to revive
this this history of this company that
really was in every household and every
government office for a droid you know
30 40 years and today you know very few
people would remember this and you know
this that was not unique many companies
were doing the same but this also draws
into graphic design that was obviously
most visible in terms of advertising and
you can see here the again this is an ad
for cement tiles really this is this is
what you see the materials and not only
that there were also exhibitions about
the materials so this is an exhibition
by a nationally owned concrete company a
cement company again showcasing the the
new material and how it's available in
the market on the market in Egypt and
what sort of the company can offer in
terms of how people can build and design
structures and so what I'm trying to say
here is the art that's in a way found
themselves as the figures the lead
figures that can mobilize and move these
developments and also serve a
marketplace that's seeking both
buildings and items and objects to
populate these buildings so drum
Bartolomeo magazine which had a quarrel
I think in salon consisted run for 20
years
sometimes the publication was
interrupted for example during World War
two and there was a shortage of paper
the issues were less they were skinnier
but you know it lasted for 20 years and
the founder of the magazine is psychic a
team who I would say is the closest
person that one can call as sort of the
let's say the mobilizer or the head of a
movement and this is actually another
important point is that part I think of
the sort of dismissal of what happens in
places like Egypt is that you know the
lack of a heroic figure that comes out
with a manifesto that's
you know this is what the future should
look like you know cytanium wasn't
necessarily trying to do that he wasn't
trying to change the world however he
was trying to preach to the local
audience to say that what we've been
seeing in our cities is a problem in
terms of its design and what the
government should do is to actually play
a bigger role in implementing materials
and using materials to build
architecture that serves the people but
also he's not a socialist in any way
although he does he does publish later
on something called socialist filler and
I'll mention this briefly it sounds like
a lot another inconsistency but I mean
he's somebody that was willing to cater
to you know all classes but of course at
the end of the day he was the son of a
Pasha a really upper-class person his
grandfather was the was the Minister of
Public Works he's a quite a privileged
man who has pitched the ETH in Zurich so
you know while he spouts of modernist
architecture in the Egyptian context as
a vehicle for progress and moving
forward to sort of satisfy the needs of
society at large at the end of the day
most of his buildings were really
catering to the bourgeoisie and to the
state but that does not I think dismiss
the importance of his ideas and also to
see them and there in the particular
context in which he was working both of
these buildings again in downtown Cairo
were completed between 1948 and 1950 I
mean for example let's state the
building on the on the Left it's a multi
multi function multi-use multi-use
building it includes obviously
commercial space on the on the front on
the on the street level there are office
spaces and then there are serviced
rooms kind of like serviced apartments
above and then the volumetric sort of
that volume on top is a villa for the
owner
demos onion so you know there's
something for everybody
and then the other building was
commissioned by an insurance company
Alexander insurance company and it's
again mostly apartments including some
duplexes and a step back that you see
was part of laws that were implemented
after World War two kind of again what
was happening in many other places in
the world step back
laws you know are quite common at the
time but he also built like I said for
the state and that actually kind of came
back to to hurt him later on this is the
headquarters of the Arab socialist Union
which is in Heliopolis and he has many
proposed but unrealized projects such as
this Church in mind you can see a lot of
you know someone like Oscar Niemeyer in
this but you know Australia Marham self
was in the until you know the early 50s
totally dismissed you know and you know
until until an exhibition was done in
MoMA yeah you know the Brazilian
modernism itself was dismissed and also
what's really important to mention here
is that psyche diem was in conversation
with Brazilian modernists more so than
he was let's say with what was going on
in the US or with what was going on in
Europe an entire issue in nineteen fifty
two of his magazine was dedicated purely
to Brazil and this is and he also
published books so we're talking about a
very active person this is his most I
would say comprehensive and important
book it's called the Socialists villa
which an interesting idea that really
takes root in somebody who comes from
quite an upper-class
setting an education both in Egypt and
in Europe that thinks a modern person in
the modern family should live a certain
lifestyle in a certain kind of space
latin villa and then trying to translate
this into a building typology that
really could potentially be used for
again all classes it failed as an idea
but nonetheless many theories that we
study in school have failed but we still
study them so we can add or one more to
them and here are some examples
from the book just put in straight pages
here you know his aspirations stretched
away beyond the borders of Egypt this is
a project for Baghdad
in 1946 this is another one for heroin
which is south and south of Cairo so
these each one of these two floor strips
is composed of duplexes so all the
apartments are two floors small square
footage about two floors I think it was
just in love with having internal stairs
in your living space and this is from
1947 this is a workers housing I believe
it was in Suez for oil oil workers and
then this is another model for new
damascus 1948 and this is the building
you had just seen previously so in
addition to to publishing extensively
and to building extensively he also was
thinking you know in larger ideas that
were more that were mostly in sort of
responses to trends and ideas that were
happening that's a metabolism so you
know there is no commitment to one kind
of idea this is clearly influenced by
metabolism and it's an urban kind of a
model that takes this as its unit so the
idea is to replicate this in this
fashion so that you can essentially
build the city that an extend forever as
much as bit as you need it this none of
this is published I found all of this is
in his archives which were deposited by
his family at the American University in
Cairo and again these were unpublished
designs and models for Nasser city which
he eventually was commissioned by the
government under the Nazi regime in the
late 50s to design and in fact Nasser
city is a notorious part of Cairo
anybody has been to Cairo Egyptians tend
to say that they don't like it
mostly because if it's modernist layouts
but also because the project was never
implemented fully the way he envisioned
it because of economical issues economic
issues and so on and also because of his
relationships our in between him and the
State
the project continued and was
implemented and quite a haphazard way
what was really implemented from his
idea is the stadium which is the first
in that not built and then the first set
of buildings in the square immediately
next to it which also involves
ministerial towers for various
ministries some of the housing models
that he developed such as this one were
in fact implemented in parts of the city
not in the plan that he initiative that
he initially wanted but the model is
nonetheless at than today and it looks
like this this is what it looks like
when it was immediately completed and I
think what's really fascinating about
this group of Architects and this moment
is while it's not really a movement in
the sense that it doesn't have
particular philosophical ideas that is
in trying to sort of implement they were
very careful to publish their own
history really quite early on so toffee
abdullah red was a very close friend to
say karim and he publishes a book called
twenties egypt in the twentieth century
or architecture in egypt in the
twentieth century this is done in 1989
in 1989 somebody's already realizing
that this moment had passed and that it
was time to put it on paper and to
document it he also was publishing sort
of let's say words for future
generations of art architects with
tenants and ideas that they should
consider and think about and you can see
on the cover is a design by site karim
for Venezuela for for a city in
Venezuela that was obviously never
implemented and not only that there were
others who were translating iconic
architects the words and ideas of art
iconic art that from around the world so
this is a book about Latrobe uzi so
again this is done in the 80s this is
another book about the true from
Mohammed Ahmed who was actually the
assistant editor of al Ahmar
zine with say a khadeem so what I'm
trying to show you in a very brief way
is that not only over these art that's
really quite active in terms of
supplying the market in Egypt with the
real estate that it desires but also are
very invested in generating knowledge
about architecture and modernist design
in the Arabic language that has been
spread throughout the Arab world since
so many the ways in which the true busey
enters the Arab world were mostly to
Cairo through these art that's and then
there are translations there readings of
liquor boozy is what ended up travelling
to Baghdad and Syria influenced in a
whole generation essentially to to
continue such ideas both a combination
of yes imported ideas and ideas do
transfer and that's nothing to be
ashamed of if anybody still claims that
ideas are pure and they're sort of the
product of genius I think they're
missing something you know transfer in
fact happens influence happens it
happens both ways and and recognizing
that it is absolutely essential and I
think it's to the credit of architects
and artists that actually name who they
were influenced by as opposed to deny it
in order to present themselves as
geniuses so the fact that you know an
artist Arab about pirate or say Kadeem
himself in some of his later building to
the central the similac tower which I
should also note was a period of
sightings practice where he was
proliferating consistently with an
artist a sculptor named Mahmoud I'm
blanking out I blanked out on this thing
but you can see the the artwork on the
facade and again a slew of other
architects were influenced by these
ideas both the ones implemented on the
ground and the ones translated from
masters abroad these are just some more
of sightings buildings that were
published quite early on in order to
make them accessible to artists across
the arab world and you can see the
influence you know and really across the
region for example in Kuwait in the Gulf
in many of the new cities in in in Saudi
Arabia at the time these were the ideas
that were the first reference point
before bringing in an architect from the
US or from somewhere else and in fact
someone that said Karim himself traveled
to the Gulf when his marketplace really
started to shrink in Egypt and one of
the examples is really this building
which was proposed in the early 60s to
be a culture palace for the city of
Mansoura was never implemented but 20
years later it was built in Kuwait as a
cinema this is another one of his sort
of conceptual projects that are very
much in tune
particularly with Latrobe you see a who
cited him openly celebrated and this was
in fact implemented it's it's a
three-part well partially implemented
it's it's a three block complex that
just what like Larry Busey includes a
commercial street within the building a
street that would have the shops and all
of the three buildings would be
connected by one podium what was
implemented later on are the two
furthest towers not the round one and
the podium that connects them was not
ever realized
Mohammed Ahmed like I said who's worked
with Kareem also went on to propose to
in sexual ideas about architecture and
how they could serve the transforming
and changing Egyptian front that after
the Revolution of 52 the need for
housing was was really quite a big
problem there was a huge demand for
housing and and I think this is really
the tipping point when the state failed
to supply not only enough spaces but
also related to provide opportunities
for others to implement solutions for
housing this is when the informal sort
of really creeps into Egyptian cities
and has since dominated and so what's
important to keep so basically cytanium
is my guy he's for me the leader of
the closest thing to that one control as
a leader of of this group of people that
have just start about I think the idea
and it's really important to mention his
relationship to the state
this is him explaining or so casing an
architectural model for called the
another per design for the Mansoura
culture palace to the Minister of
Culture 1960 which looks like this a
little bit more subdued from the brief
previous model and again this is the
same idea that you see in the first
model implemented here and then the
different way for a suit and other
province and again was never implemented
and then this is an unrealized Hotel and
Casino combo that was done in 1955 and
the edge of downtown Cairo and again was
not implemented what's really important
for me to mention here is that I'm
showing you all this at the end about
the relationship between this architect
and the state is the relationship soured
and cytanium spent the last four decades
of his life under house arrest by his
house wasn't so that it was it's it's
really quite nice whatever one of my
dreams is actually to the family still
owns it and they don't live in it and
they're very open and willing to the
idea of transforming it into some sort
of cultural center focus on the life of
site Kadeem where perhaps an
insufficient space and an archive and so
on so if somebody out there wants to
make this happen let me know but you
know the relationship between
architecture and politics is was not new
psych-k diem was not the first sort of
to to to break that barrier
it happened in different ways previously
so for example this is the Egypt Central
Bank as it was built during colonial
times a British colonial times and when
British troops were demanded to leave
Egyptian cities one of the first things
that we're done is actually to renovate
the building and transform its design so
I think it's it's really quite an
important example to keep in mind the
fact that one of the first are
by the state immediately after the let's
say the eviction or you know the
withdrawal of British troops from
Egyptian cities was to go to the Central
Bank which is really the symbol of why
the British were in Egypt in the first
place it was about the banking system it
was about the economy it was about money
and as soon as the left in 1947 Egyptian
cities to to be limited to the Suez
Canal Zone the building is transformed
into a modernist one with an added floor
a clear simple facade different
materials but the building remained
there was not demolished it wasn't a new
building it was a renovation it was a
ton of a facelift it was the
announcement of a new era and you see
this again after 1952 with the Nazi
regime where the Cairo tower is the most
note you know notable example of this
where you know the rumor is that you
know it was built with a gift by the
Americans just way in the Cold War and
instead you know we got this monument so
you know politics and architecture
particularly in this kind of direction
modernist design and this is by now
Habib again the engineer architect that
I mentioned earlier so how does Egypt
trigger in the history of modernism and
I think I'll just start you know I'll
answer this with a very recent article
in The Guardian and one of you know one
of brains newspapers where Jonathan
Jones I've never heard of him before but
apparently everybody knows him said in
relation to the Egyptian surrealism
exhibition that's currently at the Tate
Modern and he said that Egyptian
surrealist cringed before the might of
Paris as artists and writers did all
over the world at the time why should we
look at second-rate imitations of a
modern French style when we could be
contemplating a majestically beautiful
minbar carved in Cairo in the 15th
century and I just hear like a lot of
music in the background I mean
essentially what Jonathan Jones is
saying is that you know modernism has a
center is a very clear center it's Paris
in this case in reference to surrealism
and that everything else is
as a knockoff it says certain recopy and
I must say that you know I've been you
know interested in modernism in Egypt
particularly architecture you know for
most of my adult life after school so
every single time that I did a
presentation in in a western setting but
the first question is and why is this
important it looks that a knockoff of
liquor boozy and this does happen and I
think really the roots of this is quite
really outdated ideas about the history
of art and the history of modernism in
particular that really can be traced for
example to something called the Fletcher
a tree of architecture which was quite
you know relevant until not that long
ago until the 1970s it was in some
textbooks and it has many variations
this is a particular version from 1954
and what the tree of art that really
symbolizes is that you know taking the
root or the the diagram of a tree to say
essentially that there are dead branches
that emerge out of a tree they stopped
they become irrelevant over time and you
know it's the part of the tree which is
of course Greek Roman Romanesque and in
this particular version it's American
with the flat iron at the top because
it's 1954 you know that's still seen as
the pinnacle of architecture and design
and you know everything else through the
I think there's that Egyptian some one
of the dead trees down here and the
first row along with a Syrian Peruvian
and Mexican and Indian and so on this
was taught in art that your schools and
some are touched rules as late as the
70s in media maybe even the 80s so it's
no surprise that in an in you know to a
Western audience a well-educated Western
audience the perception is we own this
thing we own progress in modernity in
its manifestations in terms of
architecture and design is one of the
outcomes of this and therefore when we
see someone let's say karim we just
think of liquor boozy and we say well
why should I care and the reason I say
you should care is because there's local
history and history has specificity in
the Egyptian front that someone let's
say Karim and all of the other art
that's that we've sport but of sporting
about come out of a really real national
struggle about
identity that again grows back to 1919
revolution in this particular case I
show you here an example of a proposal
for the Egyptian Exhibition in the 1939
its position in New York and guess what
it looks like an ancient Egyptian yeah
futurist kind of building exhibition
hall and it was done by the art that
Mustafa family who was the architect of
the palace at the time who built quite
monumental and stately buildings all
across the capital including the
mausoleum for saad zaghloul who was the
political leader of the 1919 revolution
so at that moment in the 1920s in the
first decade after the 1919 revolution
you know this was one of the answers as
to how to create an Egyptian identity
that's still modern and it was to take
direct reference from ancient Egypt in
order to create a new kind of building
typology and this again translated into
art it wasn't limited to to to
Architecture and you know there were
like the Surrealists that Jonathan Jones
dismisses there were whom you see here
in this in this picture there were other
voices that did not approve of this
approach of you know pulling out of the
back of history and piecing together a
new kind of style for them it was moving
forward being progressive thinking in
sort of simple terms and I'm not saying
that this is something that they that
were particularly embraced but this is
happening at the same time this is 1939
so the same time that that that this is
being built this is also being sold to
the middle class
so realities are really happening at the
same time they're concurrent there isn't
one direction and or one pure sort of
line of progress that happens in any
place at any given moment and I think
it's really important to to accept this
in the Egyptian context just like you
should accept it in the British context
just like you should accept it in any
context in fact is that there are
constantly multiple realities and
multiple approaches to answer in really
core questions which is how do we as a
society want to build how do you want to
represent ourselves whether in our fresh
or in our architecture I say fashion
because here's an example of a
department store that uses architecture
as its logo the emblem of being modern
where you draw by your pajamas is the
building that's specifically that kind
of building so what is the fate of
modernism or modern design in Egypt
today and I put this question on a
background photo of the Royal Geographic
Society from 1925 because I couldn't
find there is no photograph of another
event in which site Karim spoke in the
presence of the King to add the Royal
Geographic Society in 1933 where he
essentially made those ideas sort of
almost very legible the idea is that we
should move away from this referential
hodgepodge approach to design in modern
national identity by actually embracing
a modernist design approach and
obviously this is not what happened
but I want to use this sort of part of
the tour - - to show you how ideas about
design really surpassed the monuments it
surpassed s' the the real estate driven
boom it was also in the everyday it was
in simple things like insect sprayers if
you look at the container of this insect
spray which would be something clearly
not to be placed in a museum in Egypt
today however it does tell us quite
interested in complex histories about
what it was like to design a product as
mundane as an insect sprayer in 1920's
1930's Egypt looked at the font design
have you seen you know that kind of care
given to write in the name of a brand
that is really there to kill cockroaches
you know there is something really quite
deep in terms of translating those ideas
beyond monuments but also how to sort of
include them into the everyday here's a
very sleek machine designed and build in
Egypt in 1954 a sewing machine built by
the military for
that were established after 1952 - sort
of well they were existed 350 - but
after 52 they also produced household
items and you know design is an integral
part of this machine because it had to
be marketed and I had to be appealing to
households and to women particularly all
across the country and so again this
calendar as maybe let's say not
important as it may seem it records on
it a building that was built after 1956
when the city of Port Said was bombed by
the Israelis British and French and when
the government decided to rebuild the
station it was this in this particular
style and not only that its image was
circulated widely in things like
calendars postal stamps postcards so
that if you can't make it to port sight
to see what the state has done to
rebuild and how it implemented this
modernist design you can at least have
it in your household hand in as a
calendar on your kitchen wall an idea
and here's the Arab League building that
we've seen in another model picture with
members of the office of Mahmoud riad
Annie what I'm trying to say is that the
image of art that she was equally as
important is architecture was equally as
important as the architecture itself it
was on things like calendars postal
stamps and postcards and cigarette boxes
and this is you know a striking example
in which what we saw as this early on
definition of what it means to be modern
in Egyptian that emerged in the 1910s
1920s with direct reference to ancient
Egypt the same item on the back of it
depicts a modern scene with contemporary
buildings so again concurrent happening
at the same time sometimes on the very
same object because these identities are
not conflicted what we're usually taught
in art that is cool is that there's
traditional and then there is modern and
there's somehow a journey travelled in
between and what I'm trying to say
through some of these images and some of
these objects is that oftentimes these
things happened quite
at the same time exhibitions this is I
showed you the illustration of the
design for the exhibition in New York
1939
this was the New York the Egyptian
exhibition in New York in 1964 again
East and see how the same architectural
ideas were implemented and adopted fully
by the state and I don't know if you can
make it out but in under the middle arch
there is an ancient Egyptian statue so
again the ancient the traditional the
ancient and the modern are sort of
happening concurrently and this is an
idea that you see all throughout so if
you keep that in mind and you revisit
the entire history you'll see that this
has always been there this is again from
the 1949 exhibition Expo for Egypt
industrial art cultural exhibition you
know this cover from you again depicts
this idea where you have traditional
woman with traditional dress traditional
jewelry showcasing in fact what was the
pinnacle of modernist design in terms of
what the state was building at the time
which is the grounds of the exhibition
itself however today what remains of
these buildings is either neglected
mostly unknown they're not studied
they're not the identity of the builders
is not known a lot of them have changed
ownership so many times that's sort of
the true owner is lost and so they just
sit around until they decay entirely in
the in decay entirely is in the best
scenario the the other scenario is that
they actually just actively get
demolished this is unheard rust or just
pure a building in Alexandria someone
whose buildings are not only national
heritage in France but you know they're
essentially a ton of UNESCO World
Heritage status and one of his early
works was in Alexandria and it was
demolished only two years ago even
though it was in perfect condition
precisely because this whole history
that I've tried to give you a quick
snapshot of is not considered heritage
is not considered important and a lot of
this is in flow
by ideas such as those voiced by
Jonathan Jones when people in those
kinds of places accept the narrative
that someone like Jonathan Jones is
actually portraying they also believe it
and then this the whole 20th century
disappears it's no longer something to
be studied and documented and this is
what happens so sort of to conclude you
know what I tried to do here is to give
you a bit of a snapshot of this of this
history but also tonight and the
negative note I want to sort of showcase
I guess trouble of things that have been
trying to do to to to mend the situation
I suppose what is to try to resurrect
the history of Egyptian modernist design
to find an organized contemporary
designers because in many ways what
someone let's say Karim was concerned
with was not only about modernist design
as it was happening at the time but it's
really about the organization of an
entire profession of makers publishing
for them creating conferences for them
so he was really invested in his
contemporary moment and I think it's
really important to do the same today
and I think part of that is also to
build an audience for art that Shirin
designs so quickly I'll just show a
couple of recent things I did this is an
exhibition that was done in Dubai design
week in 2016 the exhibition was the
first of its kind in the sense that it
gathered 65 designers working in Cairo
today produce in a variety of designs
ranging from architecture to product
design and furniture to also graphic
design and to really to try to create a
community because given the realities in
Cairo today where there is no design
entity there is no design museum in fact
when the London Design Biennale I wanted
to invite someone they didn't know how
to go to he doesn't so there isn't an
obvious representative for the field of
design and the Egyptian context what
that also means is that you know a lot
of the designers despite their
aspirations they really don't have a
clear market place but they also don't
have a clear communal space in which
they can exchange ideas and work to each
other nor are there opportunities to
exhibit and to be critiqued which was
part of part of the process is to show
off what you have and sometimes people
love it sometimes they hate it and
that's actually part of your growth
so part of the idea of this exhibition
was not to sort of present any
complicated theoretical idea more than
to just say we haven't had an exhibition
that gather is that that's the current
moment in one room so let's try and do
that and and in fact in fact what
happened was the starting of building a
community through activities that were
related to the exhibition but in Cairo
which was of course the reason it
happened in Dubai is because they gave
you a but they gave me a budget to do an
exhibition I didn't have to do anything
and that's why it happened in Dubai but
of course I would love to have done
something like this in Cairo but what I
did instead is a series of thoughts
where I invited designers and the public
to meet and to to sort of showcase what
they have and again part of this idea of
building an audience is to create a
publication influence of course by sight
Karim's desires to to to publicize
design through prints
I know it's everybody was saying why
would you go print now why not just
online print is what you'll end up
having in the archive online is
ephemeral and and I think that it's it's
it's really yeah it's really important
to really produce physical physical
things that the stick around on shelves
and so this was the cattle art that was
done for the exhibition another recent
development that I think was really
interesting in terms of what you know
what ideas it what questions came out of
it was a pop-up display that we did in
Cairo as part of the Modern Egypt
project where the very initial some of
some of the very initial set of objects
that were collected were put on display
in a shop front in downtown Cairo with
no labels and no sort of without the
authority of a museum telling the public
what these things are mostly because
again these kinds of objects that have
come out of this history that I've tried
to distress are still seen as mundane
and almost as worthless there are things
that we use there are not things that we
looked
museums because museums in Egypt are
about monuments they're about unique
things and this is not unique to Egypt
this is what you find in museums all
around the world however in some places
such as let's say London you do have
museums that such as the City Museum
where you might find garments where you
might find signage where you might find
advertising where you might find sewing
machines that institutional framework
doesn't exist yet in Cairo so to present
these kinds of object with a very
heavy-handed sort of Museum framework
would have been quite foreboding for
people so the idea was to really invite
people to participate not only in
experience and what it's like to look at
something that you might have had in
your own house holder that you might
have seen your grandmother use and sort
of displayed in this way but actually
encourage people to touch it and to tell
stories and to share ideas about what
they could potentially mean as
historical objects and it was really
quite I think you decided to see
people's reactions but also their
questions
you know the very obvious questions were
coming out you know like why is this
Egyptian ethos and why is this modern
you know that the very word modern is
really quite different when you
translate it in Arabic hadeeth means
it's news right now you know that
differentiation between contemporary and
modern that we have in English doesn't
necessarily work that way in Arabic so
to tell someone that this is modern when
for them it's their grandmother's
generations kind of object was quite
interesting to to even linguistically
think about how do we frame these items
and these objects coming up there should
be some sort of display happening soon
that you will hear more about here in
London there is also the potential to do
something at the London Design benelli
although unfunded and then finally and
finally this year there's a publication
coming out that I've been working on for
the last two and a half years which is
an art that she'll draw it for Cairo
with about 200 buildings many of which
you've seen already and this is coming
out by the American University Press
so try ever since 900 covers the entire
city obviously with a focus on downtown
because it is the area that had the most
investment in in terms of building
activities but also the wonder has been
affected less least in terms of
demolitions and destruction of 20th
century heritage
look out for it hopefully by the end of
this year here in London and I think
I've done over my time so thank
thank you so much so it's absolutely
fascinating and insight of you into a
complex world design religion taking a
spool gun from buildings themselves it's
amazing architectural journals giving a
second insight into your way of ways um
as you say building audience for new
generation and really I'm sure we all
look forward greatly to your application
upcoming and I'd like to kind of abuse
my situation and my position and ask the
first question if I may as archivist I'm
always really interested in sources what
kind of do too many office archives
exist still yeah so a lot of my research
has been based in fact on the printed
and published material this is why they
feature quite heavily and even the
presentation but in many ways it's it's
an interesting source because you you
see the way the maker presented his own
work and the way they frame it and
usually that's one of many sources so
you have other sources to corroborate
than to sort of compare notes but it's
an interesting kind of history that
emerges when all you have is some
magazines but are quite rich in terms of
material but are really your only source
and many times in many you know with
many architects the only thing we know
about them is the couple of buildings
they published here and there however
there are some offices that do have
archives that were maintained
interestingly cite Koreans own office
was burned down in 1952 as part of the
Cairo fire I guess
the Cairo fire was an event that sort of
led to the 1952 Revolution / coup d'etat
in which you know arson swept the city
and many offices and commercial spaces
were burned so in fact the archive of
the magazine is drawn in that since 1952
but of course he maintained other things
in his house and that's why I ended up
at the American University archive there
are a couple of other arts that have
shown that Mahmoud Riyadh whose family
continues to practice architecture and
they've maintained the archive as well
however not in great condition and of
course none none of it is digitized or
really indexed or other fun things that
they do yeah so I mean in fact it it
needs to be worked on it's just a pile
of papers at the moment thank you
can you please talk a bit more about the
process of how the architecture was
commissioned I mean you keep mentioning
it was a state role and I'm sure the
central planning must have been very
strong it I just want to see where there
was opened after competition and by the
same token given how close the system
was and how influenced it was by the
Russians you didn't speak very much in
terms of Soviet influence and so on and
just one smaller question if you can
address it later can you tell us a bit
more about the Egyptian pavilion at the
Biennale in Venice and whether in Venice
yes I mean if you never would like some
background history but the architect and
so on thank you okay so I think
permission I mean art that art sets need
someone to pay for their work unlike
artists you can you can't just create
you have to have somebody pay for in
order to realize your your work and so
this is wife in sight yet he was quite
interesting it is really in many ways
he's after his ideas as much as he's
after clients to pay for his ideas to be
implemented and this is why while his
magazine when he established in 1915
1939 opens with a kind of a I don't know
what how to call it
we're all sort of maintaining well he
was really trying to appeal for the king
let's just say and and then after 52 he
was very happy to appease the Nazi
regime so again politically extremely
flexible but it's really about gaining a
commission and being the one that gets
more opportunities to realize ideas and
so after 52 what happens is the state
really dominates in terms of building
activities there are still a lot of
private entities that are developing
that are building real estate but what
happens is there's also a
developmentalists policy that's national
nationwide that includes things like
cultural palaces housing schools and so
on so those are things that need to be
done on quite a new scale that was never
really seen before and so the state was
quite dominant and I think the
profession of art that should really
don't hurt I mean cycad even been on
house arrest for the last four decades
despite all of this history there's only
a small an insight into what happens
when professionals try to be too
friendly with a one particular political
entity or another because the profession
really suffered and I think what you
seen in Egypt today as a result of this
I mean artists actually today Egypt is
far from being the hot better than
contemporary architectural design I
don't know how that happened after this
in only 50 60 years and I think that's
that's what happened the profession is
not independent and it was not able to
really grow in a way that it could have
the Russian influence is quite
interesting because the Russian
architects were not in Egypt to build
apartment houses you know they they were
there too they were they live it
secluded on construction sites that were
all about infrastructure high dam
obviously you know electricity
infrastructure oil and gas and so on so
they were kind of somewhere on the
margins literally in many ways and they
did not participate in entire scene that
I tried to describe which is very urban
and very middle-class this is not where
the Russians were and in terms of
publishing you never see anything in
reference to Russian Architects in any
of these magazines or any other
magazines for that matter I think that
like the very brief interesting
appearance of Russians and with regards
to building and development within was a
new sustains critical film about
damn for which she was exiled you know
so late you know the Russians are kind
of kept silent and invisible though they
were present on the periphery yeah I you
mentioned just then a little earlier in
your presentation that a lot of this
work was geared towards a housing but
more towards the middle class in the
bourgeoisie do you think that's
significant affect 'add the way that
modernism has held at the modern
Egyptian psyche the way that the monism
has held in the modern Egyptian psyche
of the reasons why I be torn down yes
not respected no that's interesting I
mean I think what's fascinating to see
is the fact that there was a sort of a
trickle-down effect during the period so
for example the contractors that would
build quite a lavish apartment house in
an area like Zamalek which is an upper
very upper class area you know they
would go home to AB Dean or say the zina
which are quite popular areas
working-class areas but you would see
that how what they were building for
those clients impacted what they were
building in those areas as well so
there's a kind of an interesting you
know kind of conversation happen in
there that's also been a topic that's
completely under studied because those
areas are not seen as sort of sites of
interesting or that sure for example but
I just interest that interest in
relationship there the association with
the aspiration for middle-class
aesthetics is something that continues
until today it's just that the
aesthetics have changed
so if the bourgeoisie of today or the
nouveau riche of today they like sort of
revivalist plaster columns that look
like a great temple that says you know
god bless this house in arabic in the
middle of the pediment if this is what
they're doing and they're really fancy
neighborhoods that's what you would see
in the informal areas to kind of with
the watered down version where the
problems are just smaller and the
facades are just obviously much taller
to accommodate more people but you know
this kind of relationship between the
haves and have-nots has kind of been the
for the last century and it's been
completely unstudied in terms of how
aesthetics are created and how do they
travel across classes but I do think
there's something there to discuss to
put what you were saying in in a wider
context on the list of designers that
occurred earlier in your presentation
the name of Whistler wasa
appeared yes and we know that hisself a
team was working at the same time but in
a very different very different style
yes
was there a counterculture going on at
the same time sake a team hated Hassan
Fathy in fact in his archive in his
personal archive that went to a UC I
found a handwritten note by site Kadeem
on an invitation for Hassan Fathy event
where he curses him I'm not going to
this and so we I have this I can scan it
and post it you know but it's it's it's
so there's clearly an antagonistic
relationship there you can tell why I
mean in many ways I think the the
reasons for which site karim has been
forgotten despite the amount of activity
that he's done and hassan fat he is
extremely remembered particularly in the
west despite how little he's actually
done it's quite interesting that should
be a question you know why do we
remember Hassan Fathy but not psyche
kidding I think it's because when
modernism reached its limits here in
Europe and there was the need to sort of
be critical and looked at and think I
mean really the birth of post-modernism
when Kenneth Frampton needed to write a
history about you know modern design
that includes other people for once you
know so there's not only about Europeans
now we want to look at you know what's
happening in India and what's happening
in Egypt what's happening there had to
be different because it was still driven
by the Jonathan Jones approach to
reading history which is oh well this
looks like what we have so why should we
include him but Hassan Fathy
disinterest in mud-brick houses you know
for peasants with domes fascinating
let's let's bring this in and suddenly
we know how son factly but nobody really
knows say
despite the fact that the latter had a
much much greater impact on the shaping
and formation of architecture both in
cities and in provinces across the
country so Hassan fact he was there he
had a failed experiment in 1945 with new
Gorna which was already announced as
failed at the time it didn't take much
longer but despite that he is his
revered and I think that's there was
quite a problem there that should be
investigated
we saw us if on the other hand I I
admire very much and yes he's found a
part of this cohort he comes slightly
after his he sort of develops more in
the fifth in this in late 50s and then
he's really shining in the 70s so today
after the moment that I discussed today
yeah this is more of a speculative
question I guess but sorry Wow
complicated question I think honestly
because I think part of what of what I'm
trying to do is to actually say that
this entire history you know Egyptian
students today are not learning about
this this is not on the curriculum and
it's again the appreciation for for this
era and I think it was extremely
important for me not because if its
aesthetics but because it came out
really have a revolutionary moment in
1919 that generated a new class that had
aspirations they had ideas that wanted
to implement those and materialize them
into things including space and the fact
that that legacy all of it together an
art that should only be in one piece of
the puzzle is not really it's not really
study that's not really investigated
it's not really I mean you know some you
know students would know the big names
there with no sound rule they would know
all the but there's sort of the really
the big idea that was that lasted for a
good thirty years what we called the
liberal era in Egyptian history that
included all of this
studied and that approach is not really
something that's put in a museum there
are no type sports created in 2000 or
[Music]
2003 me essential to shed light on this
moment because I do think in terms of
design today we have a total moment of
crisis I mean there is I don't know
there's no there's no clear direction in
terms of what is an Egyptian building
today except to perhaps grow back to a
much more watered down version to that
early moment where Ferran it kind of
references were were the source of
influence so when you look at something
like the the Supreme Court building
which was done by an architect named
Ahmed me too it's a building that is you
know purely postmodern which is fine I'm
just not a fan of post-modernism but
it's purely postmodern in the sense that
it takes pieces that you recognize as
being ancient Egyptian but they actually
are not the product of a study of
ancient Egyptian architecture it's
almost like a theater set of ancient
Egyptian art Thatcher so it's not you
know has a what we saw in the 20s with
the reference to ancient Egyptian art
that's based on an academic investment
and investigation of what ancient
Egyptian architecture was like in order
to translate into something modern what
you see with the sort of the Supreme
Court type of approach is not that at
all there is no direct correlation
between the ancient and then sort of
translating it to the mark so that being
said I think I think without with the
lack of a thorough investigation of our
own history of modern design we kind of
missed the boat on even having a
postmodern moment even if that was
necessary I don't think it's the
inevitable next chapter post-modernism
made sense in some places but it didn't
have to happen everywhere and it didn't
happen everywhere and so yeah there's
been a kind of a this continuous
development in the last 30 40 years that
I think leads to a situation where the
new capital will unfortunately be kind
of a little bit all over the place in
terms of his design approach I just say
thank you very much an extraordinary
talk and yet no I am embarrassed to say
that the the architecture tree that you
showed from banister Fletcher was still
very much in use up until the eighties
and just just to say for anybody who
wants to venture to the library the new
edition of banister fletcher by
Cruikshank is excellent and as i think
on rid of a lot of that baggage i just
wanted to say you know thanks to the a a
because your presentation is trying to
refocus away from that imperialist
history which is still going on here in
london okay here in the a a over the
last year we've had some phenomenal
talks which have refocused this notion
of multiple realities and the the whole
arrogance that we see of this continuing
notion of the authentic and true baton
holders of modernism
you know charging forward you've just
look at the lecture series at the moment
at the Royal Academy it's just loaded
with the same old blockbuster stuff you
know and so you come come here come to
Bedford Square to hear these talks and
refocus on what what is a really much
more rich and diverse historical
position on modernism so I just wanted
to say thank you thank you thank you
thank you very much very trying the view
I've got a question you talk about these
like cultural buildings that were never
built yes I wanted to know was that
because there was a fear to lose
tradition or was that to lose tradition
uh or was that more of a fear of the
oppressed capitalism or autocracy that
was happening in Egypt no it was just
there was no money oh yeah yeah that was
really it no I mean in in fact I think a
lot of this is about it's about money
and I think once because of economic
policies that were implemented after 52
why what really happened in Egypt after
52 in many ways the first decade is
quite vibrant with interesting
production despite the fact that people
want to prisons and you know people were
silenced and these things happened you
know you know that happens on the side
but in terms of cultural production in
terms of architecture in design there
were some really fascinating and rich
things that happen after the 60s and
after the total control of the economy
by the state in there was a total
disaster because the same people that
had the money to Commission things like
these buildings and many others that I
didn't show some of which actually had
impact on the scale of villages and
towns and cities I mean Pasha's you know
were not only or all bad people that are
there to obstruct capital sometimes they
build things that were actually for for
the public good at least in a certain
scale and once the money was extracted
out that kind of Commission was drawn
and so the state became the only person
and money was allocated elsewhere like
wars abroad
you know like in Yemen or something you
know and so what that meant when who
cares about a transfer palace in
Mansoura that is quite an expensive
building that requires kind of
sophisticated structures when there are
other things on the table so that's
really why it's really about money it
was and this is why I think studying
modernism in the Egyptian context is
interesting not because it's unique but
because the
the way it went is different it wasn't
because people hated it and then they
said oh I want my pediments back you
know I you know I want my post-modernism
it wasn't that it you know people ran
out of money the professionals were too
consumed in pleasing authorities and and
the marketplace totally transformed and
this is not the way we learn about how
modernism died in certain places thank
you very much Philippe
[Applause]
