so I'm going to title to chair our next
panel people and projects and I think
many of the themes are the papers
connect so well with what we were
thinking about yesterday and
particularly some of the themes and
ideas raised by the session this morning
I think one of the main themes for
reflection in this panel is thinking
about how we capture record archive
write and communicate the histories of
architecture and a lot of the papers in
this panel will take a case study
approach and I think through those case
studies our speakers will be thinking
about the politics and strategies of
reassessment and recovery reappraisal
and looking again at the careers and
lives of individuals but thinking about
how those careers are practiced in a
wider landscape in which places shape
people and people of course shape places
so what we're going to do we have four
presentations and then to keep the focus
and the energy we're going to have two
presentations and then take some
questions two more presentations and
then take some questions and then
hopefully at the end there'll be time to
gather everyone together and have a
round table and hopefully unpick some of
the broader themes of the of the panel
and I'm just going to introduce our
speakers very briefly because all their
biographies are in the in the packs you
can read about they're very impressive
careers at length and and so our first
speaker will be Paul makovski who's an
editor a writer a curator and vice
president of design of metropolis
magazine and a new york-based copper
tations or somebody very aware of
thinking about how histories are
communicated and then our next
presentation will be by Fiona McLaughlin
Anu mcLaughlin fiona is there professor
of architecture practice at the
University of Edinburgh and a partner
and es McLaughlin architects Anu
McLaughlin is a partner in the
cotton architects and holds
qualifications in architecture and
psychology so we'll take those two
presentations first and I'd like you to
join with me in welcoming all our
speakers to this panel No have any of
you heard of the term knowing anyone no
okay well you should know Ling is the
process of organizing objects in two
parallel or 90-degree angles the term
has even infiltrated popular culture
just look it up you'll see thousands of
examples on Instagram you can find for
example people knowing guitars knowing
light bulbs people are nolan camping
supplies they're even nolan car parts
and even knowing food i don't see people
cool housing or ha d ding or grimm
shining so the influence of known as
skewed as it is is here to stay now how
does ice come about the term first was
used in 1987 by andrew kromm low who was
a janitor at Frank Gehry's furniture
fabrication shop and at the time Gary
was designing chairs for Knoll company
famously known for Florence Knowles
angular furniture and you can even see
one of our chairs out in the exhibition
Cromwell would arrange any displaced
tools at right angles on all surfaces
and he called this routine knowing in
that the tools are arranged in right
angles similar to Florence Knowles
furniture the American sculptor Tom
Sachs
spent two years in Gary's shop as a
fabricator and adopted the use of the
term from Cromwell and nowadays knowing
is integral to his process so the design
DNA of this term can be traced back to
one person and that person is Florence
Knoll the subject of my talk today it's
perfect timing that we're celebrating
her two
at this conference celebrating a hundred
years of women in architecture at the
AAA because Florence known to celebrated
her 100th birthday in May earlier this
year I'd like to start with a quote that
Florence Knoll first said in 1949 good
design is the sum of a designer's
experience it results from the ability
to analyze and solve problems by
organized thinking and imagination now
what does this all mean to understand
her philosophy I think you have to
really understand the background of her
life and work let's start from the
beginning she was born as florists
Schuster
in 1917 in Saginaw Michigan the child of
Frederic issues in Mina haste her
father's family were owners of a very
successful baking company that
eventually merged with the loose whiles
sunshine biscuit company she essentially
became a biscuit heiress here is a
picture of Florence at the age of about
four and shoe that was her nickname and
she here took scissors and cut her hair
herself it was her first design act she
said
sadly she was orphaned at the age of 12
by the death of her mother in 1931 and
her father had died when she was five so
she Lawrence where she was taken in hand
by a guardian who guided her to her
girls school between which was a
Kingswood which is part of Cranbrook
between 1932 and 34 she attended the
Kingswood it's the girls school that was
part of Cranbrook outside of Detroit
Michigan Cranbrook was run by the
Finnish born Eliel Saarinen and she
ended up studying architecture and
design there not unlike the German
Bauhaus in some respects Cranbrook was
an artist colony and school which by the
1930s had become one of the centers of
modernism in design and architecture in
the u.s. training the likes of Eero
Saarinen Charles and Ray Eames Heriberto
and Ralph Rapson le ole in his text
textile designer wife Louis Saarinen
recognized shoes talent and brought her
under the wing of their family Cranbrook
presented a holistic approach to design
that Florence carried forth with her it
was here where where everyday she was
exposed to the handcrafted textiles on
the walls and floors whether it was just
by walking to class or by eating in the
dining room in front of a huge tapestry
that had been hand-woven by Loya
Saarinen there she became fascinated
with the building itself tanned when the
Saarinen's learned of her interests they
virtually adopted her as part of a
family
later at Cranbrook she continued her
studies in design being the youngest
student ever in the history of the
Academy to be accepted at the school
still a record to this day it was that
Eero Saarinen suggestion that she
designed her dorm room and experimented
with her first ideas of space planning
the room includes a chair designed by
Eero for the school and she designed the
build building desk and combination sofa
bed and the striped carpet textiles in
the wall hanging with a geometric motif
were influenced by the work of soya
Saarinen
which were hand-woven by shoe it's in
this room where you get this idea
bringing in the warm and fuzzy feeling
of Cranbrook through the combination and
use of textiles and materials the sarin
in family quickly took to shoe as a
teenager and she was unofficially
adopted by them traveling with them to
Finland every summer where they stayed
at beach Rusk the sarin in summer house
and studio outside of Helsinki here
again she's influenced by the fully
integrated interior spaces of his house
with all its handcrafted textiles rugs
and wall coverings she attended Columbia
University in 1935 for a year or she met
Lulu BCA who lectures at the University
he even signed her copy of Latin field
rat ears she was only 18 when she met
him and she decided to leave the
University because the curriculum which
was still in a Bo's art style did not
interest her so she goes back to Finland
and one summer with the ser√°n ins Alvar
Aalto was a guest for lunch and he
suggested that she go to the
architectural association to continue
her studies during the summer of 1938
she continues her studies at the AAA
enrolled in the Advanced Studies course
where she arrives at the the atmosphere
at the AAA
is exciting the AAA had done away with
the post art system and taken on more
moderate modernist and progressive
approach in part using the unit system
cope using teamwork and research and
planning is part of the new curriculum
she was put in the second year unit 6 in
the winter 1938 term she works on
projects such as a house near London and
also the garden of a house getting top
marks for work and she had crits with
architects like Tecton and Max small-fry
and while she was here
um obey Arab was lecturing on advanced
concrete design of the twenty nine
students who entered the school in the
winter term of 1938 only four were women
including a Miss J and miles of
Portsmouth miss Wallace and and then the
neck
who in 1940 married the architect Peter
moorim national archives has an
interview with Peter Morrow who talks
about working as an art architect with
Tecton and lavochkin during the 1930s
and it would be really great to see her
contribution because it really doesn't
talk about her in the fifteen part
interview here's another project she did
in the spring of 1939 term which was for
a Sussex pub again very modernistic and
then in third year she works on a
project to design a restaurant this is a
cafe that she does called cafe USA she
wrote there's one letter to her former
teacher Rachel Rossman a Cornell trained
architect who taught her interior design
and architecture at Cranbrook
she writes I made a decision I just have
to make this Wow I made a decision to
come here to the AAA from Finland this
summer and have been very pleased about
it ever since as London has promised and
success in every way I'm thoroughly
enjoying the work and learning a bit
about construction which is my purpose
in coming here I shall probably finish
in about two years
as it was placed in the middle upon
arrival okay she then goes on to say
London has been working full speed that
looked last few days to blanket herself
in snow for more convincing Christmas
and it looks ever so charming however
it's a city of frozen wastes the cold
temperature is a record one thank God I
have a flat in a modern
building she moved into Russell Court
was which was had just been built a year
before
which reminds me Richard could you
please send me some details of the
American system of plumbing and the
drainage system in the wall they're a
bit medieval in that respect here please
excuse this subject but it's rather
important as I had a row with a cocky
sort of lecturer on plumbing the other
day this is very a shoe here's a pay
stub of a project that she did in the 98
1950s but I'm showing it here in the
context because it was at the a a where
she started to use small pieces of
textiles that were pasted into her
projects and using fabrics and materials
on a rendering so that you get a sense
of the color and texture of the
materials use and also note how she's
knowing the furniture so the war breaks
out in Florence no returns through the
US and called Marcel Breuer and offered
to intern at Breuer and Gropius office
they were partners at this time before
the war in Cambridge Massachusetts and
what's interesting here is that she
worked on one of their largest
residential projects in the u.s. which
is the Frank house it's a huge house
over 12,000 square feet and was designed
for an engineer and his family it had
nine bedrooms 13 bathrooms and is one of
their biggest residences ever Gore pious
embroider designed everything for the
house including the interior furnishings
and hardware the amazing thing is that
it is virtually the same today as it was
built in 1939 40 totally original and
authentic it's stolen hands of a son and
it's in Pittsburgh any Alvers did the
textiles and shoe worked on the
children's bedrooms to compare the
average house in Pittsburgh at the time
cost 12,000 dollars to build Frank Lloyd
Wright's falling water costs two hundred
and fifty thousand dollars to build that
year and this house cost to mill two
million dollars in 1939 it's a
spectacular house and the Sun is trying
to get it preserved but locals in
Pittsburgh I think don't just understand
it so 1940 she enrolls as a grad student
at the Armour Institute in Chicago under
with Mies van der Rohe who became
another similar influence on her she was
one of the few female graduate students
in the Department of Architecture and
according to shoe needs had a profound
effect on her design approach and the
clarification of design after graduating
she moves from Florence no moves from
Chicago to New York and around 1943 she
started working for Hans Knoll and in 46
they married and they they began to
reshape the country the company as NOLA
Sochi 'its with Florence Knoll as an
equal partner at this point it should
give you some background on Hans Knoll
if we look at the early years of Hans
know he was the son of Walter Knoll a
leading furniture manufacturer just
outside of Stuttgart Germany and
although he was German born in 1935 he
joined architects searched ramaya
who had a furniture company and
interiors company called plan limited in
London that manufactured and sold German
modernist design furniture it goes
bankrupt basically in 37 and hunson all
has to decide does he go back to Germany
or what does he do he decides instead in
1937 at the age of 23 to emigrate to
United States and he did so in part
because of his disagreements with his
father over his father's strong support
in the Nazi Party one of his brothers
died during the war and the other
brother ended up in a Russian labour
camp by the end of the war so there was
a split in a family over the ideology it
appears though Hans may have been
considering the move across the Atlantic
for some time since and fond he was
following the path of many European
modernists designers who sought refuge
in the u.s. during the late thirties
here's for example a furniture catalog
by Knoll in nineteen four
and you can really see this is before
she joined the company of the type of
furniture that honson was developing
rather playing graphics in terms of a
catalog overstuffed furniture uninspired
patterned upholstery and it really was
here where no one was just becoming a
company that was just selling furniture
and not design only when she becomes
involved as branding designing of the
company take on a more integrated
approach in selecting the furniture
design and other products so hans was
not without his problems around 40 1945
hans tried to make market his furniture
in bloomingdales that got him into some
trouble as he owed money a lot of it to
some agents and shoe who was just an
employee at the time went to a trust
fund and got the $50,000 unbailed him
out by doing so she effectively became
co-owner of the company and in 1949 the
hans jean all furniture company changed
his name to no associates she always
said she was the associate in no
associates and the following year they
were married
meanwhile in just a few short years they
were really really able to really
transform the company the knoll planning
unit founded as a division of no
provided clients for the first time a
design surface separate from the selling
of furniture this was kind of really
brilliant because instead of just
selling furniture they would now sell
the services to the client they would
sell sell the furniture textiles and
they would really sell the whole package
and if you look at other companies like
Herman Miller they're still just selling
furniture so what's warrants no more so
than Hans who's well connected with
leading design designers in the u.s. one
of shoes earliest published interiors
was a recreation lown lounge for defense
workers at an aircraft plant in 1943 and
we're seeing where she's taking the
knoll furniture in that line and using
them in a spatial way
the Knowles started a program of
designing case-study housing much like
the case study projects that were
happening in Los Angeles they
commissioned architects such as Ralph
Rapson Charlie Eames search Amaya and
Luke on to design prefab houses and the
furniture inside this is just one sketch
in a series of over 44 sketches designed
by Luke on for his parasol house for
Knoll incidentally Luke owns partner at
the time and ting who had just recently
graduated from the Harvard Graduate
School of Design got a job working in
the norm Planning Unit at the time the
Noles also worked on top-secret projects
sometimes you didn't know what what she
was working on she was actually working
on a project but didn't know what what
what it was gonna end up or where was
gonna end up for the US government but
this is one that Hans long worked on it
was the German Village which was the
nickname for a range of mock residential
houses constructed in 1943 in duck
way.you Utah in order to conduct
experiments used for bombing of Nazi
Germany so they were building houses
Mandelson was building the structure
Eric Nelson the architect and Hans Knoll
was responsible for finding the kind of
furniture and textiles that typical
German what would live in these houses
and what they did was they tested
different types of gases and in fact the
early first uses of napalm was used on
this she did a work on large projects
such as creating housing for American
overseas personnel in cities across Asia
and the Middle East so places like
Jeddah Karachi Pakistan Saigon and so
forth you can see all those X's and if
you look at the checklist there's cities
like Monrovia Tehran Rangoon
Singapore da Quran Lahore the idea was
to create about 55 prefab houses and she
would design and specify everything in
the house down to the curtains and the
cups and saucers everything was packed
into containers and shipped overseas to
their destinations you'll see the list
of ABCD so there were four versions of
the same house and you'll see a line
through Karachi Pakistan because the
shipping container that had all the
furniture for Karachi when it was being
unloaded fell into the Arabian Sea so
somewhere at the bottom of the Arabian
seas a container full of normal
furniture one version would have for
example here's the one on the big one
has the blue sofa with the yellow
curtains the next version would have a
brown sofa with the red curtains and the
idea was that she didn't want people
living in the same city having the same
looking house so she even within this
idea of standardization she's really
affecting some variety so she was on the
lookout for fresh talent and people from
Europe who were not well known in the US
you have people connected to Cranbrook
like Harry Berg Toya who trained as a
jeweler Ralph Rapson
Antoinette Bert's pristine Ian of course
Eero Saarinen and then she worked with a
whole international architects and
designers Hans bellman Mies van der Rohe
ilmari Tapia Barra
Pierre general so she remember she meant
Corp but she doesn't want to work with
him and instead chooses to work with
Pierre generate who she felt was really
the guy in courts office who was the one
doing all the furniture Charlotte Perry
and also designs furniture for Knoll but
she gets those designs and she doesn't
think they're really designs from the
30s and she really didn't think they
were sort of fitting into the Knoll look
that was something that was really more
modern um in contemporary
and remember she does this all by 1951
and she was just 34 years old so she
even brought in from her former teacher
Mies van der Rohe and asked him if Knoll
could reproduce his furniture so if you
look at his furniture production during
the 1920s he did a number of metal
furniture for the toucan hothouse the
Barcelona pavilion and some other
residential projects and she only picks
a few have his designs she wasn't
interested in Mises chairs that use
tubular furniture like the mr chair the
little X but for her what was more
amazing was the Barcelona chair so she
could even look at nieces work and
Cimiez and Me's because the Barcelona
chair has rolled steel polished steel
handcrafted and that her was really the
essence of Me's even when you look on
the bottom the Brno chair that's tubular
so when it's being redesigned for the
four seasons they use flat steel rolled
steel and said later shoe commissions
another Cranbrook graduate Heriberto a--
to design a line of furniture she saw
these pieces as well as the other pieces
by other designers like Me's and Sara
Nina's the sculptural pieces and
although she never saw herself as a
furniture designer she does not consider
herself a furniture designer she
designed over 130 pieces of furniture in
the null wine that were put into
production at some time in the company's
history and she called these pieces the
filling pieces so furniture was a
crucial element in the design of a going
to good interior here you can see that
she patented the tufting on a cushion
for her sofa so she hated the idea of
buttons because they caught in your
jacket or they were always popping off
the sofa but her her solution is also a
very elegant one and a rational one on
this kind of gridded plane so very
architectural solution during the 1940s
when fabrics were hard to get shoe first
used men's suiting fabrics like tweeds
and flat flannels and neutrals that came
from men's tailors
Paul Smith does this you know with my
harem today maybe 10 years ago and she
was doing this in the 40s until they
started they were able to start making
their own fabrics so at first they used
textiles from Sweden with patterns by
designers such as span mark alias
architect Stig Lindbergh and Astrid
sempai and over a decade and a half
worked with 50 different fabric
designers and if you look even at the
little square samples she was a pioneer
who started the 3 by 3 inch sample so
this was another standard that she
started in the industry for sampling
architecture you see starts here with
the smallest of scale so Noel didn't
work with just a few British designers
during the post-war period one reason
why the knoll brand was not well
promoted in the UK is because there was
a trademark conflict there was another
company called Parker know which did
sort of traditional furniture and they
sued them and so know was it was
difficult for an old to really promote
the nola brand even though even though
the two company Styles were completely
different so on the bottom is a yellow
and black sequin style by the British
abstract painter Paul d√©sol√©e introduced
in 1950 before she comes sort of known
or famous then you have textile designed
by the British architect Dennis Lennon
called Shoji and Lenin had worked in the
office of Maxwell fry and Jane drew and
at the time this textiles main linen had
recently hired a young design student
Terence Conran to work in his office
and since Conran was the only designer
in Lenin's office doing textiles this
textile is also probably designed by
Terence Conran both Conran and Lennon
both shared their enthusiasm for
contemporary modern design and use the
Eames's and Knoll has really influential
in their design so we have their
showroom 601 Madison and really these
showrooms were
a laboratory for wear shoe could really
experiment with space planning because
it wasn't client based so 601 Madison he
or she uses a wall of abstraction or
else in the back you see the textiles
hanging as abstract squares and during
the 9th late 1940s and early 50s the
showroom had murals by Swiss artists and
designers like max bill had paintings by
Paul clay Jackson Pollock and Alexander
Calder of course here you can see the
next image of her next show 575 Madison
and it was really designed like a
Mondrian painting you can see this idea
carried through in different cities such
as the San Francisco showroom the Miami
Knoll showroom and the LA showroom which
was seen specifically to be seen while
driving in a car
here's her an example of her pasted up
for haunts and all showrooms so if you
look at it you'll see that she's using
all the materials and textures but then
also if we look at the little swatches
it really reflects this idea of how you
can translate that which was a
pioneering element but then she also was
doing something where she's flipping the
space so the table in the front is where
and in the back you have a cabinet where
you can really store things now so she's
really starting to be more efficient in
space planning but there was another
reason the black wall the textures the
kind of blonde materials was used
because Hans Noll
a fair skin and blonde hair and made him
look really good against this black
background so the idea of designing for
human centered design was central to all
our spaces and if you start looking at
them very carefully they really look the
same in a way sometimes there's a
similarity but then there's a lot of
difference in a very few short ear
Swardson all with her work started to
work on corporate offices and designs
for everything from hotels from hotels
corporate offices hospitals on the my
left is dormitory for example that she
did this is her apartment in New York
Connecticut general was one of her
biggest projects done with Gordon Bunn
shaft and what was interesting there's
there was this back and forth and with
Gordon Bunch shaft they didn't have a
Planning Unit interiors okay unit okay
we're getting near the end and what
happened was a bunch chefs office was
inspired by of an old planning union and
they base their interiors division on
the knoll planning unit this is one of
my favorite pictures of shoe here she is
in the middle I'm an interior design
presentation at Connecticut General she
really is it owning the room jesus's
pictures an example to show how the
conservative nature of a lot of her
clients who were all New England bankers
and life insurance executives were able
to convince and embrace this new form of
modern design in architecture honson old
dies in a car crash in 1955 and she
takes over and what's really interesting
here this was the first time a woman was
featured in the business section of the
New York Times and she chooses to have
her picture taken with Eero Saarinen a
collaborator but also to promote the new
furniture part of the the tulip chair
let me just skip to
the last one so for install looked at
the challenge of designing an interior
as an architectural solution one that
was more than just specifying furniture
in fabrics her contribution to
contemporary design is that she was a
great collaborator making architecture
making architects buildings look great
from the outside in and also in working
with furniture designers and artists to
create design classics that are still
popular today she's one of the few
architects and designers to win the top
Art Awards from the various design
professions such as the AIA ASID and
even the graphic and interior design
associations so hope you like her work
and I think it's a fitting tribute to
her on this 100th anniversary of the
[Applause]
it's a great pleasure for us to be able
to give a short talk about karma
kovarsky who's someone who's very
important to us she and her partner and
make houses give its scene here
exemplify much that's positive about
architecture and its relationship to its
users and inhabitants the work embodies
our worldview that's open generous
life-affirming and despite all the usual
pressures that bear down on any
practicing architect never cynical carlo
gavazzi is an architect artist and
educator and she studied here at the
architectural association in the late
1960s before working the office of good
to vanish she co-founded the practice of
shis give it some kvass congrats
southern austria in 1978
despite the city's relatively isolated
setting on the edge of what was then
western europe grass has experienced an
astonishing blossoming of architectural
creativity since the 1980s
JustGive it's Kowalski was one of the
principal leaders in this a Carlos
contribution to the character
professionalism and outfit of our
practice is indivisible from that of her
partner they're instantly recognizable
workflow continues despite Michelle's
recent
today we first became more widely
appreciated following a traveling
exhibition that represented the output
of a loose grouping of individuals and
practices who were the catalyst of the
city's new architecture was so-called
grant through Sheila Carla was notably
the sole female representative of the
group as a byproduct of its success her
office has employed and nurtures
successive generations of Architects in
grants and so continued to strengthen
its architectural community happily
women now have a stronger leading role
in the city's architectural offices and
they've been able to benefit from and
draw on Carla's pioneering position sure
skillets Kowalski's has produced an
extensive and notable body of buildings
and projects many one through
competition their works emerged from the
zeitgeist that pursued alternatives to
late modernism and opened a space in
which more individual architectural
expressions could flourish their early
buildings demonstrated the partner's
ability not only to develop
sophisticated compositions but also to
do so in a way that conversed with a
given sight the carefully considered how
people might interact with structures
and materials a demonstrated maturity in
resolving aesthetic and technical
aspects through carefully crafted
detailing Carl Kowalski's design
philosophy and reading of history are
mediated to her drawings but she's
foremost an architect she's built
politically and to design ideas her
manifested and the strongly expressive
forms colors and details of her
practices constructions these are
overtly confident buildings not ones
that make a virtue of being incident yet
despite its idiosyncrasies design ethos
is hard to overstate how impressively
broad the practices portfolio is in both
scale and program it includes
residential commercial cultural and
educational developments and the client
base extends across Austria and Germany
[Music]
the practice has completed many
single-family houses in Graz in Vienna
are these encapsulate the density of the
partners thinking each host takes a
specific approach to its location where
they're following existing contours or
constructing a new artificial landscape
or being set in counterpoint to its
surroundings these same principles apply
equally to the practices larger
buildings while the use of strong forms
is a consistent theme layouts details
and specifications are not simply
repeated from one project to the next
even when a similar typology is called
for each project big or small is
interrogated according to this
particular set of constraints and
opportunities and so results in an
individual response their house
interiors tend to use distinctive non
orthogonal forms and volumes often
linking rooms and circulation areas and
carving out informal spaces that people
can colonize but they're not blind blank
canvases frank Verena wrote that quote
she's given some kovarsky's buildings
are not called architecture they leave
space for and encourage emotion unquote
inhabitants are welcomed as active
contributors to living architecture
rather than awkward afterthoughts who
might intrude on or upset a noble
precious architectural concept the
practices urban work has developed a
dialogue between modern insertions and
historical context Cheska Visclosky
approaches their opportunities to build
to build in this context in the manner
of Patrick Geddes that is to say they
knowingly add to and subtract from the
built fabric in certain contemporary
buildings that draw on pre-existing
forms colours and roofs capes
they also clarify existing structures
and open up the routes and spaces to add
permeability extending and enhancing the
legibility of the phone situation the
office has also has often been extremely
daring
part of the regeneration shown here or
apartment store in Grant's involved
excavating a seven-story deep carpark
all the historical city center and
immediately adjacent to a river to
entice shoppers back into the town
center their boldness has seen in other
ways too they've constructed extensions
to historic Schlosser's that sit in
architectural conversations with the old
buildings they've engaged deeply with
the problematic complexities of public
participation housing models and have
developed complex detailing to ensure
that their architectural concepts
function ecologically in the extremes of
sub-alpine Sun and snow the combination
of the formal and informal inches covers
kovarsky's buildings is an important
theme the evident irregularity of
external form is always pinned by a
clear structural and organizational
strategy many of their build is
developed from a construction of system
or grid overlaid with cross and sub axes
and asymmetrical elements structural
base are then enclosed or opened out and
additional layers added to soften and
add complexity to the strictness of the
initial geometry these allow the viewer
a choice of orientations and scales at
which the final building can be read the
interrelationship of form and function
are fully explored and Jaclyn Nagar
wrote that their quote poetic features
aim to recover the sensory experience
that has largely departed from
functional construction on court their
buildings bulge out where space is
claimed internally or twist and fall
with the site but always with a knowing
degree of manipulation relative to a
clear underlying morphology the finer
detailing of individual building
elements emphasizes the main conceptual
ideas such as solidity openness or
enclosure
Karla Cavalli is a skilled artist these
stunning but delicate landscape sketches
on Japanese paper demonstrate her
ability to observe the strength and
dynamism of nature's forms but they also
events a finer eye that can perceive and
appreciate small details and the
contribution they make to the whole one
reading of shish kebobs Falco ball skis
buildings is as extensions to the
landscape acting as topographical
insertions to the urban or rural
settings in this perception roof escapes
Echo Hill formations built structures
form cliffs cracks or valleys while
there are obvious suggestions of this
the greatest value in the work is as a
in its ability to shape environments
that provide public and private
enclosures with which people can
identify and within which they can live
at ease with themselves and their
surroundings in this the use of finer
elements such as columns staircases and
canopies that bring the scale down to
that of the individual inhabitant are
just as essential as the more
immediately obvious elevational
arrangements Sinan photographs perhaps
their buildings most obvious trademark
is their formal expression yet Peter
blundell Jones wrote that quote much of
the time it distracts from the real
ingenuity of the work the photographs
are certainly striking but the work is
in real life often better offering more
unquote the logistics of delivering
buildings is always intense and fraught
with the contradictory demands of
clients contractors funders and
regulations and even greater
concentration of resources and will is
required to produce a commercially
viable architecture that is based on a
highly individual crafted response to
each project part of the success of
Siskel its kovarsky's career has been
due to the administrative and
constructional professionalism through
which they have expressed their
justic and social ideas practices
designs knowingly absorb historical
elements from Italian churches to the
Baroque to the English country garden
their output is not exactly a number of
things
anthropomorphic neo expressionist
regionalist what it is is a very
personal expression of the partners
worldviews or more accurately their
singular combined worldview
Kowalski can consider that architectures
fundamentally a perpetual set search
quote to generate a home on earth
unquote this strand of building as
dwelling runs through her architectural
work and her designs explore the
reciprocal relationship between built
form and human somatic and psychological
experience the aim is to deliver an
emotional as well as physical identity
an architecture as suggested by Wolfgang
Shakur that possesses a kind of saw
unquote or a number of years Karla
Cavalli has created and exhibited a
menagerie of large hand sculpted hybrid
ceramic beasts that extend the
animalistic concepts painted us in many
of her offices buildings she considers
that they quote stand on their pedestals
at home and think deep thoughts and
voice the things for which there are no
verbal explanations unquote these
so-called monsters show a breadth of
artistic thinking that underpins for
architectural work but also importantly
demonstrates inquisitiveness and sense
of humor that permeates her thinking
what of a taper was half dressed or half
shaved carlo gavazzi has received
recognition for her work through
numerous building awards and many
publications
exhibitions of her practices opened in
2009 the Academy - kunst er in Berlin
recognized the significance of the
practices output by acquiring an archive
including sketches technical drawings
and models this is available for
scholars to contemplate and perhaps to
begin to unravel its significance I'm
just reminded about the conversation
yesterday and how important archiving is
so that's something to celebrate beyond
her practice she was appointed professor
at the Faculty of architecture and urban
planning at University of Stuttgart and
opposed she held for 15 years so while
some of its roots may be glimpsed
looking forward it's almost impossible
to see how other architects could
develop she Scott's Kowalski's style
without the catalyzing influence of the
partners
Karlis worked together with Mike Gousha
skits does not self-consciously place
itself in an architectural ISM or school
their work deploys specific artistic and
organisational responses to place and
brief rather than the pursuit of
mainstream theory as such it sits
awkwardly in the kind of architectural
history that likes to trace a
chronological lineage between Styles
instead it occupies a space reserved for
those whose artistic sensibility is
overlaid with a sense of a desire to
build kovarsky's architecture is
grounded in her observations of nature
and built forms it views urban public
and domestic structures as enclosures
that have the potential to enrich
people's physical and emotional
well-being through the architects
empathy with those who inhabit and
engage with them this is as worthwhile
an aim as architecture can aspire to
Carla kvass his work is highly
thoughtful it rejects the position of
the architect as someone detached an
intellectually superior instead it uses
the balance of tensions between old and
new nature and culture formality and in
to mold places where people can dwell as
individuals and as part of society her
drawings models sculptures and buildings
demonstrate an undoubted artistic drive
and technical skill
the true measure and depth of Karla
Cavalli is out to it however lies in its
expression in the joy of life a sense of
humor and most importantly it's aimed to
manifest through architecture her deeply
held soulful and human centered ideals
[Applause]
some questions for those individual
papers and I one thing that just struck
me immediately is obviously we all have
our own motivations for choosing the
people that we work on and the reasons
why and I'm just kind of intrigued how
you were led to these architects and why
you're why you're working in them what
you want to do with thinking about their
histories um Kyla's very important
currently how were very important to us
because when we were students
I wrote a dissertation on good to
Domanick another of the grants
architects and we went out to grad since
and just just looked around and they
were very good about showing us the
buildings and and from that we've just
continued they've been across here you'd
across there and just continue to keep
an interesting history but also you know
we talked a lot of people yesterday
about role models and so on and and this
morning was really interesting about the
role model of the partnership and I
think for us as developing architects
setting up our own practice Authority
was really important actually I'm just
that joint authority from the start and
in their case that's what they always
did everything was always Julie credited
and I think for us that was that was
really important they didn't you know we
never did anything that wasn't truly
credited so that was awesome and it
repeats re importance for Carla giving
this talk to say that it was indivisible
between her for me I was working at
metropolis I was a senior editor there
and I sat at a desk and I had to come up
with ideas and cuz I really didn't know
what I was supposed to do I was given
this job and I remember thinking
Florence Knoll she's a sofa designer and
how come we have never heard an
interview with or read an interview with
her and when she resigned from the
normal night she's 1965 she basically
stopped doing interviews refused to talk
to the press and really you know retired
into private life I was able to get an
interview with her and she really liked
this story and thereafter we became pen
pals and then we became very good
friends one of the things about credit
that I think is really interesting was
that at Knoll the whole brand was based
on giving credit to designers and really
building up the brand of these
individual designers like Eero Saarinen
and Bert Oya they could have easily have
had one mono brand and just said this is
you know like IKEA or whatever but she
really made that a point to give each of
those individual designers credit and
royalties and then promote each one
floor for questions if there is one lady
what she just said about accreditation
within Knoll think that links back to
her finish links you take Marimekko for
instance all the textile designs they
have the signature of the designer in
the margin printed into the texture and
that is so empowering and motivating for
staff working within a larger
organization
very true and then even designers in the
null planning unit if they did a certain
piece of furniture lu butler charlie
needing needing house they got credit
and they were promoted as well
andrey do you pray a french designer
who's only done one thing in his life
the string chair in the 40s also has
gone credit so she gave credit to actual
people on staff so the knoll planning
unit as a team for collaboration was
very important never more than six or
eight people and the interesting thing
is when she leaves knoll
an OLE planning unit is taken over by
lou butler one of her favorite and
longest people in the planning unit and
he tries to replicate what Florence
Knoll has done for five years after that
they work on a big project for
Westinghouse but then they can't
replicate it afterwards and then the
null planning unit is dispersed and nol√©
goes to back to being a company that
sells furniture and not the whole
services
hi I wanted to ask our I wouldn't say
both of those presentations weren't
really really really inspiring so thank
you and you talk about it Florence being
inspired or I think that Corp and it
looks like she was inspired by have I
wonder it was she did she ever mention
women that she was inspired by her
Janice or similar thing I just see him
saying like I was like excuse me I was
thinking of someone like Eileen clay who
seemed to me didn't know it's uh well
loyal Saarinen eros Ellis Aaron's wife
who really taught her about weaving know
that was an important person but most of
the architects who she had close
relationships with like Alto or Eliel
Saarinen or mieze mieze was really
somebody who really transformed and
really helped codify a lot of her
thinking she had women friends in the
sense like knowing the Raymond Antron
and Raymond's
wife Android and Raymond's an
interesting architect who's modernist
they go to they do work in Japan and
come back so she does textiles for know
almost they're worse these kind of kinds
of friendships but but really on the
architectural side it was clearly meant
Charlotte Charlotte Pyrenean produces
designs for Knoll generaiiy is writing
back to her because he comes over sit
for six months and and says there's a
small American company that wants to
produce modern contemporary design she
sends the Zions but they're really
designs from the 1930s like the stool
and she does tubular furniture and for
install doesn't think it's right for for
the new brand for where Knoll is going
question about what we've seen in the
presentations and just clearly you made
the point about kind of been an amazing
art artist as well in her the kind of
diversity of her practice and it's sort
of you know just thinking and again
perhaps this is motivated by me as being
an art historian you know what gets
included in the archive what what are
the records one of the materials that
contribute to the history of somebody's
career and whether those objects are
seen within her practices and architects
or as something that slightly outside of
batiks just thinking about the the kinds
of materials that go towards creating a
history of someone's career I think I
think it's really interesting because
recently there's a boot called monsters
which which effectively documents the
beautiful the hand drawings and the
monstrous and but before that I think
Carlos would have almost did that to
keep her sane you know it was all this
kind of something that she did in in I
with the office and she was kind of
reluctant to necessarily make them
public for some time but I think you
know there were things that you came
across in the house really yeah but I
think now recently I think she's
beginning to understand since keeping
herself that there's this relationship
between to me always if you look at the
forms and you look at the detail there's
a there's so much connection between the
between the different practices so
between the drawings between the
sculptures between the buildings there
is there's evidence of my significant
crossover I don't know if it was their
attack there was always there a rigorous
selection procedure and
canadair consider went to Gratz and
sifted through I mean a small architect
self you know not sure if the sketch is
significant or not but and that's
something that you obviously have
professional archivists can see well
actually we think that that is and it's
an interesting question about whether
the monsters meet each other or not I'm
not sure yes I've seen publications and
but well I think just in the for the
sake of time we'll move on to the next
two papers but hopefully we'll have time
to kind of weave together make all these
connections between our papers so but
thank you again our next two speakers in
this panel and we have dr. Ellen Rowley
use an architectural historian based in
Dublin and a shoe looks primarily at
20th century island and is someone who
is very much invested in thinking about
history as three museums and is
currently developing the new tenement
Museum in in Dublin and our stew my
prime my mix and then our second paper
in the second half of the panel is
Suzanne Ewing who is senior lecturer at
the Edinburgh school of architecture and
landscape architecture and so I'd like
you to join with me in welcoming them to
the panel organizing them inspiring
wonderful and conference and exhibition
and book and so my presentation is and I
suppose in stark contrast to the more
canonical and prolific figures that
we've been looking at this morning or in
this session and and it considers the
position of women in the past and Irish
architecture but through the micro
history very much to the hidden history
and it stands I suppose were like look
at this this character in this work as I
have done once in in Ireland and once or
twice worth students I put her as a well
in a kind of a binary position with
Eileen Gray who's always pulled out as
the Irish were
an architect but who left and the score
at E in 1898 I never came back and so
I'm really into God like the whole
business of bread and butter hidden
histories and so it's the beginning of
research into women and architecture in
Ireland asking questions of Irish
society and his architectural culture
which since the 1980s as you all know
has produced internationally acclaimed
and practices with women partners and
O'Donnell to me graft and architects and
also McCulloch movin and the
granddaughter of today's hero
Ruth O'Hurley is a director of McCallum
Wilson and this their paper today fear
of not this papers hero rather is
Maureen hope and and so this is a
discussion of some of the work that she
was an agent or some kind of conscious
m4 in October 1940 just as war was
raging in Europe Ireland's first nursery
school opened an impoverished slum
reading corner of Dublin all of frost
aged four and Bernadette Timmons age
two-and-a-half became the first children
to attend the account informs us that
olive was a sliced child while
red-haired Bernadette one of a family of
12 quote has personality she rebelled
against sleeping in a rest bed but
slumbered peacefully when taken on
anyone's lap unquote design and color
were central to the nursery from the
outset so that each child had a motif
embroidered on their towel and overalls
olive selected a blue cat while
appropriately according to our account
little Bernadette chose the three little
pigs
and as a neutral country newly
independent since the 1920s and having
just redraft at its constitution in 1937
so as to reflect its deeply Catholic and
family-oriented nature Ireland was able
during the early 1940s to consider Civic
Improvement the nursery in question st.
Bridget's was an endeavour of the ladies
committee of the civics Institute a
philanthropic organization intent upon
Dublin's inter alia moral improvement
the civics Institute was simply a group
of civic minded individuals numbering
about a hundred very much inspired us
the previous speakers mentioned Patrick
gathers the physicalism of goddess and
in 1914 the Institute instigated a major
competition for a town plan for Dublin
and and an an exhibition leading to
Patrick Abercrombie say she plan which
was the foundation of tank planning as a
discipline in Ireland and and in this
image this is the publication's from
that 1914 published in 1922 as Ireland
gained independence and the frontispiece
is an engraving by Harry Clark where we
see the city and conceived of as well a
personification of the diseased creature
touching and the decrepit tenement Gorge
and building and then these three
structures of neoclassical imperial
power which are all ablaze which have
been and damaged in the course of the
struggle for Irish independence
preceding this up to 1922 and so within
this idea we have the idea heir for
Ireland for the first time M of the
moral authority of the architect to cure
the disease city which is very much
something coming through the Civic's
Institute and very original for Ireland
at this moment and through the nineteen
twenties and thirties the Institute kept
the house in question and slum clearance
alive it founded the first social
studies course at Trinity College and it
founded probation
services patient welfare's and in
hospitals the and the Irish Catholic
Association and more Orkut the Irish
Country Women's Association the ICA
possibly its most visible and least
known legacy was Dublin's playgrounds
from the 1930s the civics Institute are
custodians of children's public play
spaces on behalf of the public authority
Dublin Corporation and this continues
until the 1980s and there's more nuanced
and focused interest for the civics
Institute highlighted its pursuit of
better life for urban Irish children of
course for the social reformer Street
playa seen as a symptom of social
disorganization to be countered by
planning playgrounds in the letter to
the editor of the Irish Times in
nineteen thirty two of the civics
Institute members called for us
generally in Ireland to attend to the
needs of children that they have nowhere
to play and that by making playgrounds
we will have quote better public morals
because children who are happily playing
under supervision will not ultimately
become juvenile delinquents and the
civics Institute thought figures from
the Irish police forced the Guardi
and around child fatalities and street
accidents during the Year 1931 and
indeed Hershey six children under the
age of 12 lost their life on the streets
Dublin when renowned architect and town
planner Manning Robertson was the
Institute chairman one of the most
active protagonist and indeed the main
designers of the Civic's Institute
playgrounds and subsequent and nurseries
was architect
Maureen hope nay cuff here she is what
her girls at the drawing board looking
at new archive material around the
voluntary design work of Maureen hope we
begin to draw a portrait of a
professional married woman as benevolent
mediator of social services
seeing her hope like other married women
architects married women doctors married
women lawyers married women secretaries
in Ireland were unable to practice until
1970
with the with due to the marriage bar so
the abolition of the marriage bar only
comes in in 1970 so my mother would
fight to give up her job when she got
married and as the Irish Constitution
stay should quote this clause one in
particular the state recognizes that by
her life within the home woman gives to
the state of support without which the
common good cannot be achieved and to
the state child therefore endeavor to
ensure that mothers shall not be obliged
by economic necessity to engage in labor
to the neglect of their duties in the
home unquote and I remind you this until
1973 and graduation from University
College Dublin UCD in 1939 from
architecture and cloth married Liverpool
trained English architect Allen hope who
by the end of the nineteen forties won
the Royal Institute of Architects of
Ireland the or IAI gold medal for his a
spoke aspera factory and from 1948 since
demolished in the late 1980s which is
typical of the very reckless behavior
towards twentieth century buildings in
Ireland and so I suppose most of what
I'm doing is a kind of a pea or exercise
in trying to counter this the the
disdain and public and disinterest act
of disinterest dangerous disinterest in
20th century architecture with this
example we can see her membership in the
civics Institute or something
oh sorry um yeah yeah skipped a major
part and so Maureen story is on the
other hand is not a public one unlike
her husband her career does not retain
detail of public commissions but rather
speaks of small-scale backdrops designed
to improve conditions for the less
well-off but this is not an oppositional
account of wife versus architect husband
collaborate collaboration or japanned
Maureen's practice in the first instance
we encounter encounter her an Allen and
architect friends designing and building
their own ski
domicile in Fox Rock County Dublin
meander from 1939 inspired by alto with
concrete block walls clad with cedar
boards and the exterior and plywood
lined and the interior is completely
intact and lived in continues to be
lived in by the family today you can
visit it during the summer months he
concerns in the email and pop in and see
us has made the same time as meander the
end of the 19th Hershey's and into the
nineteen forties Maureen hope is engaged
in the design of fans gardens or sand
pits as we might call them with money
Robertson and a team had to just buy
this captain couch parcels to this
Institute in a letter from Maureen to
Robertson and we can see I'm not gonna
get into the details was just it did it
in the hut the hope archive which is a
private collection that will be we're
trying to get it out into the public
domain but with this example with the
sand gardens we can see her membership
of the circus institute things that
brings the possibility of activism
enabling Maureen and her peers to
contribute to public life and social
welfare were alternatively they would
have been muted here Maureen is
recommending the employment of railway
sleepers instead of concrete due to
material shortages of the mid-war she is
advising mining Robertson who in turn is
advising the Office of Public Works
government body so a seemingly naive and
innocuous route into public policy
material culture of childhood
environments in this instance the simple
humble San pish becomes a document of
social history while Irish histories
have records the fight for women's
suffrage and the links with the
nationalist cause and a socialist battle
like Sade the Dublin women laundry
workers strike of 1945 I'd argued that
this is something different
whereby the scaffold of the civics
Institute empowered a genteel polite
middle to upper-class activism that was
in practice fearsome and markedly
effective
as we'll see in terms of the planning
and enduring success of the nursery
centers and so about these nurseries and
avant-garde for Ireland and that they
introduce a brand new social
infrastructure the first to the laughs
to thank Bridget's the second to the
right is st. joseph¬¥s and their
dominions of utterly unheroic Brandon
Booker buildings architecture with small
a and how first of all in Bridget's
housing a converse of tennis pavilion in
the corner of the public gardens a man
choice square catering for children aged
between two and five so called preschool
age and an open for children of working
mothers who these children would have
alternatively been left to their own
devices a fundraising pamphlet from 1941
and importantly the nursery central
dictum from the outset was that it was
not to be a substitute for the family
the social facts coming out very clearly
about reading the Constitution diocesan
Catholic diocesan correspondence and the
archive papers of the civics Institute
and established or affirmed for me that
it was a great source of shame for the
mother to have to work and as an example
around the nurseries or until commented
it was embarrassing for women to work
long hours and quote their children
would be lonely and would slip into bad
habits owing to lack of supervision and
would thus grow up bad citizens at the
same time there was a rations coming out
of Catholic social teaching for the
state to interfere with the workings of
the family so a nursery like this was
controversial and laid out in its
defense and the civics Institute stated
that it wasn't to interfere with the
most natural form of government in
Ireland was the family that was the that
was the the forum destined by nature
they said
and that this nursery was designed to
strengthen rather than weaken the
spiritual and natural ties of family
life and most especially the intimate
link between the mother and her children
the nursery was paid for the first three
years by an English couple mr. and mrs.
Simmons who were he was working in
insurance and they had witnessed during
several stays in Dublin in the hotel the
grashey motel on O'Connell Street they'd
seen lots of little children looking
after little baby brothers and sisters
and at the same time they had lost their
three-year-old granddaughter so in her
memory they sought to encourage quote
good citizens to the workings of the
civics institution Maureen hopes and
files which was quite peripheral in the
early stages and the adaptive tennis
pavilion was a corporation gift and hope
seems to be brought in slightly later as
the project architect by the fifth of
July 1940 the civics Institute secretary
miss keen is recording the making of the
crash M or nursery and for the
benefactors and she writes in a letter
that there's the installation of a new
roof and quote the workmen are wildly
enthusiastic about everything not
satisfied with the book measurements for
fittings they brought little children in
and measured them to ensure correct
Heights for shelves seats etc so the
nursery opens on the 22 November 1940
pretty soon after its opening efforts
were being made to make another nursery
across the city in another slum
inflicted area of Dublin 8 the liberties
and this time hope was procedurally
placed to spearhead its design from
conception and this is st. Joseph's the
most lengthy correspondence collection
charts hundreds of letters written by
hope and some of her colleagues
eliciting building materials and
procuring services for free or for cheap
over tree tires and pounds worth of
construction currency was found which
allowed hope to make a new building here
rather than adapt an old existing one
and the nursery as as late as its floor
plan very simple and clear layout and it
was all about devising
a very clear circulation sequence of
work together bringing shelter and space
for proms and inside there's this large
sealant play room which prioritizes that
cross ventilation emphasis on natural
light and these timber doorways and air
through the east south wall action to
this play space having direct access to
garden and here's an image of the
opening with people smoking cigarettes
and dropping ash on children's head and
striking aspect of this endeavor was
firstly and the apparently selfless
pursuit of better conditions and the
benevolence of the ladies committee was
so low-key one suspects there was not to
earth the Catholic authorities and just
as an aside it's interesting that the
Archbishop John Charles McQuaid was
deeply suspicious of the Institute and
because it was multi-denominational and
he was always trying to get spies in
there and trying to figure out what's
going on
he alley had a vigilance committee and
he he had a guy spying on that and the
Irish housewives Association and the
Teddy boys of Dublin and things like
that so this isn't a made-up this is Oh
like I got my archive material and but I
suppose the the interest the interest to
me was how utterly child centered this
whole endeavor was motivated by the need
to make tiny children independent and
competence in their daily chores and the
absence of a parent and at a time when
Dublin slums were the worst in urban
Europe and and there was the highest
incidence of death by tuberculosis in
Europe and trade the nineteen forties
and so there was a black cloth narrative
of extreme need and taking the early
correspondence around st. Bridget's
these reports from Miss keen to the
benefactors mr. and mrs. Simmons in
October 1941 she writes that they had a
cup of tea organised for the mothers the
new mothers of the crash and it was the
first time that one mother had had tea
outside of her tenement dwelling in
eight years in the same Lasser
and we hear the children are becoming
plump by March 1942 with 28 toddlers
installed a dietitian visitor from West
Africa comments it's an quote I've never
examined better nourished children
unquote a 1946 reports highlights the
precarious nature of Dublin's housing a
job of tenements quote one little girl
O'Brien had sore foot or weak taken to
Temple Street Hospital and Friday
septic reports mrs. Kane's other child
was killed by falling over banister and
tenement house and she was keeping the
second child at home for present and on
for the present unquote another strike
condition kind of my final point M is
the ambition and far-reaching aspiration
really outward looking of the air ladies
committee which wasn't surprising given
how highly educated most of these women
where for instance at st. Bridget's the
doctor was dr. Angela Russell who was
the wife of Dublin City magical after
but unable to practice as she was
married she would give of her services
for free magical services for free air
voluntarily and for instance when social
policy was shifting and post-war Britain
that legislation was circulated amongst
the ladies committee they invited
speakers over from Britain to lecture
provide workshops and it would seem that
as soon as barriers to travel relief to
this is just something I found in mrs.
hopes in Maureen's archive from much
later from the 60s and when barriers to
travel were left at following the war
and members of the civics Institute
world Avis mead traveled with her
husband in 1954 to Mexico City and
ditched him to visit nurseries
underneath she went to Sweden and and
she made extensive notes about equipment
especially around bedding and kitchens
in the same way when it came to finally
redesigning st. Bridget's nursery after
years of attempts to replace the Tallis
pavilion Maureen Hope turned to
Scandinavian practices and very you know
unsurprisingly so I found a series of
pretty relentless
two different nurseries and nursery
supply equipment in Denmark and Sweden
and she was clearly a breast of American
and post-war play experiments and
adventure playgrounds for instance the
final result was a prefab prefabricated
single-story block given by Dublin
corporation in 1967 these are the
buildings of my youth I would say a
prefabrication of temporary blocks
they're still there and so my children
have just my youngest is four and she
just finished here few weeks ago this
building temporary building and an
insight and proceeded this image taken
couple weeks ago and maureen hope did
her magic whereby she brought you know
an amazing array of color and she
shifted scale and you know brought as
much lighting as possible and changed
floor planning as much as she could
so this study i am ivan ivan of an
unassuming building in Dublin's north
inner city and its sister nursery in
Marion Dublin ace reveals various layers
of Irish urban social history from the
period as well as signposting the
presence however latent that may be of
international architectural modernism in
the Irish Free State these examples
force us to consider how such
international modernist practices
collide with the indigenous strain of
Catholicism and it's growing hold on
social teaching attempting to keep
married women at home at all costs
it's about local level latent activism
which by focusing on the child and by
extension the mother and the family most
commonly but not exclusively in the slum
context seeks to influence urban Irish
society as a whole
thank you
- sort of traveling tour we're taking
this morning with so many new companions
it's a real privilege to be here get my
right screen I'm reading for my laptop
so that's why I'm sort of slightly
[Music]
the preoccupation conflation and
contradictions between the image and
identity of individual architects the
profession as a body on the one hand and
the realities of architectural practice
and work on the other frame the context
for the voices of experience project
which would I'm going to talk about
today thirty years ago Andrew st.
explored there setting out some tropes
where these were most at odds the
architect is hero ingenious as medieval
as professional the 19th century UK as
businessman in the 19th century us as
gentleman house by house Ian as
entrepreneur in the relatively small
literature field of historical work
which has taken professional and other
architect of practice as its subject and
there's many people contributing to that
in this room this book exposes the
divisions between the witching powers of
art and the facts of everyday practice
that cry out against it traced back by
saying to Ruskin Ian origins
[Music]
the preoccupation has generally been
echoed and reinforced in the discipline
of architecture and its
historiographical a saint has pointed
out the pursuit of an attention to sound
building and the inevitable
collaborative processes that are
entailed a rare in architectural
historical accounts or in architects own
articulations and presentations of their
endeavors francesca hughes gathering of
essays and cases of extended ways of
thinking and doing architectural
practice was significantly published at
the time in the 1990s of collectively
looking at other alternative desired
practices driven by high architectural
practice might be reconstructed from a
feminist or at least a regen dirt
perspective and Peggy dima's recent work
of course begins to face this
contradiction between art and reality
between desire and reality and between
the material embodiment of architectural
work and the immaterial personal and
social labor that is actually the real
work of contemporary and the historic
architect related recent scholarship is
developing from a humanities perspective
in this wonderful work around industries
of architecture by Katie Lloyd Thomas
worked from kth Stockholm academics
around architecture and feminism's and
we've got a forthcoming publication
around behind-the-scenes women in design
history in architecture and culture so
in the voices of experienced project we
follow these foundational threads and
actively explore alternative practice
practices of histories documentation and
dissemination which might open and
clarify the complexity and Ecology's of
what architects looked like and what
architects do and we aim to foreground
this by focusing on conversation social
and personal over the individually
authored biography with assumed powers
attributes and aims and also
significantly documentation in situ
where different aspects and several
projects of sound building may have
overlapped in time where are the
existing historical sources for
architecture in Scotland they're pretty
limited David Walker's ambition
Dictionary of Scottish architecture
project is the most in debt
and consolidated public database it
advertises its scope as being the period
1662 1980 but the most detailed
information covers the hundred forty
years between 1840 and 1918 when mostly
professional records provide the primary
source material alta out of thousands
and thousands of entries I don't know
the full final number 194 are women and
of these only seven heads or faces of
women are visible who I briefly
introduce now starting with the earliest
face or head edith mary Wardlaw burnett
and the entry suggest that she was
possibly an architect professional she
was always in relation daughter
granddaughter niece duty wife assistant
next lecture assistant in the offices of
and some history is clearly need
untangling she's an unusual entry in
this dictionary because she's always
also present in some other domains she
has a profile entry in the women in
architecture comm database and the most
publicly visible work recorded seems to
be Glasgow's merket cross 1930 with
possible involvement in the urban
building behind other work was domestic
in scotland sterling show where there's
some sign drawings a real rarity as
we've noted before number two kathleen
Veatch perhaps a gentlewoman architect
and facts here tend to the conditional
with gaps and discrepancies in the
documentation and quite a lot of
anecdotal evidence of course you find is
contradictory and many of these entries
are based on our abhi nomination papers
and of course all the proposers are
always men at this point and one of
Kathleen's few known works 1930s little
salt hole also appears in local scored
at the Scottish Borders accounts and
historic environment archives as it was
listed as a building in 2008
Margaret Brody was also working the
1930s and she was pursuing the optimism
of the modern movement
she's been acknowledged as the architect
for the site layout of Glasgow's 1938
Empire except its exhibition and some of
its buildings which includes the women
of the Empire Exhibition which has been
published and talked about another
Margaret Margaret love was admitted to
the ER Arabiya in 1938
Margaret Macon's in 1941 and just a line
but she was chief architect for the
island of Mauritius for six years in the
1960s Margaret oh sorry that's Margaret
makings again Margaret beverage and like
many of the women 194 in this dictionary
only seems to be recorded because she
was a student member of the RBA there's
no further work or discussion about what
she might have done since and finally an
Duff who we will return to later so Ann
was assistant principal of architect of
operon Hill development plan for the
combine all new town Development
Corporation from 1966 and 68 and she was
the responsible for designing some of
the housing community facilities and
also lived in the new housing for a
while and of course the dictionary I'm
not trying to sort of openly deconstruct
it but there are obviously lots of
things outside this which we don't know
such as Jean Peyton Reed who doesn't
appear to be registered
so existing and dominant practices of
history documentation and dissemination
are evidenced in this example of the
dictionary of Scottish architects as
alphabetical dictionary or third
emphasis on biography the historian and
historical interpretation artifact
professional record institution reading
and searching by architect or building
so assumes a pre knowledge and a current
and correlative textual archival or
published evidence the practice of
history is usually as we know a project
of sifting selecting ordering
prioritizing and distilling for
narrative communication to our presence
but it's clear that when we are looking
for women who are making modern Scotland
in our case that the characteristics of
historical practice as shared by much of
the work in this conference shared so
far are the other way around they need
to be inventive searching they need to
expose they need to explicitly
accumulate we're not dealing with a
surplus quite clearly and being open to
architectures expanded field and
definition is making in its immaterial
and material sense of course means
working at the edges of outside and
beyond the institutional domains which
steward the formal knowledge and
archives sustaining the Canon a
chronological ordering of these these
194 women does show the increased
numbers of women studying or working in
living in Scotland entering the
architectural profession I'm just going
to run through these very quickly a
large proportion did not seem to
progress beyond our Ketil study as they
were student members particularly from
the 1950s and 60s the ones in red
Margaret Richardson Kersting Borland
I'll come back to because they're part
of our project as well as and us and
these entries become very patchy
although I'm delighted that Ewan and
Fiona are in here and which is wonderful
and which but I argue that this shows
how reliant this criteria is on the
normalized famous and all my already
recognized figures the invisibility of
women or the not famous in architectural
includes many emissions and including
participants in our project and while
the dictionary privileges textual
sources over the visual there are some
extraordinary image based comments not
very far beneath below the objective
veneer of the database and there is
acknowledgement for this honor you know
I think that the authors of the database
are quite aware of this and they want it
to be improved and thickened but it's
quite extraordinary to read read
comments like this when we encounter
what we think are good records so the
second part I suppose we move into the
project twenty-five years ago I started
working as an architectural assistant in
Glasgow
just after Glasgow is post industrial
reframing a city of culture in 1990 and
around the time the Elspeth King
published the hidden history of glass
cos women and I found the book
extraordinary compelling and fascinating
but at that point I hadn't grasped how
it had emerged from an impetus from a
number of people and organizations and
relationships to rebalance the mat-su
urban and civic histories that have been
constructed around the year of culture
women in profile actively aimed to
ensure a representation of women's
culture and form the foundations of the
Glasgow women's library led by the
visionary energetic and Adelle Patrick
and Sue John an Adele Patrick was
interestingly part of a feminist Housing
Group group to take root working in the
late 1990s around the time of another
Glasgow makeover the year of
architecture and design on self-build
housing in Glasgow gala gate and huge
protests and contestation Glasgow
women's library moved into
purpose-designed premises the men's
Reading Room in Bridgeton designed by
Collective architecture and more on them
later only a few years ago and Vaska
women's library where jude barber who's
here as well director of collective
architecture is also on the board has
been a fantastic supportive site for the
evolving public architecture in
conversation events that we held in 2016
17 and it's I have to say at this point
dude and Nicola McLaughlin is sitting
next to her it's been a fantastic
ongoing collaboration project which we
are sort of moving forward with the
other key impetus for the timing of this
project was the backward-looking and
parochial representation of architecture
in the 2016 our Ras festival of
architecture year and the state of the
profession has been sorrowfully
commented on by Kathy's lesser in a
recent urban realm short essay during
the festival of architecture program the
image of the architect was presented in
the National Portrait Gallery through a
series of architects profiles the
exhibition to display portraits of those
who already had their image steadfastly
fixed in society
the architects who'd found places in
public galleries and on wealthy private
walls opposed to created during the 1999
City of Culture showed a male tribe of
similar headshots entitled Architects of
Glasgow a whole generation of educated
architects later nothing has changed so
the impetus is not isolated and it was
shared as good backstory it was shared
with the Archie Fringe collective who
launched an exciting new open platform
in 2016 is it the more positive side of
practice and life moving forward and
what we love about the new platform is
its inclusiveness of multiple viewpoints
emerging practices experimental projects
reflective and collective stances as an
evolving open-source web platform it
opens a place to see to meet and to make
architectural culture in new ways
so voices of experience is a
collaborative project we're in the
middle of constructing a website which
has got a different domain name voices
architecture rather than voices of
experience we can share that when it's
when it's live we've constructed a
series of conversations between a highly
experienced architect or maker of the
built environment and an architect or
other professional at the outset of
their career and it's deliberately the
start of an ongoing audio archive
intended to be housed in the Glasgow
women's library each conversation has a
project or thematic concern in common
often crossing significant
time spans of engagement and the
participants discuss their work on
location in situ the contextual focus is
late twentieth century Scotland and
obviously for us this is a significant
period of national history when the
country itself is rethinking its
national and political identity
contributors to the project project have
include that architect Margaret Rich's
Nicola you can see here conservation
architect Dorothy Bell with Emma fair
has also from collective architecture
and daph who I introduced earlier in
conversation with Kathy Houston who's
been working on a community master plan
encumber knowled
with collective architecture mary
Laverty in conversation with
conservation architect writer
Fiona Sinclair and these are some of the
events we had in the Glasgow women's
library and Kirsty Borland planner and
architect in conversation with a young
planner heather Claridge who's working
at moon for Glasgow City Council
Denise Bennett's is probably the most
well known person we've had
conversations with speaking to grease
mark who has worked in a number of
school and more activist led projects
Jocelyn Cunliffe who's for many years
worked as a conservation air architect
in urban Embera in conversation with
Melanie Hey working also in conservation
between the west of Scotland and London
histories are hidden always in relation
personal and social there are many gaps
that we need to reread in new ways now
we're very much I'm aware we're very
much in the middle of a project at this
moment and we're working through the
methodological pragmatic practices and
parameters and looking for what we might
how we might take in frame project
forward but we're really driven by the
idea of making an audio archive as
resilient that has an almost
ethnographic thick district scription
quality to it the transcription
listening will be part of what we
contribute as a human
archive to the highest at Glasgow
Women's Library architecture is the most
public of Arts its entangled with
conceptual and literal constructions of
society and environment it determines
how we shape neighborhoods yet expresses
the hopes and dreams of the communities
we dwell in and move through but how do
we see hear and talk about architecture
in public life beyond encounters in
everyday life arc title projects and the
people who make them are usually exposed
through professional and educational
channels they reach public audiences
through grand design media stories only
when they become controversial or of
course through the persistent
perpetuation of the cult of
individuation the figure the head the
face of the person representing the face
of the building the professional of the
project insights from the recordings
we've made so far be really broad
ranging and generous very much personal
and social they include hire architects
discover their preoccupations their
strengths their range in their niche
through different working relationships
and formats amazingly resonant
experiences women entering in tactical
education decades apart and the making
and remaking of homes and work at
different stages of life light look so
we've shared some of these excerpts at
the architecture in conversation events
at Glasgow women's library where the
paired conversations have offered us
opportunity to listen to others
conversations and become Marg much part
of a larger more public conversation
around tea and cake voices embody the
different ages voices in the spoken
voice with mind slightly creaking at the
moment embody the different ages
backgrounds bodies and geographical
journeys of these participants and the
conversations engender a wonderful sense
of listening in where the personal is
mixed with quite significant insights in
themselves the community conversations
have become a cumulative so promote some
outline structuring questions which we
all maybe start out with how do you
start what inspired you who inspired you
what is your dream project what's your
advice to young architects the
conversations
really move forward into amazing hours
of fascinating reflection and working in
six you are continually a set of prompts
and encounters to deepen and evidence
some of the things that would be talked
about in the abstract or in the more of
a recollected mood and the audiences at
the project events have responded really
positively to the social history aspects
of the conversations they've also openly
shared their own insights stating the
favorite aspects of projects to be the
modesty of these great architects the
variety of issues raised that show bold
insights and achievements and an insight
into all aspects of architecture so
we're really excited because we feel
that this project demonstrates the
public appetite to understand what
architects do rather than what actually
some selectively choose to show making
good architecture is a complex endeavor
that's potentially significant with our
collective life architectural knowledge
is practice based and experiencial we
therefore need to pay attention to the
real sophistication of the production of
our built environment the teams the
interrelationships and the roles of
expert and skillful practice negotiation
position deeply within it we need to
extend beyond the narrow bounds of
professional architectural culture the
authority of formally designed
designated critics designers and
historians of architecture validated by
their media professional educational
institutional status tend to hold a
monopoly on who can speak for and about
architecture our aim in the project is
to enrich Milkmen to the historical
lenses and the many practice of
documentation and dissemination through
which we encounter all the many women
who have made and are making modern
Scotland thank you
[Music]
[Applause]
well thank you for - and very rich
presentations which I think spoke so
well - to one another and I think that
idea of historical research as activism
as well is something that you both
brought up and the importance of history
- impact on the present was something
that really spoke to me very powerfully
and through these two presentations so
I'm sure there's lots of questions for
you as well so I'm going to just open
open its up and ask if anyone wants to
us are two speakers particular questions
my relating the red here
[Music]
you didn't mention Blanco white she's in
the list please
and sorry I should speak into here and
she's also in the exhibition here we're
not claiming at all to be definitive I'm
suppose what I'm doing is really showing
yeah the patchy reality and how we're
beginning to navigate it I think there's
a lots more work to do and I think we're
discovering so much in the way I mean I
should say can i interject it is kate
who's sitting there we're going to have
a conversation with on Saturday so we're
really delighted with a Eileen who is
going to be in conversation yeah so
anyway when I did my year out ROM John
in Edinburgh Blanco white was
particularly mentioned to me as a really
tough operator yeah I mean one of the
interesting things I mean I'm over
critique possibly the dictionary but it
is one of these you know a project that
attempted to be systematic attempts to
offer a domain and what's very
interesting is it doesn't take very far
to think how you know how what are the
selection criteria people who've studied
in a Scotland who've made buildings in
Scotland who've had an influence what
does that really mean you know I mean
that's actually a very complicated
question and most of what I've heard of
the last day and a half of showing the
complexity of how people move between
different domains
and influence in different ways well it
is interesting as well thinking about a
digital resource as not only just you
talked about and opens an open source
platform for as a way of capturing and
disseminating such history and obviously
that has great practical effects but
kind of philosophically as well to think
about this kind of an idea of an open
ended history I think again you are both
it there's so much work to be done that
the idea that one person can do this
these are often very collaborative
efforts that need to go beyond a
publication date and Kea need to be
revised rear avise added to and I guess
that question comes into histories of
Irish architecture as well which again
you were sort of suggesting that this is
you know a kind of an idea of a history
under threat still and so much work to
be done a gr version of the dictionary
of Scottish architects the dictionary of
Irish architects has it goes up to 19
for she and I you know so we have this
imperiled and these apparent buildings
which is yet which are you know gender
neutral yes yes they're just offensive
regardless who makes them whatever
according to state etc but we're looking
to start this women and Irish
architecture are women and architecture
in Ireland because I won't acknowledge
some writers and conservation
practitioners and whatnot activists but
we would start with the dictionary of
Irish architects and it today's has been
generated by mentions in the Irish
builder or a membership of the or IAI
and it would seem with the first female
member of the or AI isn't until 1944 so
and it's M it's established in 1839 so
over a hundred years later and struttin
so that's a it's a really acute I I
drove through the post-colonial
condition or you know you're so obsessed
with what your national can be and
because you're getting freedom you know
Tony it's not even hundred years as
Ireland's independence
such obsession with this Volks Geist you
know and that that that we're just so
behind in in even considering gender
issue
and it's really extreme you know I was
struck by the fact that in both cases
you're talking about creating an
alternative place to record and explore
women's architecture and it strikes me
that what we really would like is for
women architects to be included in the
mainstream narrative I think that ending
up with a situation where women are only
acknowledged as being on the margins is
very unsatisfactory even though perhaps
this is the only way that we make some
progress towards it but have you got any
strategies for how we might change those
mainstream records of architectural
achievement to recognize women's
architecture more adequately well I
think I think I mean I feel finding more
and more I'm thinking that the the place
of the record is usually so
institutional so private or difficult to
access that actually how does it enter
the public domain and you know it's far
away quite clearly for most
consciousness as per you know Harry's
introduction about Larrabee you know
gold-medal sort of persona
I mean what's been really interesting
our project and I think you know working
with Jude and Nicola from you know
successful practice and working outside
academia working in a context which
which is the women's library which is
in-between in a way that is helping to
structure what we do and how we do it
because of each turn and it's not
particularly by design it's been as we
go along but we're actually
communicating about what we're doing and
who with where that's drawing in public
comment and this social history aspect
has been really super interesting that
people are absolutely transfixed by the
social history of the place obviously
the glass goes women's library minute
it's extraordinary it's not it's a sort
of locust and I suppose it comes back to
someone mentioned earlier about that way
you mentioned the micro history and for
me it's something about this holding the
kind of scale of history and
acknowledging and valuing the most micro
which may be one conversation over two
hours in some unit and how that then
you can access that so you're not
getting a kind of a big institution or
record that you have to access this and
it is interesting to think about the
role of oral histories within that
project because it often you do get the
hesitations and the you know the arms
and the earth as someone's telling you
their narrative their story which again
allows for that allows for their kind of
either nonlinear they the moments of
failure of of a more complicated messy
history which is not this I will tell
you my story from this date to this date
but allows for some of those the other
hesitations I think to come through
which again some perhaps written
histories don't always capture don't
adequately capture so I think that kind
of oral the different modes of history
and historical research is what he's a
really again important thing that I
think both the presentations in Tull
I should say in response to your
question that and this isn't an issue of
making another platform the the the
female history the history of women in
architecture in Ireland it is simply not
there at all so it's not like I'm
looking to propose an alternative
platform it's to start put it into the
dictionary of Irish architects so if you
google them now dia da Jie you you won't
you won't find a woman
yeah you know I mean I think Eleanor
booth Clare's mentioned she was a
senator but you know it's if this is
this is M this is an extreme this is a
crisis situation that just come up and
recently an Irish drama I don't know if
you heard about waking the feminists
where there's there's very little like
there's loads of Irish women play right
but none of them are getting gigs and
the National Theatre and so then we've
also got the repeal of the eighth which
is to reproduction right so it's it like
that like feminism in Ireland is a bag
to or activism around gender issues is
about to explode I suppose right now so
architecture is one aspect of that I
should say also that when I talked about
the marriage bar there was and there was
an exemption for teachers because so
many teachers were female
that the state had to live
to that for teachers or there would have
been bloomin nobody to teach it again so
you know so it is really extreme so when
I'm listening to what Suzanne has done
it's with it's in or you know it's it's
it works of course after treatment but
in terms of what's going on in with the
with the Scottish and setting off the
record straight are widening the record
where we're still at the stage of
setting one record so as to stop
demolition so we're you know we're so
not nuanced in this it's a crisis
situation I would say there's a question
here hi there I wondered if Ellen can
tell us a bit more about the tenement
museum that you were yard with and
particularly when it's planning to open
yeah yeah good question I wouldn't want
to know about that girl
I chose over here talking about in the
Institute of historical research and do
you know the Center for studies of home
Queen Mary and Geoffrey so talking to
ants you like to give a lecture on us
and probably should have advertised to
its height of but to do connection to
this because actually in terms of
women's history and hidden history it's
fascinating so the tenement museum I'm a
project curator and it's to open a wall
strip within the last week it's to open
officially in January but soft-launched
December we have just signed off on them
on our literary immersive experience
which is that beautiful poetry by Paula
Mian and other Irish writers and so I
would say the stars of December if
you're in Dublin you will get in and I
actually have an office there so I can
be emailed and I can sneak you in one or
two of you not not everyone but yet the
tenement museum is really interesting
way of actually speaking of oral history
it's in Rouen as a community project so
there's no collection the collection is
memory and story and the walls of the
building so the walls can talk so
basically it's this very intense and
life of the 1740s building and we've got
lots of yeah story is essentially
I have two questions points one I've
been doing a lot of database research on
looking at women designers for example
one of the things that I noticed and you
know we sing a lot of digitization
projects of archives that could preview
it for example spend ten million dollars
digitizing two hundred and fifty
thousand images in two years but you
can't search by women so you can search
everything like the name the maker the
biggest item in the option in the
collection but or the smallest but you
can't search by gender and so that in
turn can't tell you how many women
designers or architects in our name
collection and I saw that you were using
the architecture dictionary what's their
actual to searches our architect and
building right I mean it's very broad
it's it's it's at the early stages I
mean it would admit it the early stages
of a project but so there's no nuance
right so your app so need to know a name
of an architect and in particular
identify building right so that's been
built right so that's really limited
yeah and I'm seeing that that's
something that I think you know if you
want to know how many women are in a
collection women designers are in a
collection or how few it does start to
open up your eyes once you see the no
that's me scrolling yeah so the second
thing is when I spoke to Florence Knoll
and she said in the forties you know she
architects architects if you're a woman
you fell into doing in interiors because
that's what women did and yet to the
stage she still calls herself an
architect and I'm wondering if you're
gonna use the strict definition of what
architecture is because I think by its
very nature it is limiting to what a
whole generation of women architects who
ended up doing interiors and not being
considered architects I think it really
is important to really
have a wide definition no absolutely I
mean there's huge amounts of I mean our
the the constituents of the
conversations we've had show the breadth
of what we're dealing with they've got
planners we would like to have landscape
architects we've got people working not
within necessarily defined identity of
an architect the dick tree of Scottish
architects has Dominic is prominent
without the term architect because it's
professionally that most of the source
material is from the profession and
that's something obviously we are not
we're just looking at that and noticing
it but I think we've known at the
conversations we've had have been
extraordinary I mean we've you have the
privilege of listening to them we will
be sharing them to get them out in
through the website through the Glasgow
women's library but what's extraordinary
is I suppose there's an issue that came
up yesterday about your presentation of
self in a conversation just through the
buildup of concerns and preoccupations
we found that individuals show the
nuance of a leash and being an architect
and it may be about spatial planning it
may be about concern for you know sort
of a social Drive or conservation you
know and these are this two sort of a
kind of a massive range of that term is
you know and the quote I have from flora
which is is it a useful term any norm or
of course I agree McLeod I don't think
it necessarily is but it's where we are
working with working from Oh Susan thank
you that both presentations were really
great I'm particularly interested in
your project cuz it's quite close to
something we've been doing a parlour as
well with public storytelling and these
public conversations and I'm really
interested in the motivation of the
audience who listened in to this
conversation which is both public and
intimate and I've been thinking about
the role of the audiences witness and I
just wondered if you had any thoughts
about what the emotional investment
years I mean I'd love to have more I
mean lots of work that we know it's
fantastic going on we need to learn from
and there is something for that intimacy
in the public the Glasgow women's
library setting it deliberately sets up
a space for many
elusive space so it's roundtables it's
not actually this kind of formal
arrangement even though there may be
some microphones and technology and
that's been very inclusive so they have
a list through their work over the years
which is built an audience the our key
fringe platform we were advertised
through which had a more general
architecture us of younger audience so
we're finding it's quite broad and not
analyzed it there's been about Jude
Nichol about 50 60 people at each of the
events we did in the women's library
yeah about sixty ish so and I suppose
the scale of that means that you there's
conversations with people around a table
this conversation litter and we were
doing we were actually playing back some
of their recordings so that we could
listen together and the converse ins
hadn't heard back the recordings so you
know we were sort of introducing quite
intimate aspects and I think it's
something we'd like to think more about
and have discussions with you know
parlor and about because if there's
something about the intimacy in the
listening in which gives the integrity I
think to what's being said but you have
to respect that it has to be it has to
be sort of respect what might be private
what might be public it also may be that
it feels spontaneous and natural and
authentic and there's a kind of
authenticity that that maybe really
engages people well a great thing about
a conference is to meet these encounters
and these conversations happen and I am
conscious that time marches on and we
need to leave time for lunch to fuel
those conversations because otherwise
we'll all feel a little weak after all
these kind of incredible ideas but
hopefully we'll use the breaks and
receptions to ask any questions that you
didn't have chance to ask and to make
conversation and friendships and
encounters that have been stimulated
placed by this event there's a bit of a
housekeeping lunch is going to be served
here and
in the barrel vault which is apparently
upstairs okay and then after lunch there
is a choice of where to go and there's a
session here at the AAA the open jewelry
and there's another session at the Paul
Mellon Center as well so it's up to you
you choose which one you go to and they
start at two o'clock so but I just want
to ask you to thank our panelists for
this idea of really drilling down
through very careful case studies and
researched the idea of hidden histories
and thinking about the strategies and
the politics of the kinds of work that
we do through our research so thank you
to you all
[Applause]
