street of architectures relationship
with emerging digital technology and
ecological consciousness in both theory
and practice after the Second World War
history of I'm going to sketch today
both in this lecture and in the seminar
suggests that successfully balancing
these preoccupations with the continuing
evolution of architectural practice may
be less straightforward than it
otherwise appears yesterday I talked
about the emergence of a kind of
postmodern understanding of urban visual
life in the theories of cancer townscape
it was his erect response to the purely
visual theories of townscape that a
number of architectural theorist tried
once more in the 50s and early 60s to
regain the sense of a discipline
beginning with John some ursins appealed
for the program as a fundamental source
of unity for modern architecture you
already drew his inspiration from
moholy-nagy sense of a new biologically
grounded formal aesthetic Rana bannon's
stop taking of 1960 which we'll go into
in much detail in a bit which called for
a new technological basis derived from
cybernetics and computer science and
Peter Eisenman's first forays into
formalism in 1963 publishing his call
for a formal basis of modern
architecture in architectural design the
pressures for a rigorous and unified
theory intensified between 1957 and 1963
when interest V is that those three
elements of architectural unification
the one on the basis of program the one
on the basis of technology and the one
on the basis of form actually
corresponds of course to the ancient
division of Vitruvian triad
thus writing in the Riv a journal in
1957 Samson opined that a theory of
architecture would be a quote statement
of related ideas resting on a
philosophical conception of the nature
of architect
on quote one he found in a group of
Mediterranean beliefs around reason and
antiquity stated by Albert II
reformulated in the age of Descartes
rewritten in pebbles critique of
Vitruvius than the game by lo CA you
harmed me later Duke huge in vilaça cata
pepe and luca brasi a he wrote corrosive
antiquity is the thing and look how
rational lovely seems to have set up
with primitive antiquity only resource
of the rational your own said down with
Mo Kio
rationalization needed genomic pure
didn't sit down with them typically up
with the Gothic and look irrational
villains dude said up with the Gothic
prototype of the rational and eventually
a voice is heard saying down with all
the styles and if it's rationalism you
want up with grain elevators and look
how beautiful that was summer sense
analysis acids like Walter Benjamin's
short history of photography right this
is the shortest history of architectural
theory that one has ever read in this
argument service and traced the idea of
the classical and rational and the
organic to its modern conception a
tragic Civic moved from the antique of
world of form to the program a local
fragment of social pact and Summerson
celebrated conclusion that the source of
unity and modern architecture is in the
social sphere in other words the
architect program the one new principle
involved in modern architecture in his
terms of program quote is the
description of the spatial dimensions
spatial relationships and other physical
conditions required for the convenient
performance of specific functions all
involving a process in time a
rhythmically repetitive pattern that
sanctions different relationships and
all satisfied and sanctified by the
classical tradition the problem we
identified as with a naive functionalism
was the lead for a way to translate such
programmatic ideas into appropriate form
a problem to which Summerson offers low
answer dismissing Bannerman's 95 1995
appeal to topology in his essay in the
new Brutalism as Summerson said an
attractive red herring I think it's a
herring summer since was not a little
dismayed at the unfamiliar and complex
forms that are cropping up in practice
around him through the extension of the
engineers role and on the screen you
have that extraordinary polemical
contrast between two objects of the
first machine age the one of the last
plates imbalance theories and design of
1960 where he compares unfavorably the
luca brasi JS attempt to look
technological and Bucky Fuller's attempt
to be technological Bucky Fuller's of
course realizing the technological
spirit of modernity in balance terms and
Luke Abruzzo only looking like it
realizing the themes of modernity I was
telling Mary van just now that once
turned to this page and said this
extremely invidious comparison and will
understand why we wanted one would want
to live in a tin box the problem yet
Summerson recognized in this tradition
that come to close in the modern period
to be superseded by a new scientific
paradigm that at the biological as
advanced by lászló moholy-nagy and of
course that's the moment is where the I
ca is putting forward a lot of new
exhibitions developed by the independent
group and banham to on growth inform on
movement and so on all to do with the
reinterpretation of the forms of nature
and in summerses terms the new
understanding of the forms of the DNA
molecule which has been published at
that time as mohali stated Summerson
went on architecture will be brought to
its fullest realization only when the
deepest knowledge of human life as a
total phenomenon in the biological whole
is available for muhuali
noted Summerson the biological was
psychophysical a demanding demanding a
theory of design matching a broad idea
of function
the call for the most far-reaching
implications of cybernetics to be
realized if the are dysfunction were at
last to be explicable in mechanistic
terms in this context the problem for
architecture Summerson concluded was
just discovered the appropriate language
for the expression of new biological
facts based on the discovery of the
structure of DNA his conclusion was
however pessimistic we concluded any
theory deposit program as the only
principal leads either to intellectual
contrivances or to the unknown the his
fear was that this missing language will
remain missing and our discomfort in the
face of this loss would soon be simply
quote a scar left in the mind by the
violent swing which has taken place
banner writing three years later was
more optimistic while he cited the
Summerson in deploring the style
mongering of the nineteen fifties a
period when an enterprising manufacturer
could have put out a do-it-yourself
pundit kit in which the aspiring serious
had only to fill in the blank in the
phrase the new ism and set up in
business as he himself had done the same
with the new Brutalism he found that
most of the blanket series that have
been lords to proves fallible and partly
because most labels have concentrated on
the purely formal side of what has been
built and projected and failed to take
into account the fact that nearly all
the new trends rely heavily on engineers
or technicians of genius or nearly so he
proposed that what was needed was a new
and equally but compelling slogan and
suggest did some of his own anticipatory
design we now see texture ultra we
talked about that in relationship to the
new Britta's 'm all in package design
service and perhaps even a more crumbly
aesthetic the most radical departure
from this via twitter via n-- triad
however was that proposed by a young PhD
student at Cambridge Peter Eisenman who
in 1963 propounded his faith in the
formal basis of modern architecture in a
short architecture article in
architecture design attempted to go
beyond the technological and the social
the program
the functional waking of a trivia sis
categories Iseman I do quote that the
situation is more complicated than
Summerson allows for and if seeing a
work of architecture in terms of its
program
is the only alternative to see it in
terms of history it must be admitted
that the criticism is not very far
advanced in his formal danton ISM Eisen
and then went on to refuse all outside
reference for meaning in architecture
exercising symbolic iconographic and
perceptual influences or interpretation
instead he looked at the primary
configuration of buildings consider the
structures of logical discourse their
internal spatial and volumetric
considerations deriving from the formal
linguistics of his understanding of
architectural systems from the caboose
for compositions and making it
implications explicit if the Summerson
form was considered only in relationship
to proportional systems or for banham it
was no more than a dead academic
language Eisenmann saw all formal
systems as communicative based on the
properties of form itself this for him
was the only criteria through which
architecture could be considered a
discipline thus the the moment then in
the very early 1960s when a theory
architectural theory and the idea of
unity and architectural theory was
completely divided up in oppositional
terms we could also add the social
opposition ISM that's emerging in
Berkeley and the west coast and of a
whole range of activist theories that
are competing with these more academic
triadic theories but architectural
theory at that moment is sort of split
in a number of different ways which then
in some way or another the intellectuals
in architecture including Bannon
following by Norbert Schultz wanted to
buy in together in march 1960 banham
wrote an article this is action in
1957-58 the machine aesthetic web animus
is beginning to develop the premises of
that he outlined was to outline in the
theories in design in into design
sorry into design and the same year John
McHale recently returned from a moment
in Yale where he'd met Bucky fuller
wrote the fall the first full article
assessing the work of Bucky fuller in in
England this in 1956-57 and it's a very
comprehensive article and it it came
just before he published his monograph
on Bucky fuller with George Brazil ER in
New York in 1958 59 you can see what was
particularly interesting about this
article is that Mikael as someone
trained in sociology and literature at
London University and then having
visited Paris and become very adept at
the kind of associative critical collage
sees in Bakke follows something that is
related fundamentally to his I Baca
follows American transcendentalist
context where he actually actually makes
a very beautiful relationship between
Thoreau's Hut and the Dymaxion house and
the whole relationship of that notion of
individual autonomy and life life
structures and life support at the same
time Bonham is contesting the
relationships of history that are
emerging in the neo Liberty movement in
in Italy having a wonderfully rhetorical
exchange with an Esther Rogers he
publishes this attack on the liberty the
kinds of stylistic derivations from from
different periods of of early modern
architecture in Italy the words
appearing in the 50s and ernesta Rogers
was fired back in Casa Bella with this
wonderful article dedicated to the lover
of refrigerators
so an architectural review in 1960 Anam
launched a series of five major articles
I'll just show you this very quickly all
on yellow paper as a demonstration
I think against peddlers love of brown
paper for history and blue paper for
criticism in the architecture review so
this is yellow paper with a big red
stamp on a a series of articles called
stocktaking
and we're going to be looking at these a
little more closely
interestingly enough in those articles
Balam was not entirely convinced of the
reign of technology as a kind of total
system and in fact I picking out one of
the I think one of the larger most most
important and symptomatic quotations he
wrote throughout the present century
architects have made fetishes of
technological and scientific concepts
out of context and had been disappointed
by them when they developed according to
the processes of technical development
not according to the hopes of architects
and in a phrase that we might look at
more closely today a generation ago it
was the machine that that architects
down tomorrow or the day after it will
be the computer or cybernetics or
topology so in in a very very prescient
way madam is looking at technology for
itself and seeing that the fetishization
of technological modes of production
that is transferred to architecture
might in fact not be precisely the
transparent and translational system
that will work the architect who
proposes to run with technology ban on
concluded in theory and design the first
machine age knows that he will be in
Fast Company the historian who five
years earlier the called for an ultra
architecture in the name of the new
Brutalism now advise the architect
to discard his whole cultural load
including the professional garments by
which he is recognized as an architect
it maybe he hasn't it that what we have
hitherto understand stood his
architecture and what we are beginning
to understand of Technology are
incompatible disciplines the last images
of the book as we saw as if mimicking
the capricious technique of before and
after images displayed on one page the
caduceus village de bois and the facing
page Bucky Fuller's Dymaxion house
project of the singing years quote
radical technological criticism of the
International style as mechanically
inadequate freshmen completing his first
book having been appointed assistant
executive editor of the architecture
review and with his political opposition
to neo Liberty as infantile regression
in full swing
baddam launched a series of banner
articles under the heading of stock
broking between January and June 1960
printed on her bright yellow paper the
contrast with brown and blue and with
red stars accentuating dates and numbers
these articles summarized what Lebanon
represented the conditions for
architectural theory and design in the
next Machine Age in 1960 in architecture
Bannon plain marked a great divide
following the Expressionism of Raja
and John summons dismissal of new
Brutalism somewhere along the line Balan
concluded the modern movements private
mythology of form and function as pom
Apple Park torn between tradition and
technology or as he phrased it science
and history the profession needed to
redefine its limits in the midst of
these competing bids for intellectual
domination by tradition Bannon meant the
stock of general professional knowledge
and by technology its opposite the
exploration of potential through science
in a dramatic
parallel representation a parallel
representation that unfortunately is not
being replicated in the repeats of this
of these articles one of the most
extraordinary
typographical moments is the
way in which the tradition on the left
and technology on the right continues as
parallel stories that intersect only you
know vaguely but you know I was very
disappointed that in the reprinting of
this particular essay those parallels
were not actually they were separated
out as two separate almost as two
separate essay that I'm talk to
intersecting but ultimately separate
stories architecture defined in terms of
its professional history versus
architecture as the provision of fit
environments for human activities Bannon
was concerned at the reaction of the
first against the second the sense of
sociology and technology had over
determined architectural fall and the
ensuing moved back to architecture led
by the followers of Victo his analysis
of Renaissance proportions Colin Rose
investigation of the mathematics of the
ideal Villa and the flowering of history
teacher biro Scully
news av that in turn had led to a wave
of geometrically inspired designs added
to this a new stream of what he called
latent historicism had emerged with near
liberty in Italy neoclassicism in us
near historicism of the modern movement
in Britain all Karaca characterized with
with neo Palladian as formalist even
balance earlier espousal as the new
Brutalism came in for criticism here
although the Smithson constantan school
and Sterling gallons ham common flats
was slightly redeemed by their honest
use of materials on the side of
Technology banovic or for a complete
revision of commonplace notions such as
house and place Buckminster Fuller at
the head of those who conducted
fundamental research into shelter needs
of mankind Tom relax moon comes a close
second as a fanatical watchmaker of the
joint not without an implicit debt to
the Courvoisier
Bannen revised the car as a standard of
comparisons for architecture with us he
also had in the machine aesthetic not
only as an object of technological
sophistication but as puncturing the
myth of a single non style style and as
an irritant the demands redefinition of
the
in environment here the Smithson House
of the future the Monsanto House new
machines plastic dwelling units secret
seem to open the way the large unit
prefabrication he concluded by
contrasting Charles Eames conviction in
a real continuity in the architectural
tradition with a lack of caution of the
nests exhibited by scientists towards
such positions so that the nice loops
that happen in these parallel essays as
that a moment's architecture emerges as
a powerful force dominating technology
and countering the influence of
technology which is in fact undermining
some of the formal and vendor and social
effects of architecture he warns at any
unpredictable moment the unorganized
hordes of uncoordinated specialists
could flood into the architects
preserves and ignorant to the lure of
the operation create another
architecture by chance as it were out of
apparent intelligence undertook the task
of creating fit environments for human
activities so there's this whole sense
of ambiguity that is operating these two
parallels which I find particularly
interesting
he cited John Doe Hanson's heir form
house as a radical departure from the
prevailing near palladianism but he was
as his pessimistic summing up of the
modern movement revealed deeply
convinced the architects tradition would
win out in the end and destroy science
here are just some of the pages I just
wanted you to see the kinds of
comparisons the comparisons of the
emergence of shale technology in
architecture and of auto technology in
science and the science of shale
technology in science as opposed to the
science of shale technology in
architecture the development of pods in
science and not in architecture and of
course at the end a little nod to Martin
Pauly's fine house
here the bottom was and always would
remain under big you ously in between as
it were inhabiting the margins
separating the two columns his reception
of two of the three contributors in the
next article the science side was less
than enthusiastic AC brothers from
English Electric wrote of weapon system
design with respect to the RAF guided
missile the Lightning interceptor that
was designed holistically in tandem with
his fighter aircraft and radar amy
Drummond of IBM wrote of computers as
used in operations research systems
simulation linear program and queueing
theory Drummond himself warned that this
computer's quote Delton cold hard facts
computers have no aesthetic sense and no
imagination badams only response to
these papers was to observe that even
psychology could be assigned a numerical
value as could aesthetics indeed the
psychophysiological relationship between
man and environment was susceptible to
scientific mathematician banham was more
favorable to the third paper in the
science side Richard Llewellyn Davis and
this is before of course he's become
head of the Bartlett in higher Benham
but he was quite favored all then at the
Nuffield foundation was soon to become
head of the Bartlett School of
Architecture and balance professor
Llewellyn gave us was concerned to
introduce the social and the biological
as opposed to the physical and the
technological into the architectural
equation from the science of visual
perception to group dynamics he provided
a bibliography the pabellón represented
the cutting edge of these facts about
the environment that would if used
wisely produced another architecture
seems he said no longer a question of
where the architects should try and
master this massive information or not
but how much longer they can put it off
so the science side and the bibliography
the next article reporting a discussion
between Anthony Cox
from the artist co-partnership golden
gram architects Design Group John page
building science Liverpool and Lawrence
Alloway program director of the ICA and
chaired by Bantam over a chicken lunch
with wine and it's very quite obvious as
you read the text that the wine was
there clearly demonstrated what
Bannerman knew beforehand quote the
confrontation between architecture and
technological society as banner reported
the discussion was somber nervous and
occasionally barbed as it debated the
precarious position of the architect and
technological society especially so is
his position as universal man was being
challenged on all sides potentially a
battered relic or at most qualified
technician but of course Bannon was not
an architect but a critic and historian
and pevsner's recently graduated PhD
student so he was bound to include
history in the fourth article and his
contribution to the history section was
entitled interesting in love history and
psychiatry although there was actually
little psychiatry in the text the
psychiatry with cause was the implied
critique of Pevsner in the article
itself in other words the killing of the
father rather it was his justification
the per Furies in history as a sequel to
pevsner's pioneers of the modern
movement of 36 balance thesis was the
person who had completed his history
with the formation of the deutsche
werkbund in 1914 and had then created a
zone of silence while the successive
histories of Gideon had in their
partnership space-time in architecture
harvey mentioned Mies van der Rohe
repressed the number of architects and
supra and had suppressed psychiatry many
modern architects were three considering
vents go read using design in the first
Machine Age which has just been
published
balam's purpose ironic in respect given
Manfredo to furries attack on him was
that the only physician for a true
historian to have was outside
architecture regarded as a specialist
almost as a consultant a cura of souls
that's probably
for mark at the moment of the ultimate
detachment of Architecture from its own
tradition and with the objective
responsibility for ensuring that the
architect doesn't fall into eclecticism
or modern movement providin tribalism
Banham was well aware of the dangers the
historians diagnosis the historian is
therefore seen as the psychiatrist of
architecture must be as nearly
infallible as humanely possible and to
achieve this he must be as nearly of juk
objective as humanely possible and is
reliably skilled in interpretation as
humanely possible the responsibility
that awaits the psychiatrist's of
architecture is not a light one
architecture no longer able to retain
its Vitruvian innocence relies on the
historian to plot the future chords the
results of his analysis as we know were
not what Bannon anticipated the
technical side continued to be supported
by the architecture review which have
published Mikhail's essay on Pola but
the architecture review is still
dominated by Hubert de Koning Hastings
and Gordon Cullen's town stated in
theology seemed to back off the
technological society side very quickly
as it was not the architect to review
with the architectural design under the
editorship of Monica pigeon with
successful technical editors Thea Crosby
Kenneth Trant and Robin Middleton and
Peter Marie that took up the casual
schedules for balance technological
question this is the the history in
psychiatry and a whole series of pages
where banham administers a questionnaire
to architects and historians as to what
were the most important buildings of the
modern movement and you get the answers
in parallel lines the end of history in
psychiatry as a as an article and the
discussion the kind of pushback of
Richards and Pevsner Qasim and Hastings
that summed up the hope end of this
debate with much a Civic critique of
bannon's
invited guests and Bannerman's positions
and benhams responses all down the
right-hand side in the in the in the
margins this is the this is I've I've
encouraged the architect to review to
publish this little little forum as a as
a little chat book because it is one of
the most amusing and at the same time
prescient and perhaps even disappointing
given that these debates continue in the
same vein today document and in his
response science for kicks in 1965 an ad
vana reviewed lead projects of ARCA gram
with reference to the influence of mass
production on architecture a clip on
architecture John McHale edited a
special issue of ad in February 67 2000
plus introduced by buckminster fuller's
the year 2000 and largely written by
Mikhail himself is under the title made
it to given to his book the future of
the future I'll be talking about Mikhail
in the seminar this afternoon as he were
presently given the next 40 years some
of the mandatory requirements of the
ecosystem are already clear we need to
recycle our minerals and metals
increasingly to employ our income images
of solar wind water and nuclear power
rather than have hazardous and depleted
capital fuels to draw upon microbiology
in its related field to refashion our
food cycle the reorganize our chaotic
industrial undertakings in new symbiotic
forms so the waste of one may become the
raw materials of the other to redesign
our urban and other lifestyle metabolism
so that they function again and here's
balam's contribution to the domestic
environment
home is not a house that the
extraordinary article illustrated by
dalla gray
I actually confirmed confirmed last
Saturday night with Francois Delacroix
that in fact the heads of Bannon and
dalla gray in the in the - naked - naked
statues in the seated figures in the
bubble had to be collage by Delacroix
balam's head had to be collage Don the
deliberates body because Bannon refused
to sit naked for the photograph and
properly so I would say in Mikhail's two
seminal works the future of the future
in the ecological context 1969 and 1971
balam's aspirations for global
scientific knowledge would be realized
what was not realized however was the
union of tradition and technology that
he thought would emerge from increasing
scientific knowledge only a year later
and perhaps in revenge for the stock
taking series Nikolaus Pevsner delivered
his famous 1961 our IBA lecture under
the title modern architecture in the
historian or the return of historicism
with both bannermen Summerson in
attendance this seemed even at the time
to affect the closure to the
technological revolution in its apparent
antipathy the stylistic eclecticism but
nostalgia for modernism ala Gropius and
with his introduction of the term
postmodern architecture for the first
time only six years later the return to
history was confirmed by Christian
norburg Schulz response to Bannon in his
enthusiastic review of Robert Venturi's
complexity and contradiction in
architecture a book that he saw was
against the prevailing tendency for
architect publications to be dominated
by studies on topics taken from
sociology and psychology economy and
ecology mathematics and communication
theory Novick shields concluded the only
subject which paradoxically is missing
is architecture defining architecture as
the concrete means and architect uses
the solves the task is facing that is
architect
he concluded as Battlement steered we
need more architecture and not less
post-modernism as Jenks was to coin it
in 1965 at a write this postmodern
tendency which we saw already emerging
in the work of two furry in 1953 was to
be carried forward by those who worked
to restore what they saw as a greater
complexity and historical reference to
an architecture denuded in the stripped
forms of a ubiquitous corporate
modernism interests house for his mother
with its clever rift on Palladio and the
Mannerist deformations of its plan
remains iconic between the publication
of complexity and contradiction in 64
and Paulo Portuguese his manifesto
exhibition of post-modernism in the
Venice Biennale in 84 the historicist
gained ground indefatigably championed
by Charles Jencks another British critic
and a former doctoral student under
Balam Purdue presumably psychiatrically
critiquing bannanas technological
position by returning to history if
there was an auteur architecture and I
conclude developing at the time it was
the province of a few pioneers in
computational design for example the
programmatic research of Christopher
Alexander in his notes on the synthesis
of Paul 1964 and lone architects like
Cedric price working with fuller and a
cybernetic Gordon tasks on Joan
Littlewood Sun Palace which famously
influenced the high-tech approach of
Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano in their
software Pompidou between 69 and 78 the
mathematics of proposals such as these
were developed to some extent in the
vocabulary engineer's Frank knew beef
eccentric price Lord and his Lord
Snowdon in the aviary going to vanish
and fry Auto in the Munich Stadium to
the Olympic Games but they still remain
somehow outside of the architectural
mainstream until the vance's in
computation in the 1990s made it
possible for younger architects to
revisit radical geometrical
experimentation otherwise developing
technologies were in prisons is enabling
new urban environments of high density
and flexibility only by more utopian
groups like a gram I'm not going to go
into
detail obviously with their
mega-structure clip-on part aesthetics
celebration of networks metabolism to
Changi in Japan and the French mega
structuralist including on the Freedman
and a brief collaboration between
console in Eden war betraying the
influence of such collectives
in his celebrated article a home is not
a house banham joined response word
elahh great to illustrate a
transportable standard of living package
in the form of a transparent plastic
bubble containing images of a naked
quote-unquote banham seated around the
modular Technical Services icon which is
in there ultimately perhaps the best
examples of balam's otach texture will
be developed outside the architectural
professional tradition
thus the artist Nicola chauffeured an
avid reader of Norbert wieners book
cybernetics and society conceived what
he claimed was the first cybernetic
sculpture in 1956 engineers from the
Phillips company outfitted Besson
so-called sips one see why PSP one for
cybernetic spacers in their dynamics
with electric brain animated by feedback
loops the 10th central theme of
cybernetic theory a rectilinear frame
structure it's 16 black red whitening
yellow rectangular plates responded to
variations in the environment light
color and sound by moving in all
directions confronted with the color red
my nose or intense light it remains
still what was set in motion by silence
and the color blue thought to shoo me
about that one it was installed on the
roof of the caboose es única at
Marseilles where it became the center of
one of the first festivals of
avant-garde art in 1956 a festival that
could be a subject for another PhD
dissertation
responding to the moat the movement of
Bashar's ballet wonderful only on the
art festival art architecture dots and
cybernetics
a year later this is this is Chappell's
studio and this is his diagram of the
Tuolumne acid in Ithaca and the
different feedback loops involved a year
later Shaffer extended the use of
feedback loops to the inhabited spatial
environment building a prototype space
geodynamic house at the International
Exhibition in south group these are some
of the spatially of dynamic towers and
some of the extraordinary light and
movement experiments that this house was
called to the supper or Kehoe and
consisted of two rooms each with a
radically differentiated environment but
without a separated wall there was a
cold room kept at a temperature of 19 to
20 degrees centigrade while a hot room
hovered at 35 to 40 degrees the rooms
were then respectively painted in cold
and warm red and orange colors were lit
with cold and warmed incandescent light
and were quiet and noisy respectively in
their insulation they were separated by
this infrared wall of heat and these two
rooms with showfair claimed aloud to
individuals or children's and parents in
a family to inhabit the same space while
enjoying completely different
environments the one suitable for calm
reflection presumably for the parents
and the other four noisy play presumably
for the children expanding his ideas of
spatial dynamism or this is the house
expanding his ideas of spatial dynamism
showfair went on to develop designs for
an entire cyber city published in la
ville phonetic in 1969 anticipating
later ecological and environmental
concerns he called out a range of
topologies climate light sound natural
artificial and space where architecture
was not based on strict or permanent
division of space but instead measured
in the rhythmic movement of time and so
you have a whole series of statements
about climates about light and a
topology of light about sound and the
topology of the autumn or audible about
space and the topology of space
horizontal and vertical and about time
which animates all the typology of the
dynamic this led fortunately or
unfortunately to this the city was made
up of an administrative center which you
can see here a Science Center a cultural
center in museum cinema library
conference halls and a space year
dynamic theater that's the administers
to Center the science center cultural
center a series of administrative
diagrams of different habitable spaces
and of a suitable distance a center of
sexual recreation
this last in the form of a giant
inflated you-know-what rhythmically
pulsating provided audio-visual
immersion a game with hot and cool rooms
wafting odors and a spiral moving ramp
leading up to a hotel and restaurant at
the top even has a section if Schiffer
anticipated the technological and
environmental exploration of cybernetic
feedback space the Cades earlier in the
pre way a pre-war heyday of the
International style the surrealist
painter Marcel Jean had already explored
topology as a generative architectural
form in a series of meticulously carved
solids constructed according to precise
geometrical formula Marcel's John
developed designs for new housing blocks
in visiting an entire topological city
that was published in a special edition
of ayodhya
dedicated to the object in 1936 Luca
Brasi a himself was not unaware of these
experiments asking the young engineer
musician youngest is in Arcis at that
time his apprentice to help reduce the
immersive light sound environment for
the first company and the brussels world
farad 58 when we know the philips
pavilion very well here the tent
structure that had been Canisius model
for the origins of shelter since the
twenties was given new technological
life is topological inner surface use
the projection screen along the winding
route of an audio-visual architectural
promenade sanaka hsihu would later be
given complete responsibility for the
construction on the monastry about the
RET and if you look at carefully at the
drawings of that threat you'll find
they're all sign not by look appreciate
but by sanaka s-- and if you look
carefully at the rhythm of the different
fenestration of last grade you'll also
find that the rhythmic structures are
part of the musical harmonic structures
and non harmonic and dissonant
structures at listen like this with
exploring the darkest obviously as we
know eventually broke with Cobra CA went
on to develop a project for an ideal
city in a manifesto written in 64 and
published by Francois Shoei a year later
Psilakis proposed a cosmic city of
radical versus vertical dense
5,000 meter high towers formed out of
hyperbolic paraboloid each city and
business is an enormous shell containing
five million inhabitants but in 1984
Tanaka's produced what I think was his
masterpiece on a smaller scale in his
competition entry for the city de la
musique at the Parc de la Villette he
elaborated on the suspension roofs of
caboose used for the pavilion the
proposed roof geometry was to be
controlled by mathematical formulae that
responded to musical intervals with the
auditorium enclosed by what he called a
patter toyed or free shape rectangle for
acoustic accuracy all these formal and
technological experiments from the 50s
and 60s was conceived in the meteor part
surrealist part mathematical part
utopian that included interestingly
enough the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan
whose topological formulations of
psychological states have been
elaborated in concert with the
cybernetic theorist George whoa
leading to Lacan celebrated invocation
of the mobius strip the Klein bottle and
the bar omean knots demonstrating the
relations between the real the symbolic
and the imaginary and here in Seneca
tsa's drawings for the city given music
which was not preemie ated I talked to
silicosis daughter last week and she
said she talked to some of the former
jury of this competition and asked why
it was the darkest was not at least
given a second prize in this competition
and they said oh because xenakis was
pass a while possum paw was the mark of
the future in 1971 Balan brought
together his pleasure in life
technologies in his earlier conversion
to fuller by adopting a newly
fashionable word ecology for the title
of his unconventional book on Los
Angeles Los Angeles the architecture of
four colleges and here I have to pay
tribute to to Mary Bannon because when I
went to the archive at the
Getty Center I found that the exquisite
maps that illustrate the the front of
the ballon architecture for colleges
were in fact traced and drawn by none
other and there is banner here Bannon
showed the influence of his former
colleague in the independent group the
Contemporary Arts Mikhail who had
produced in the same year the book the
ecological context in ecology vanam
finally found the proper arena in which
to ground his desire for an ethic of
design aimed at deploying technological
developments to establish more
harmonious feedback between architecture
and environment it was not until the
ascendancy of relatively accessible
computational software in the 1990s that
questions about ecology technology and
design could be reframed with new
urgency
what could digital technologies offer
for the exploration and application of
theoretical ethical and programmatic
principles to architecture a pioneer
inflamation implementation of digital
design was the möbius house by ben van
Berkel and power in Boston here in
studio between 93 and 98 where the
building's geometry was painstaking
developed to calibrate the times and
moments of everyday life in a seamless
loop as if constructing a bikini and
family analysis in three dimensions and
the family that lives in it certainly
today will us assent to the idea that
they have been analyzed by the Mobius
house today Frank Gehry's ongoing
application of auto industry software
the result the complicated twists and
turned to this powerboard model and Zaha
leads use of parametric modeling
techniques to produce the flowing
topological curves of her dramatics no
structures point to a vast the extended
range of formal programmatic and
structural possibilities experiments in
material fabrication is developed by
Greg green and others have demonstrated
the potential for new resins and glues
to create lightweight shells of
surprising strength even in more mundane
practices the early use of computer
aging aid aided design as drafting tool
has evolved into a range of
sophisticated programs to calculate
structures
and organized material and environmental
performance throughout the present
century barren conclude that Bannon
concludes this lecture architects have
made fetishes of technological and
scientific concepts out of context and
had been disappointed by them when they
developed according to the processes of
technical technical development and not
according to the hopes of architects a
generation ago he wrote in 1960 it was
the machine but then architects down
tomorrow or the day after
ie today it will be the computer or
cybernetics or topology
thank you we can throw any immediate
questions
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
it's really interesting for the
prehistory of contemporary tribal
ization the fracture is you described at
the fracturing a part of architecture to
a certain degree and certainly that the
fissure between form all and other
topics or agendas seems striking right
around the early 60s
but I'm wondering if what's also
happening at the same moment is a
fracturing of a disciplinary project
from the conditions or the experiences
of the city and you haven't touched on
it not yet directly here but I'm
wondering if there's something in the
period of that separation that would
also provide a different kind of context
than the purely discursive or or
disciplinary project that's it's the
focus of this sort of I think that in
there's a
a number of recent studies one of which
is called topologists of the
explorations of many of these if you
like the early numerous new monomer
ologists of of architecture and habitat
to the city right we have always been
you know continuously given services
utopistic projects of various different
scales and kinds from constant all the
way through to his and aqus himself you
know 5,000 feet towers so but at the
same time I think what the crisis of the
60s was the responsive architects in the
mode for example of Rossi who while
taking the notions of structuralism and
geography and urban geography and
applying them to the notions of
architecture in the city nevertheless
recapitulated architecture as a series
of title aaj achill units that were
fixed and repetitive and therefore to a
certain extent autonomous from the city
itself so that there's a contradiction I
think between and we talked about this
yesterday with venturi
who's whose notion of complexity and
contradiction in architecture was
resolved in a kind of complex semiosis
of the elements of architectural
signification in the building itself
whereas someone like ro who began his
analysis of the kind of internal
structures of the modern villa but ended
by the if you like the top-down figure
ground analysis of the city as a fabric
in which the architecture itself
mattered not at all because if all it
needed was variety as long as the fabric
was was you know maintained right which
allowed for the facades of post
modernism to decorate the fabric and we
don't have to worry about what's inside
right so I
that's that's the next if you like what
you touched on is the next crisis I mean
the crisis between form and technology
the crisis breakthrough the traditional
architecture and it's fracturing which
I've traced in these these lectures then
is a crisis of the city I think you're
absolutely correct where questions of
townscape yesterday we touched on the
interesting moment where the economy the
smiths ins asked Gordon Cullen to draw
the Economist building right so those
who were against the picturesque
constructed a series of environments
that could only be satisfactorily sort
of exhibited visually by the by the
artist of the picturesque so with that
complete that notion and I stressed
yesterday the the question that the
problematic of these notions is that on
the one hand the technology is is
pushing towards an ecology which is
entirely science-based and not
humanistically or socially or
economically economistic we based on the
other hand the architecture is pushing
towards a kind of formal understanding
either of historical motifs or abstract
motifs whether it's Gray's or White's
right and in between the city is
conceived as feeling visual entity and
not as a an entity which which has
anything to do with any of those any of
those outer disciplines of this being
right but a globally distinct from the
city or urbanization as a trend so you
could read megalopolis John Gottman's
megalopolis side-by-side with fuller
banham iseman and so on and you you have
no way you know in that in that period
and perhaps not even now of constructing
the interfaces that are critical
socially and politically and especially
in terms of how habitat is going to be
arranged for a forty percent of the
population in informal and slum-like
conditions in 25 years and
80% of all of us in urbanized conditions
without a habitat or a sustainable
environment - economically or socially
or ecologically to sustain us so I think
that we we got a had to put these things
together and we can't rely on technology
we have to rely on our own understanding
of human relations and political
activities too
the late honored school was a kind of
venue one possibility to recover that
school you could say would be its
ability well hell I'd say is one Dean to
another we got a lot of work to do in
the sixties they were extremely powerful
element which is the difference is that
the apocalyptic campus is now in some
sense in turn to architecture just some
extent that have thought that whether or
not the problems were solved or not
they're so radicals that that
architecture will in some sense be
irrelevant to the news also a certain
perverse enjoyment fantasy by
transmitting the apocalypse so it's the
way in which that the kind of imagery in
the force campuses as to some extent
invaded the work of the school itself
yes third truth
the end of the Second World War was
obviously continued by other Wars which
were displaced into other areas of the
world than Europe but the ghost war
which can which continued was the ghost
in the with the ghost of the notion for
example the very few of us me included
thought we would actually live to
maturity because there would obviously
be an Armageddon battle between the
nuclear powers room additive or in a
lecture at the ica saying miss Sunday's
awful ever do you're lost kids don't
have a chance because there's something
so much bigger and anything we can do
you know we can wander around doing the
debrief in Paris after a good lunch but
it's it's not going to help anything
right it's good actually we are helpless
in that regard and that I think was very
powerful for the generation that
produced those sort of topological so
quote-unquote ideal cities above-ground
and those very very sinister are kazoom
and the super studio cities below ground
right the city of the super studio which
is already erased and it's just a flat
plane on which you're left with a couple
of picnic baskets and the city of our
kazoom which is several thousand meters
deep where which is great a big bunker
right which is what I started with
whether the bunker and the and the
post-apocalyptic share that dismisses
those two extraordinary paradigms in
1956 have to be put in the context of
that operation I think the problem
always is that in school there are two
problems in schools one is of course the
separation of knowledge into courses uh
you know I'm put have to take that
course in that course and then when I've
done that I'm unqualified and if I don't
take those courses I can't qualify in
the 60s there were all those attempts to
put all those courses back into the
studio and
that didn't work either because there
was too much knowledge and to be gained
at the same time as you were trying to
put lines on paper right so that crisis
of Education has always been there I
think but even more so is I think what
Mark is talking about is the
displacement of the of the material
moment into something so big that we
can't do anything about it and and if
scientists are dealing with the
environment and we can you know we can
either deny it because it's it's not
happening today
oh all we have to just do something
about it like we put sandbags up on the
East Village you know but it's it's
tough and the students is even tougher
because the displacement of the small
the large means a kind of paralysis
formal project right right where where
the in fact Peter seems interesting in
part because he has no theory of the
city or a verb right and it is just an
architectural object to find form right
and purif post-nuclear
architect but but there are others of
course who define it purely
technological right hyper
technologically others define it you
know hyper sociologically others define
it hyper semi illogically you know to
the point where it's it's only question
is that a contextual style so I guess we
still gotta argue anyway thank you so
much for coming and I'll be back next
year with all the answers
