okay and this afternoon is billed as
cosmetic surgery I have to I mean some
people who already know that I've been
wandering around complaining I started
reading articles on cosmetic surgery and
soon found myself in a world which was
so mad and unpleasant I have read
articles on things which you just don't
want to read I also wonder if they'd
heard of it and they said yes they'd see
the documentary on TV about it but for
me I was completely innocent of the
procedure known as anal bleaching please
if anyone is you've now been had anal
bleaching don't complain as to my
naivety you really wonder when life so
difficult how you could get up in the
morning you say everything would be
alright if any I could get my ass beat
and what exactly fall I mean it raises a
psychoanalytic question you know I mean
I guess there are only so many anuses we
look at during a lifetime yeah they tend
to be regularly constructed same colors
but you realize so obsessional as our
culture become the someone says you know
I want a white anus
I mean you'll have to give some of the
discourse because it will verge into be
insane but these are sort of analytic
questions it occurred to me in my dotty
way
as a black person ever asked for anal
what's with bleaching or is it a normal
kind of obsession all terror that the
natural color of your anus
what does it seem to them to look like
 or the colour of so you've got
to get rid of it it really does sort of
bigger the imagination that's I have
seen in photographs but then probably
everyone in the room has because I don't
use my phone the man trying to look like
a lizard did you know there are men who
so heavily identify with snakes that
they have their tongue divided so that
they can feel ever more like a snake I
mean I do you know you think after a
while I mean Freud and Marx both had the
same favorite motto from Horace Neil
humanum alienum happened may roughly
translated as nothing human is strange
to me and you know it's a very good
motto to have a Dilla see this
he's able to write nothing human maybe
strange to me but is it weird
all the woman who wants to look like a
cat needless to say the one doesn't look
very like a lizard even though he spent
a lot of money having his ears removed
and then I each one helps thinking of
the other way around like the doctor oh
yes you know first patient snoring wants
to look like a lizard
this will require my professional
intervention how exactly which bit of
the Hippocratic oath kind of leads her
doctor to snip off your ears so that you
look a bit more like a lizard or that
case is just that now neither you nor
lizard have ears but I can tell you from
those Oh
not having ears doesn't actually make
you look like a lizard it just makes you
look like a man without ears so it's
kind of a problem I will try to stay
with the faith but it won't always be
able to this afternoon Larry brings me
to my own kind of anecdote in this field
is a birdie one morning I got a call
from my brother who says you have to be
at this gallery opening this evening at
7:00 I will see you there and explain
why I go there as always he's late
so while I'm waiting I see these two
young men with lemon to me they don't
love my 18 but I didn't kind of riveted
if he had to me because they are both
the most wearing t-shirt and jeans the
t-shirts are kind of hugely ripped the
jeans are very design Italy ripped and
one boy especially has a lot of pine
work on his face like wings
Suzy is knows when he speaks you can see
he has her like a stud in his mouth you
can see while you meant to see through
the t-shirt nipple of having rings on
his nipples and you know you think oh my
god I don't want to think about the rest
of it but clearly every possible organ
has rings and other metalwork I'm
thinking god he just looks awful I mean
how can someone do that to themselves
then to Michael Dom he starts walking
over to me and in a broad Birmingham
accent says excuse me
the you more cousins
I say not knowing quite had her violin
yes I was very tempted to say no no
cousins yes well think you're my uncle I
do watch it turns out that he is the son
of my half-sister who boy was a mess
herself she was the daughter of my
father and his second wife she was a
female contortionist and hoping to
establish herself as an actress is my
mother an actress and my father's first
wife observed she's a terrible actress
but she's probably good for other things
as a female contortionist
she was already involved in the kind of
downhill slide which ended up by dying
of an overdose of something called
Collis Brown kaulitz Brown was one of
those Victorian medicines which said on
the front it would settle your stomach
actually would settle your whole
ash because it was powered by vast
quantities of opium and the world by the
1960s
a lot of Collis Brown addicts going to
the chemist several times a day to buy
this pain medicine for your stomach
my sister was married she's the only
person I went to the wedding reception a
Greek husband unusually I think I hope
beat her up at the wedding reception
you know without being a kind of
soothsayer or as possible say I don't
think this is very very well she too
retreated into heroin addiction and son
was obviously taken away from her by the
council it to be placed in a foster home
where when he was 15 he came out to his
foster parents as gay which for him they
kicked him straight out of the house so
all had not gone terribly well hold for
this side of the family it's a family
you know I'm usually documented in the
what sociologists called downward
mobility seeing the bottom of society
and heading straight that way he and
this point he introduced his friend
Ramon friend Neal worked as art
therapists in an old people's home but
they seemed to be perfectly happy there
and whatever they explained they weren't
trained artists but I don't think most
of the people without timers there
probably care too much anyway so he
presented himself it was as I say all
this kind of I didn't like to ask what
what's all that stuff for I mean what
you know what does it make you feel good
I mean I'm gonna say Jenny sign of
optimism or pleasure would have been
time he said I can't tell you what the
pleasure is is unbelievable every day
fine okay I buy that in the meantime it
was impossible to avoid you know the the
impression this is just a sort of
physical expression of absolute
objection so then as I was thinking
about the essay I caught sight you know
some when I was at university with and
admired III critics mentor I mean she
must be no more than a year younger me
me amazed and she had a very dramatic
facelift and you told yourself like
what's that for
I mean there was nothing about it like
don't look at me I've had the disaster
of facelift I mean she obviously felt
good about it but it kind of looked
weird everything was kind of stretched
but then these huge kind of toxin nips
and whatever here you realized the
the facelift is really about kind of
just stretching the skin and therefore
creating tucks that you have to make you
know Ronnie years or somewhere else I
don't know the face let's imagine for a
moment that everyone said that's a
really good facelift and that the
cosmetic surgeon said well there's a
morning's work I'm proud of I don't give
the impression it was some kind of
disastrous facelift it was find that he
was a facelift why would someone want it
well what would be the motive I mean is
it somehow a simple that you feel
yourself growing older and growing old
if you didn't know already let me let me
let you in on it it's inevitable but now
there's an assistant insistence that you
can do something about it
I want to slightly pursue the argument
that opening up the possibilities where
you say you can do something about it is
a terrible source of
a terrible source of you know new
problems in order to do so to make this
argument I want to make a point that
ancient Greeks were extremely aware of
the Greek for it is really an ante
Destiny there is a fate common to humans
to which from birth they are condemned
that you will die is obviously a major
point for the Greeks because it's the
counterpoint to the gods I mean the
major thing about the gods is they're
immortal one of the great things about
Greek polytheism if we call it that well
one one thing about it is that it's it's
it's obviously and the Greeks knew it
and wrote about it it's obviously silly
you have Zeus who is the sort of Harvey
Weinstein of antiquity I mean a complete
sexual reprobate with the advantage over
Harvey one whatever is anyone
Einstein that he contended you can turn
himself into anything and so there's
really this thing you're condemned to
something with then the idea
that in the condemnation to your destiny
you find a certain freedom indeed
as against modern conceptions of freedom
your freedom comes from this recognition
that there are things you condemn to
that you can do nothing to change
nietzsche starts off the birth of
tragedy by saying actually the greeks
all sought so much so they really bother
say or Akutan the best is not to have
been born at all second best is to Danya
on the basis of that you can acquire
happiness and freedom and whatever by
accepting what you're condemned do and
trying to point out that this
condemnation is not a deficit of your
humanity
it constitutes your humanity so we can
all you know we get oak sing in praise
of death without the finitude which
death involves i mean what would it be
night that's why i know one of the
literary level has ever been able to
plausibly paint a picture of heaven you
mean it goes on and on what do you do on
day one worship god what do you do on
day to worship God every day it's no we
send in heaven just glory to him it
famously drives
the devil who we must remember is a
fallen angel to say quite rightly better
to rule in Hell than serve in heaven
there's Milton so this condemnation you
could say in a kind of curious way this
is where Marxism is kind of a very
classical Marxism says what can be
changed the governments economies
whatever will rest a bit we'll call a
revolution problem with liberals they
think everything can be changed theirs
are not very good novel which I read on
behalf was dis Sunna by LP Hartley who
wrote go between with the famous lines
histories what is it
the past is a foreign country they do
things differently there he wrote a book
called not very good called the Ministry
of facial justice in which an
authoritarian government comes to power
on the basis of stopping Envy and anyone
who is beautiful has to have their face
degraded if you're what's called an
alpha you you know will get a letter
sometimes they present yourself to
become a beater where you get a more
average face
gammas still maintain the optimism that
someone might upgrade the
to being a beta etc and some of the
novel is just some works this fictional
device out as I say it's not great but
it's the only novel I can think of which
is about changing phases now this
touches on and honesty really compels me
to go on and touch on it but not very
much which is really about the uses of
surgery amongst and drugs to enhance
people change them whatever and we've
seen how sections of society some
universities have moved in the last
couple of years into a kind of frenzy
about the whole kind of prefix of trans
if it would just you know enthusiasts in
universities being polemical that would
be one thing but actually I'm assured by
people who live there that there's an
epidemic in Californian state schools of
kids under ten who have been become
indecisive about their gender and some
seek pre-pubertal treatment and get it
to change their sex
mostly boys to girls but not solely
there is a book who I read it over 20
years ago by a French analyst called
Cathy neo of the school of Lacan I wrote
a book called all sex on just the
problem of trans sexual ISM which would
be sanitary we would read today it
starts off by saying it might be quite
rightly analytically speaking a patient
comes into the room and says I'm a woman
trapped in the body of man she says
above all the analysts must remember
this is a man saying it right the
problem now is had lots of kind of
counselors and surgeons have started to
relieve them you would have thought - as
a basic inhibition within medicine well
indeed there is is not to intervene so
as to provoke any harm in the case of
cosmetic surgeons there seems to have
abandoned them in a sense to groups who
remain outside to some extent the
current I would say wild over
politicization of this issue is feminism
I mean feminism has a heritage
incentives all being quite skeptical
about first of all not only transsexuals
read about transvestites
because the accountant transvestite drew
attention to the fact that you know the
major point wasn't about men dressing up
in women's clothing I mean who would
rate that what amongst people we're in
universities and things jeans and a
sweater but transvestitism came as a
very kind of florid dressing wildly
exaggerating aspects of femininity which
clearly feminists were questioning and
this led to them also detecting and I
think rightly that there's a level of
aggressive parity in the transvestite
I'm not trying to disapprove of anything
I'm just saying everything is up for
analysis
what could occasion like this outbreak
in young people in the states and one
has every kind of human sympathy with
the state of not only confusion but
probably depression and all rest of it
amongst children who otherwise might be
having a rather splendid time
to some extent I think we're seeing you
know the collapse of the symbolic order
now what do I mean by the symbolic order
I mean really those things that sort of
guarantee difference amongst other
things so in that sense it may well be
the case that printless men feel
themselves and have fantasies of the
level of I wouldn't be nice to be a
woman they also know they're condemned
as it were in the sense that I used in
just now condemned to be a man not
condemned in the sense of you know being
punished but it being a kind of symbolic
constrained in which like the Greeks you
find freedom and purpose and whatever in
that including here you know a rich
fantasy life and or a kind of sexual
life which accommodates those fantasies
I'm not posing here any sense of a
moralist but the point is that an okay
destiny the sense of destiny the sense
of the inevitability of some things
there are some things you can't change I
mean if you see the way people you know
are offered additional life I mean like
a so cheap version of immortality on the
contrary Freud's famous advert
and he saw in the states on his one trip
there was outside the Jewish Undertaker
you just said why live when you can be
buried for $15 these dark remarks or
what make us happy we are kept going in
a fence by the dark because it allows us
to feel it is light enough in a curious
way these are things with a necessary
putting in theoretical terms that your
grandmother knew and probably even said
her bones knew but with sort of lose it
all now you know when we return to the
question of the facelift
you really think how could an
intelligent I mean is this person just
simply failing the tasks of being
responsible I mean I have nothing
against anyone trying to look good but
actually this seems to be much more
perverse than looking good you don't
actually look very good there are old
people who are wrinkled who look great
you know it's more to the point of the
pathologies of something which only
finds young people very beautiful
so when we come to the facelift you have
to ask what what's it for what is it
symbolically doing obviously at some
sense it's just denial I mean or it's an
attempted denial it's not surprising
that usually the one consequence of
major cosmetic surgery is the people get
addicted to cosmetic surgery I mean it's
completely well known thing believe me
I'm not here trying to erect a sort of
barrier between the cosmetic and
Nietzsche I'm happy to buy into remember
we went through a few weeks ago but now
good less deep appreciation of makeup
was because it was artificial one of the
real perversities of cosmetic surgery is
that it wants to pretend to be natural
and that's why it looks perverse you
know it makeup - no I mean everybody
knows what's there and you know what's
underneath and indeed that it comes off
at ninth or you know sometime and I'd
say that we have to look to see the
facelift in their way not as being
cosmetic it's as I mean to give it in
psychoanalytic a mitzvah version
traditionally in psycho-energy
literature and in some extent
psychiatric literature women aren't
supposed to have two versions
meline have two versions weird
transformations of their erotic goals
but I suggest in a sense that you know
the facelift now it makes it clear
because I'm very troubled behind hike
not wishing to be misinterpreted
I'm not saying surgery on your face is
bad if you need it I mean if it helps
with any I had something done in my nose
because I couldn't breathe properly I
wouldn't call it a nose job the other
thing I think is free perverse fatty you
never know who's demanding it
I lived in the 80s above a flat in which
there was a very beautiful young Italian
woman and about 15 or so years older and
immaculately turned out Italian banker
it turned out he had met her when she
was four on the beach I mean I'm not
suggesting any impropriety he got to
know her family but I mean it was always
understood that when she was of age she
would make him as she did I went down to
see if she was all right one day excited
to hear her weeping and crying don't you
know
you might be in it and started saying
her husband was giving her for a
birthday a nose job she had a slight
recluse a nose of enormous charm but you
could say slightly contradicting you
know the classical nose he wanted he
wanted and there he is
there's no confidence mistakes there was
a student here it was half of Chinese
half Dutch whose father was in her words
the leading cosmetic surgeon in China he
continued his practice and his
registration in China because the
regulations on cosmetic surgery were
much less in China you could pretty much
do anything you could you know not only
give him the face of a lizard but
probably a tail as well
she said the twelve he'd offered to do
her eyes and he's not difficult to see
these you know it's really quite kind of
sadistic offers
so and I see that poor Germaine Greer is
made like uninvited all to various
universities because her College in
Cambridge wanted to appoint a female for
a fellow and according to them and they
did so but at a college meeting Germaine
Greer observed
that's not a woman but the man is a sex
antigen and given how few active women
fellowships throughout etc etcetera etc
I don't kind of attacking him for
getting in but I am attacking the attack
on her for saying it
one of the points that feminists make
surely reasonably is that a woman is a
woman by virtue of the experience of
being a woman a lifetime of experience
which were the happy or sad includes
systemic discrimination you know etc etc
etc you don't get to have you know a
heritage of experience of what that's
like if you just say you're a woman
because you want to be what does the man
patient who comes in says I'm a man I'm
a woman trapped in the body of man what
does this man know of what it is now one
of the difficulties we come to in a
theoretical issue and he bears on the
face and it bears ultimately on some
aspects in architecture which we'll look
at next week is where does the body sit
in all this let's say I tell you I'm a
woman trapped in the body of man the
question is what do I mean it's odd how
often it seems to be at least in part an
issue of sexuality
[Music]
I think the question is in a sense
there's awkward division which we insist
on making between fantasy and reality
I'm saying if I have a fantasy of being
a woman and I'm in the body of man
that's a sort of situation which I need
to accommodate to and profit from I mean
maybe I get to have strengths with
entertaining a lot of fantasies I've
warned maybe not maybe you just get to
be really dumb I mean because you have a
very stereotyped conception of what a
woman is a lot seems to turn on is not
about fantasy if you have lots of
fantasies including I don't see it's
quite a commie fantasy to imagine you
know you're a lizard children do spend
time hello I'm a bear trapped in the
body of an infant school child you know
but I mean literally right we will take
you to the vet and have you bared up
it's this moment like now there isn't
the problem is that there isn't some
defensible line which strikes between
fantasy and so-called reality that's one
of the
normally I would define fantasy as
whatever you do in your mind and in a
sense I borrow from Freud one of the
philosophical note is of Freud is he has
an unusual and very productive sense of
what is reality I mean after all if you
ask a philosopher
what is reality they can't say sometimes
very directly like the early witness
time you know what there is the world is
the totality of facts about the world if
you're sociologists or an anthropologist
you tend to say reality is what people
believe is the case Freud's not
interested in any of that Freud says
reality is where your fantasy bumps into
an obstacle reality is where your
fantasy your wish is your whatever I'd
once tried to think of an example of
that and I came across a very concrete
example over the years I have on my view
waited too long for my partner in Harvey
Nichols I have watched people shop it
mostly dated from a time when your
credit card went through and I noticed
following difference rich women paid
more elegantly than middle-class women
rich women would just elegantly put the
credit card straight true middle-class
women were awkward make kind of like
don't want it to go through wanting to
go to you know now the difference is
clearly because to the rich paying is
still part of the fantasy you you
haven't reached an obstacle whereas for
the middle-class woman they're thinking
there's got to come out of this month's
income you know I mean there are like
real obstacles to paying will shoot
themselves up in the gesture so I've
always liked Freud's notion that the
reality is simply obstacles obstacles to
desires obstacles to everything our
problem is when we kind of think that
you know like the rich you can just kind
of put your credit card through in an
elegant way and change the reality one
is because I don't it's running out of
time but I just want to finish on this
note it's an issue ultimately we are
condemned not only to our body which is
what we think about when you talk about
cosmetic surgery but actually to
something less frequently talked about
which is your body image right we all
have a body image it was identified by a
neurologist in the late 19th century you
know as something like a sixth sense
something that enabled us it was then
called proprioception
it enables you to articulate your
movements it's everything to do with
your bearing your articulation whatever
how you hold yourselves and you wouldn't
want really to change get the body image
and the body out of kind of sink
we know this happens involuntarily in
the case of limbs which have been lost
through amputation or warfare or
something they function for a long time
as the phantom image as the phantom limb
that is say you haven't got no forearm
but you're still feeling pain in forum
and it will last can last a very long
time
oddly enough neurology is noted that as
time wore on the phantom limb could
migrate the reports that you know you
could have your the feel of your arm on
your back or frequently the arm still
air but it's much shorter this is surely
a kind of memory a body of memory
related to the body in which gradually
the person early selenium is regressing
to the earlier stage of their body
now the body image in a sense is it's
tough
you can even as I say kind of survived
amputation but you really wouldn't want
to change and it's very difficult in the
case and like a doctor to see why a
doctor a doctor might have trivial
thoughts like this facelift will cheer
my patient up for five minutes but
actually what you're doing to the way in
which the psyche organizes the body is I
would have thought very unpredictable so
I don't have a like an ethical position
about this I can't help it if there are
cosmetic surgeons around but insofar as
doctors are governed by an idea of do no
harm it would seem to me and including
you know turning them into a surgical
addict it's really quite different
difficult to to state the sort of the
reasons for cosmetic surgery of course
I'm quite aware there's a thin line
between cosmetic surgery and you know
interventions to prevent this or help
that or whatever and you know I'm not
kind of being realistic about it I mean
it's not about defining what's cosmetic
and what good surgery I'm sure there
would be very muddy water but whenever I
see someone who has a facelift you you
wonder you know really I mean you
couldn't ask because it would be
intrusive but you wonder what on earth
what led you to think this
be the thing that would improve anyway
I conclude by announcing that I never
want to do this research on your behalf
again I never wish I mean fads they
truly amazed me to read that there was
someone in California who specialized in
giving maybe a Botox I mean excuse me is
that bonkers or what I do hope though
that we've established the non
moralistic grounds in a sense of talking
about the functional value of things
that you might consider you're condemned
otherwise which I link to the symbolic
order no symbolic order no organized
form of difference you would confront
not just the market but the whole of
life including nature as just a kind of
consumer paradise
which would be culturally as well as
psychically psychotic the you know the
refusal to accept what we condemn to
starting with our death the changes in
our body the changes in our
circumstances the process of Aging
if those vanished and just got put on
the table as well you can always get
something to whatever you have removed a
kind of fundamental foundation of
culture and therefore of psychic life
sorry times so gloomy but there it is
anyway I now never have to read an
article again on the bleached anus
