so thank you all for coming to this
evening's conversation which begins our
series on home questioning post brexit
relationships for those of you who don't
know me I'm Manisha Verghese I'm the
head of public program here at the AAA
and I'll be co-chairing tonight's
conversation alongside Florian Edinburgh
from so Neil and when Florina I began
discussing this series last year brexit
still seemed like certainty so we
decided to plan these conversations as a
way to brainstorm ideas for how to
rethink identity separation and mass
migration in order to find ways forward
last week as you all know the Tory
government brexit deal was defeated in
parliament by 230 votes which plunged
our future relationship with the
European Union into uncertainty once
again and makes these conversations
between the people we've invited to
participate in this series architects
artists politicians theorists and
designers even more important to
strategize on what our future forms of
collaboration identity trade and
exchange that the UK will need to
reinvent as it redefines its
relationship with not only the rest of
Europe but also what they might be for
the rest of the world as well so
tonight's conversation will explore the
concept of home as a territory as well
as a conceptual idea in a period of post
globalization I think some of the
statistics that we put together on the
event in the work on the website stated
that kind of I think in a sense is done
in 2011 there were around 900,000 UK
citizens there were long term residents
in other EU countries in 2017 there were
three point eight million EU citizens
living in the UK which is an estimated
6% of the total population
so all these statistics mean that the
concept of home or what it means to each
of us will be redefined as the
possibility of Britain leaving the EU
approaches and it's this that we take as
a starting point for tonight's
discussion around homeland and whether
it is a place of origin or a space of
autonomy so to briefly introduce
tonight's speakers Sam Jacob is the
principal of Sam Jacobs to do a practice
whose work spans scales and disciplines
from urban design through architecture
design art and curatorial projects he's
professor of architecture at UIC Chicago
and Cole
for review and design previously was the
founding director of fad architecture
and his architectural approach then the
reason we've invited him tonight is to
kind of take inspiration from the
histories and stories or kind of
nostalgic elements embedded within the
context he's working with in order to
create a new understanding of identity
in a sense of place sitting to his right
is Maria shares our doochie and she's
the founder of publishing an educational
platform black square unit master of a
diploma unit 14 and coordinator of the
history and theory course at the RCA she
holds a PhD from tu Delft and with a
thesis on the construction of modern
subjectivity through the project of
public space and in terms of tonight's
conversation her research through
co-directing the city architecture ph.d
program at the AAA has looked at the
home as a microcosm of larger political
and social shifts in countries around
the world and then finally mariah namsun
is a sociologist and political scientist
he works as a postdoc researcher at the
University of Amsterdam on the political
history of neoliberalism his PhD focused
on the intellectual backgrounds of the
swing to the right and Dutch politics
around the turn of the century and
previously he was an editor of the 20th
edition of the art journal open titled
the populist imagination he also edited
a volume titled power to the people and
can shed light on populist movements
that have led to our current political
situation we hope so I'm really
important note to make is also that the
series was made possible through the
very generous support of the Embassy of
the kingdom of the Netherlands for which
we're very grateful and before I hand
over to tonight's panel the deputy
ambassador Brahimi Hoffer would like to
say a few words about the series so
please join me in welcoming her to the
AAA
yeah thank you very much
does it work it's okay very good good
evening everybody my name is bajas
forever and i'm the deputy ambassador as
was announced of the kingdom of the
netherlands and it's a great pleasure
for me to be here today tonight for the
first of what is going to be a series of
lectures about home and tonight about
questioning for exit relationships a few
months ago at the opening of the
exhibition home futures in the design
museum I had the pleasure to welcome the
moderator of tonight a Dutch architect
Florian Edinburgh just introduced to you
at our embassy he was in charge of
curating this exhibition which lets us
explore today's home through the prism
of yesterday's imagination
the exhibition definitely triggers the
debate amongst professionals on the
future design of our homes and if you
haven't been yet I can surely recommend
to go tonight you will be discussing the
impacts of the current political
situation in the United Kingdom on
architecture and design we will have
architects political scientists and a
designer discussing whether and if so
how brexit redefines what homes what
home means to EU citizens living in the
UK and British citizens living in the EU
I see everyday the effects of brexit on
international relations on trade and
also on Dutch citizens who have who have
lived here sometimes for decades so it's
going to be very interesting to learn
how the experts in this lecture hall
shall think brexit is going to influence
the design and architecture we see
around us every day and as a person
daily working with proxied and as a
diplomat having lived in several EU
countries and now in the UK it will be a
very inspiring conversation I think for
the Netherlands in the UK brexit will
not mean that we will no longer be very
good North Sea neighbors but now perhaps
more than ever before people will start
asking questions like who are we as a
nation and reflects on identity
our culture and what makes us different
from others so tonight's discussion is
also in that broader context a very
relevant indeed this talk as I said
before is a first of several talks to
come and I'm proud that the Dutch
embassy who sponsors the event can play
a role in facilitating these kinds of
intercultural exchanges and discussions
before I give the floor to our panelists
please indulge me but I would like to
ask your attention for another design
events that we're organizing as
Netherlands embassy at the residence on
the 5th of February this is a seminar
about cradle-to-cradle design the supply
of Natural Resources is not endless as
we all know so we have to use them
wisely if you want to attend this
seminar about this cradle-to-cradle
thinking or the circular economy as we
like to call it please speak to either
on the boss of the embassy or Kuhn who
is standing there and they will gladly
put you into contact with the organizers
of this event
sorry about that little promotion let me
conclude by thanking a few people that's
of course very important florian
Edinburg for his passion and his
contribution to future design in
architecture and for moderating
tonight's the architectural association
and specifically many very gazes now I'm
not pronouncing your name right these
wonderful series of talks the design
community present here it's great to see
you in such big numbers and the audience
of course more broadly in general I will
now hand over to Florian thank you very
much and have a very enjoyable evening
thank you
yeah thank you all for being here
tonight the idea is that we're gonna
really have a conversation which not
only people on this side of the table
speak but also you participate so the
format will be where our speakers will
first speak to five slides I believe or
speak for slides based on the prompt
that we gave them that really speaks
about the idea of homeland nostalgia
what are the emotions that basically
might have triggered some of this a
brexit sentiment but also our sort of
larger currents in contemporary society
in which there is sort of a longing for
something maybe a past maybe a past that
never happened so but I think we should
start I think everybody has their own
sort of interpretation of the prompt we
have given so I'd like to start with Sam
and then the right and should take it
from there okay great thanks thanks
Florian I'm so I guess the problem with
the idea of home like either as an
architectural idea or in a kind of wider
I do identity is that it feels like it's
natural it feels like it's completely
normal
of course it's not
is a well-known phrase which I think
speaks to a certain idea of English idea
of what homes mean within our culture of
course that phrase is an Englishman's
home is his castle and it's a very
strange phrasing I think it's good
phrase to unpack a little bit to perhaps
get under the skin of the problem of the
idea of home in in English culture for
sure this slide some of you may remember
the slide for 2000
tweet from Emily Thornbury in 2014 back
before the referendum when she got
sacked from the shadow cabinet because
somehow this was seen as a kind of
derogatory comment on I suppose the
white working-class of South East
England white vans and flags of San
Jorge so it's a kind of charged image in
some sense okay
it's definitely odd castle but you can
see it kind of somehow force tuned with
the kinds of things you would find on
castles flags
so it's phrase at home slash castle is
it's very weird because the castle of
course is actually a piece of military
hardware
it's a device is used to manifest forms
of power on its subjects and the castle
in England is really it's basically a
product of the Norman Conquest which
let's be clear was a conquest and the
castles which were built there were
seventy castles built in a hundred years
in order to control these new
territories the space of the anglo-saxon
home was very different it was if we
think of the myth of Robin Hood it
clearly shows you what is normal and
what is Anglo Saxon Anglo Saxons the
forest in the heart and a half-timbered
house and norman is the castle but the
home as that phrase suggests remains a
very important English myth it's not
just a place to live of course but it's
actually a political agent and very
ideological weapon think of Margaret
Thatcher's phrase of the home owning
democracy that really you couldn't be
part of democracy unless you owned your
own home and of course ideas like that
drive policies like rights of buying
which was clearly an assault on a
certain idea of how we could live like
essentially to dismantle state provision
of housing in fact if the effects of
which we're still arguing about today
there was a long piece by Rome or in the
observer on the weekends that's also
part of I suppose how you can see the
the politics of the idea of home being
so clearly part of the the kind of
debate about how we should live and I
suppose also how these sort of notions
become so entrenched in creating
political problems you could say in some
senses the housing crisis is entirely
manufactured there was no need to have a
housing crisis it was precipitated
deliberately
by a series of political decisions over
the last that's your 40 years so homes
are functions of ideology of economics
then force ideas of family of gender
think of it state agent showing you
around and saying here's the master
bedroom for example just to see how
encoded these ideas are so the castle in
other words it's not really our own
place it's really a place which
oppresses us it's a kind of sour in a
sense when we shut the door we don't
shut out the outside world in fact the
full force of all of those external
forces become kind of magnified and
that's the thing which we accept as
normal or natural the home is the most
politicized space of all some of you may
remember this back in the 90s Liam and
Patsy on the cover of Vanity Fair now in
terms of like the idea of nostalgia in
the 90s and I was definitely part of
this there was a kind of ironic kind of
reengagement with ideas of nation it was
a kind of 60s rerun you can see here
London swings again and of course that's
something which is much more difficult
to to to bear right now irony is not a
kind of mode of reaction to a current
circumstance because we're faced with
this kind of thing this was the front
page of the Sun Great Britain or great
betrayal and as you can see here's a
close-up of that image this is the sun's
College of their vision of Britain as it
is and how it could be so you can see
all of the important things are there
the Routemaster bus fish-and-chips
Stonehenge Wembley Stadium the shards
Blackpool Tower
exactly thanks
this is the kind of image of britain
which has been of england particularly
which has been constructed in all of the
arguments around brexit this kind of
fake idea of a country with in both and
playing critic rookie Spitfires pies
like basically a random collection of
signifiers of Englishness which
ridiculous as it may be it's also
incredibly powerful and it's this weird
collage really which is at the basis i
think of these these ideas of
sovereignty which is so fundamental to
the discussions around broke them just
as when you close the door at home you
don't close out the forces which have
created the idea of home when you breaks
it you do not close your country off to
the forces which surround there and it
will not normalize or naturalize things
again in fact these ideas of nostalgia
are just as bizarre as these imaginary
farms that supermarkets used to sell us
food which sound so real right boswell
farms as a way to disguise the
complexities of contemporary agro
business so I think these myths are
really a high-octane super kind of the
super super nostalgia and this for a
mistake like definitely understands your
first time which never existed which is
completely artificial and since
synthetic which means all of those
phrases like taking back control the
idea of independent traces of lawmaking
outside of international frameworks of
fictions and they're super powerful just
like the idea of home and the problem I
think we face both with brexit and with
the housing crisis is this clash between
two things which can't be reconciled
which is a kind of
cultural idea and the reality of the
situation thanks
so actually when when I received the
invitation to be here tonight the first
thing that jumped out to me was of
course the world home has been already
discussed I think very interesting
actually by Sam and as the some of you
in the room might know a lot of my
recent work really has been about trying
to demystify the narratives that
construct our homes because as much as
ho means about safety belonging an
orientation I think and I come from a
feminist perspective that really sees at
the same time also the problem of
hierarchy and exclusion and control very
much as keywords that are almost like
this kind of passive-aggressive
relationship that we have with the idea
of home and as much as I think that the
positive is still there there are also
of course issues and very much these are
very much the same problems that I also
find the discussing homeland somehow and
the lens actually through which I would
like to discuss actually homeland in
these five minutes is domestication so
the idea of making man domestic of
setting down of finding and constructing
a home that exactly Sam said before is
as much place as it is a narrative so I
would like to show you now basically
five images five maps that for me trace
a way in which actually architects and
citizens at large actually tried to make
sense of what is homeland disease
perhaps actually one of the oldest
extant maps of a village trying to
represent itself it's it's a petroglyph
dates back to 2500 before Christ and the
point that I want to make about this is
that somehow to have a home means to be
domesticated so from the moment we
settle down and this process of actually
constructing is imaginary homeland is
kind of unavoidable and and I want to
say this first just to say that although
a lot of what I'm going to say
afterwards might sound negative I think
that up to a certain degree this process
of domestication is somehow in some
implicit in our human nature somehow
this is actually again the same map
just in clearing terms and here you can
really see how even 5000 years ago
actually people felt probably a need a
kind of organic need to represent the
place where they settled and even its
architecture and its social relationship
relationships actually so a second point
that I want to make is that to
domesticate means to define the border
between an inside and an outside and of
course you can already imagine that sure
this is both a negative and a positive
thing at the same time and the images I
would like to show you here is actually
a map of a garden in Egypt more or less
1,500 1,500 years before Christ and you
can see clearly here that this is a map
of that which is cultivated and
potentially the desert that which is
outside that very big strong black line
that is in fact actually enclosing wall
so the sense of settling the sense of
constructing an environment that is
livable but also to define that which is
not livable that which is left outside
and it's somehow wild or undomesticated
but the problem with cultivation is that
the root of the world to cultivate is
the same root of the world to colonize
so to colonize means to cultivate and to
cultivate means to colonize it so the
moment that we settle down that we make
something productive which of course is
something we do for our own survival it
also implies actually relationship to
nature and to the land that is not
entirely peaceful that is in fact
actually quite violent and quite
aggressive and the image that I would
like to show you here is the continuum
planisphere is really one of the first
precise scientific images of the whole
world made by the Portuguese in order
actually to go look for other homelands
away in fact actually from their own
country what you will notice here that I
think is interesting is that there is
already a very strong and you have
control on Dominion but at the same time
there are no fixed boundaries in fact
actually between nation-states
because I would say that as much as the
colonization is an output of the
nation-state the initial state is
actually also an outcome of colonization
and the two things stand in a kind of
dialectical relationship so the first
point that I would like to make is that
the nation states this nation state that
we are now we are so much thoughts which
we both in terms of state as a narrative
in a nation-state as as a fact can be
read as a project of domestication or
almost as a project of self colonization
that we make to
territory and here for me the artifact
that testifies this is a map that
actually the state of friends took
almost a hundred years in fact to
compose is the first proper
scientifically designed actually and
constructed map of France it took four
generation of the Cassini family
actually to come up with that which is
in fact actually the first proper
triangulated map of a country and
actually just want to show you what was
the canvas upon which that map had been
constructed which is a series of
triangulation of important main
thoroughfares throughout France but you
will see that most of these lives are in
fact borders borders of the nation-state
particularly towards friends and towards
the east to what is today contemporary
Germany and was back then of course a
series of independent sovereign states
so you can really see here that really
is that you have the construction of a
narrative of the national state passes
also to architecture also to
representation also through drawing
because it's somehow as if France did
not exist before this map actually was
produced and the map was not produced
for pragmatic reasons it was really
produced actually to give a sense of the
image of homeland in at a glance in just
one image pretty much and the last point
that I would like to make and maybe
actually the most problematic is that in
fact in the modern state ownership so
did you have property private property
and particularly property of the land is
quintessential to domestication here the
image that I would like to show you is
an image in fact actually from my
homeland not really there has been a
colony of the Habsburg Empire for a very
long time and we were all mapped
codified down to the single tree I don't
know if you can see very well the image
but the image actually lists everything
that these peasants actually had on
their land down literally to the house
shed and and even the pieces of green
infrastructure are shed were there to
show that in fact actually home and
property go hand in hand for tax
purposes for ownership purposes and so
on and so forth and I think this
actually can trigger a series of really
for me problematic questions about the
relationship between belonging and
owning the land so these were kind of
the five points that I want to make a
point about home about the border about
colonies
about the nation-state and about
ownership there's nothing inherently
negative for me about these five points
if it weren't for the fact that actually
the type of subject or the type of
citizen that they want to construct is
essentially stable quantifiable
productive controllable and
individualized and with all these five
points I kind of have a problem with and
of course now the question is how do we
try to decolonize all of that and in my
own work about the house my own lands
let's say to try to actually uncover how
unnatural as Sam said before this is not
a naughty visa is to pass through the
colonized body in this case probably the
colonized body of the woman when we look
of course the territories is not as
simple as that and I would like just to
leave you with two I've seen our country
examples so what if we look now at two
maps that have not been produced within
the type of logic and culture that is
our Eurocentric logic that we've looked
at until now and the first map that I
want to show is actually this navigation
chart from the Marshall Islands done by
Islanders in the hundreds it's a map
that doesn't imply any kind of control
over the territory in fact the the
sticks that you see are basically the
direction mean direction of waves and
the Pearl Islands so we see here really
these Islanders don't have any intention
of actually controlling that which is a
natural but just to basically kind of
live with it and literally almost like
you know flow with the flow of nature
for me the question is actually this map
this pre-colonization map raises is
whether we can imagine forms of
stewardship of the territory that do not
imply domestication and the other map
that I would like to show you in this I
think was a very shocking imagery for me
to discover it's one of the very few
maps that we have remained from Native
American people that produced it in 1700
this is a copy of course but it was a
map of actually the relationships
between a series of of tribes and with
their European colonizers the
rectangular forms are the European
colonizers and the round shapes are the
different nations and actually here what
they're trying to map is not a
geographic location but it's really the
social and trade relationships that they
have one to the other and it's a
completely different way of actually
portraying that which is a dwelling that
which is a homeland
that has nothing to do with this idea of
settling that I described before which
on the contrary is very European and for
me these raise is actually the question
whether we can imagine forms of dwelling
that do not imply domestication so
somehow what if we can think instead of
home instead of a stable rigid sensor
form just an idea of dwelling that might
be maybe more fragile maybe more
temporary whether instead of talking
about border we can discuss about edges
so a plural form of let's say confront
ation between different realities
instead of colonization so a form of
cultivation that is aggressive whether
we can go back to maybe an idea of care
whether inside the nation of the
national state we can imagine other
political forms there maybe are more
based on the idea of Commons rather than
on the idea of reaching the governmental
framework and then finally whether
instead of actually trying to claim
ownership of the territory we can come
back to some other type of framework
that might have to do rather with our
use in fact of the landscape and finally
the point that I won't really make is
that maybe our architectural imagination
passes also through the representation
of these spaces so through the making
and the rethinking of other forms of
maps and other forms of representation
thank you
[Applause]
I'm gonna be a bit more kind of a less
literal or more indirect in my approach
to home and I will start with the
strange expression
apparently the expression you can't have
your cake and eat it too has become
something of a brexit motif Boris
Johnson once subscribes its position on
this matter as pro having it and pro
eating it - ever since the British have
been accused by European politicians of
adhering to a cake philosophy Donald
Tusk President of the European Council
recommended the followers of this
particular strand of thought to buy a
cake and eat it and see if it's still
there on the plate it is often said that
that brexit is informed by a romantic
colonial nostalgia the days that Britain
ruled the waves and could go it alone
global Britain it is tempting to see
that as a very British phenomenon but a
similar type of nostalgia and a version
to the international order can be felt
in large parts of the Western world the
desire to take back control is in no way
limited to this particular Islands in
fact when you think of the u.s. with
Trump or Hungary with Orban or Italy
with salvini or even the Netherlands
with chat about debt and builders you
will see very similar types of impulses
radical right-wing politicians conjure
images of a glorious past while
promising a restoration of national
purpose and unity I give you the Dutch
next tears this is builders pretending
to be a Dutch naval hero
and this is tell about that both
right-wing populist leaders who are in
favor of an exodus and tell about that
this is now the ascendant figure has as
its party will be like a fleet from the
Renaissance that is you can see here
it's actually attacking Parliament it
historians actually pointed out that the
boat is an English galleon it's not that
but anyway there's there's a very
fascinating paradox at the heart of the
leaf campaign which is that culture on
stodgy
and conservatism seem to go hand in hand
with a global economic outlook and this
time represented by a powerful financial
interests that aim to turn Britain into
a global offshore tax haven and it is
this paradoxical combination of cultural
nationalism and economic globalism that
I think of when I hear the word cake
philosophy having your cake and eating
it too so many have argued that the
central political fault line of today is
that open versus closed but that is
exactly where the paradox comes in from
the very beginning the politics of
cultural nationalism and economic
globalism have been deeply intertwined
it was Margaret Thatcher who opened up
Britain to the global marketplace by
deregulating the financial sector and
joining the European single market but
she combined that economic globalism
with cultural nationalism and kept
Fanning the flames of euro skepticism
within the Tory party in my home country
there was a very kind of similar
politics espoused by the former leader
of the right-wing liberal party for its
bogus time who became European
Commissioner for the internal market
he crafted the famous bowler stein
directive with the aim of undoing
differences in European labour standards
the Polish plumber could work under
Polish labor conditions in other
European countries of course the to
protest the directive was shelved but
what was fascinating for me is that at
the same time both stein argued that
economic globalism needed to be wedded
to cultural protectionism the economy
should be opened up but the Dutch
population needed protection from
foreign immigration both Thatcher and
Boca Stein were inspired by Friedrich
Hayek often considered to be the
Godfather of neoliberalism and free
Hayek wrote an essay in 1939 on the
economic conditions of Interstate
federalism which is often seen as a
luminary description of the European
Union of today he said that a federation
would limit the possibilities of
national governments to intervene in the
economy while at the federal level lack
of identification with foreign leaders
alienation from political institutions
would prevent the development of
European social policy or a European
welfare state in other words the
free-market agenda according to Hayek
was best served by a combination of
cultural nationalism and economic
globalism
and my point would be with is that we
are now with witnessing the unraveling
of that contradictory synthesis thank
you
[Applause]
let's see if we can digest this very in
this cake it's interesting that the so
before it becomes a purely economical
discussion it does seem that sort of the
association of home with ownership and
ownership with agency and the idea well
so I think it's a cultural like as you
said there's a cultural aspect there's
an economical aspect and it seems that
the the challenge that we're facing is
that these two are now sort of in
conflict with one another and that we
don't have convincing alternative within
this I think Sam you and so apart from
the same misuse of history right I think
everybody identified so the
misunderstanding actually in the use of
of say let's placed historical
references basically it's it's it's an
imaginary history but it's an imaginary
fast it's being reflected or it's being
projected as something that will not be
achievable maybe as is it is the fallacy
or is the is it a layer to put to
actually softened the fact that
economically we don't have access to any
of this anymore but I I was I'm hoping
and I'm maybe starting with you Sam to
see if we could discuss not just I think
we will agree a lot of the observations
in the ASEAN Marine I really appreciated
also the fact that you projected
something forward I was really hoping
that we would be able together to after
probably agreeing on what the problem is
if we could imagine as designers as you
know creatives as people if there's way
forward
and what sort of those models would be
but what I also realize that we should
not make baby mistakes that many
intellectuals have made over over the
course of history that for many many
people the home as an asset is their
only security is their only reality is
their only way to actually survive you
know in a time when there's so much
uncertainty so I don't want to be too
blatantly just removing them the need
for people you know for the stability I
mean I guess one of the one of the
strange contradictions which exist
within the idea of the home as as this
idea of security financial security is
that it's actually not very secure you
know if you know high-end properties in
London are losing 15 to 20 percent of
their value they're obviously not
working particularly well as in
financial instruments yet at the same
time so much kind of government money
has gone into supporting that
well supporting prices but also to
supporting the market and I suppose it's
that kind of the weirdness of the
function of homers as a form as a as an
asset or something which performs within
the market which is also one of these
unresolvable kind of dichotomies within
one single structure and I think within
the recent kind of political context of
how the home has been constructed which
is to to basically kind of withdraw any
idea of state housing and to try to
propel all forms of housing into the
market as has created this yeah like a
severe problem you see like things
changing now
in London you see local authorities
beginning to start to build you see some
restrictions on the ways in which local
authorities can borrow money which I
think it's giving a different
possibility obviously it's a very kind
of school drop a notion against however
many years since 1979 I know I have a
certain idea of home well I'd say it's
it's it's that problem which needs to be
kind of addressed certainly in the UK
but I was showing them Netherlands they
did of the direction of travel is
towards a situation that we've
yeah I think that I mean of course the
Netherlands also has it's it's it's
nostalgia and it's it's it's own traumas
but I think that the problem with the
Netherlands it's such a small country
and as Napoleon already said it's
basically the deposits of French and
German rivers I think you know it's in
the end it's less appealing the notion
that we could go it alone
so I mean there is these two parties
they present I think maybe 20 25 percent
of the electorate and what you're now
seeing actually on the European
continent is that a lot of these similar
parties are now kind of becoming
somewhat skeptical about the idea of
leaving the European Union so actually
marine lepen has just announced that the
from national is reconsidering its
opposition to the European Union and
rather would like to choose for
opposition within the European Union and
there's now also such agreements between
urban and now I think between the Polish
Conservative Party and and salvini to
have a kind of a conservative euro
skeptic force that will participate in
European elections so I think on the
continent we're gonna see that shift
that it's gonna be much more kind of an
attack from within somehow I think that
you are totally right that we cannot
dismiss this idea of home and even of
homeland altogether because I mean for
many of us most of us still they hold a
lot of meaning I guess maybe the
question is how can we introduce some
midscale of also social organization and
social imagination that don't leave us
just with these two alternatives of the
state on the one hand
family on the other hand whether we can
think of other ways of associating
ourselves you know beyond the beyond the
state which I don't particularly have
personally but also don't leave us alone
because essentially actually this
attachment to to the home as an asset is
also very psychological I think that
there is also a lot of solitude I think
in many families where the whole goal of
these families is actually to secure the
assets to pass on to the next generation
and we all know that this is actually
it's kind of a tragedy because you can
never never even actually really leave
your house your children because there's
going to be taxes and so on and so forth
but then these this form of social
anxiety or existent is I think really
exists an Schillaci really maybe also
has to do with the fact that we have
lost that or if we ever had because I
don't know whether before it was better
static but we are not very good at
imagining actually Mead scales of social
interaction where we can also protect
each other and take care of each other
that don't have to do either with the
family or with the state at that mind
you might have to do with other forms of
property for instance that can be more
shared with other forms of housing that
might be more cooperative or
collaborative but also with institutions
like the a for instance which is
something that is for me so
extraordinary because it's really an
association where you know people can
come together and construct something
that goes beyond individual but doesn't
have the scale in the state somehow I
mean if there's something interesting
you're bringing about this idea of
belonging and I think both you and Moran
brought up this idea of colonialism as
something that I think Sam in your image
of Britishness that was published I
think we curate what is Britishness a
lot especially kind of an in a brexit
context I think as a result of being a
colonial power for so long there are a
lot of things that we have appropriated
or that our result of Britain becoming a
melting pot of different cultures yeah
when it chooses when we choose to we
edit out those things and we pick the
most British light thing and I think as
you said Mariah in your presentation
that that's a symptom present many
countries I think Britain is an exam is
the example we use
today but and I think it's a symptom of
this what you talked about the divide
which in cultural nationalism and kind
of economic global ISM but I was quick I
think that idea of belonging of how
there's a kind of mid scale that that
could deal with a much more complex
understanding of belonging could be
interesting to explore like how do we
recognize the fact that you know there
used to be a thing called colonialism
and that has created a much more
complicated sense of who we are and and
and where we live that isn't as simple
as you know your passport or or where
you're from and I'm just curious as to
what what that might be or how do we how
do we redraw the the kind of map of
Britishness that you showed so well I
think it's I mean you could say in a
sense of design in fact it's a kind of
question of representation both in all
senses of the word I suppose and from
the active role of a designer like what
you choose to represent through the
language of design I think is really
important like you think of the this new
building better beautiful Commission
which the government has announced which
is chaired by Roger Scruton which has
also explicit what only hasn't has an
aesthetic agenda which is to say if one
it's argument is that if you make homes
which you assume the public buildings
wish to be you assume the public will
like then it will be easier to give them
planning permission
we'll be faster to build and cheaper to
build and will somehow therefore
alleviate any form of housing crisis but
of course what they mean by that is
things which look traditional of course
what they mean by that is a very
reductive idea of what relation of
architecture blank
can you see kind of the groups that
create streets who we have no idea how
they're funded who pursued a kind of an
idea of traditional street patterns
their arguments we should pull down
literally pull down tower blocks and
replace them with pseudo Georgian
streets and you've seen this kind of
very weird mix of political agenda and
it's an aesthetic kind of vision which
is kind of almost inseparable and I mean
I would say which is well I think we did
we tried to do in a lot of the work we
did together at fat which was to
explicitly engage with the visual
language of architecture to make things
which which looked like other things and
somehow to subvert those kind of
conventions so to actually take on you
know kind of traditional ideas of
housing but to somehow mix it up with
what have OnGuard techniques for example
so that you produce terraces which on
the one hand incredibly ordinary but
also like kind of yeah kind of cuts up
experiments at the same time I think
it's something which architecture
doesn't want to engage with because here
is you because I mean obviously you've
used a lot of historic say references or
allusions in your work but and I
realized that at the beginning of your
talk that you but you did it with irony
and this one with irony is not possible
anymore and that everything became
literal and I'm wondering if that's the
way in which you could define the
the use of historic imagery in the work
of fats versus the way it's now being
proposed as sort of it's it's false
history but it is not ironic at this
moment anymore in some of these
propositions by Prince Charles or who
have who have you running as Liam and
Patsy in a Union Jack bags in some ways
you know ironies it's a great tool to
allow you to express things you actually
really believe you don't want people I
think you can see what's happening in a
within architecture you can see
well-meaning architects designing in a
way which has a vernacular look but
isn't too vernacular and they think
that's it's somewhere between aesthetic
poles which which kind of you know make
it accessible and legitimate there it's
not Prince Charles but it's not some how
to write a book either I'd say maybe
it's time to take on those kinds of
issues think of the way in which
architecture has been used to construct
ideas think of the crazy idea of making
that the Palace of Westminster gothic
you know in Victorian times the idea
that you would build something which
looked like it was made evil purely to
kind of a very particular idea of the
image of nationhood I think maybe you
know why why don't we take it on why
don't why don't we begin to to engage
with those kind of cultural narratives I
think it's it's something which we've
done we haven't done enough of and
certainly
the right has stumbled in the
construction of imagery that to me makes
sort of sense because it goes back to
one of the points we're making at the
beginning of D naturalizing that which
we assume as natural and I think
actually exactly this idea of working
with these figures but of course kind of
naturalizing them or estranging them
let's say from from the original context
then really becomes a way to challenge
our imagination that I think could be
extremely productive I think ready well
it's at about this idea of naturalizing
for me it's is absolutely crucial
because if we don't understand the
structure within which we are then we
are already our imagination is going to
be always a stopped at a certain point
so makes complete sense to me I think
it's it's definitely missed opportunity
that we haven't seen yet apart from very
few cases regular practice think the
picturesque is exactly that the way of
making the the kind of wealth and power
of the aristocracy look like its nature
look like it's always involves shifting
whole village is flooding valleys
chopping down forests would you exist
for thousands against all to make it
look naturally and I think that's that's
clearly part of the architecture has had
in making power seem acceptable so I
think some so in some way of making it
worse in some way of interrupting that
relationship between how by making
exactly explicitly clear that it's not
we'll be proposing in which is a
solution but it might just be but but
hey maybe it's also fun because let's
face it like it is quite anyway you see
you know the the group of their sons
graphic designer suburbia and they're
there now just build this entire new
neighborhood which looks exactly like a
can or district in Amsterdam you know
it's like a kind of retro architecture
except that there's no one on the street
because it's suburbia so it's like it's
it's kind of kind of Absalom canna belts
then sort of post-apocalyptic except you
know around five speak or something it's
so like it's obviously fake and but many
people love it nonetheless and and I
wonder you know I'm actually thinking of
Sandom which is you know like this you
have this great tourist destination
where you can see the windmills and and
you have these little greenhouses and
there's an architect that built the kind
of really preposterous building made of
all these kind of little greenhouses all
together and it's kind of a very very
fascinating hotel that some people
absolutely hate and other people love
but I wonder whether you know in that
sense
space for critique is like would that
just be for four people
yeah wouldn't I just love it nothing new
like you know once one story about the
kind of you know one of the important I
guess of languages of English
architecture which has doesn't have an
English origin
I'm its kind of thing you see plus all
over out of town
supermarkets gigantic sheds with a
little bit of why with some black lines
in it so half half timbering and you
know cordis the one-story half timbering
only comes over to the British Isles
with kind of like Germanic tribes which
the Romans and we using the mercenaries
to deal with them counts and as soon as
they arrived this is like two thousand
years ago they're building in the way
that they built banging in continental
Europe and you can imagine that that's
partly in order to have shelter but it's
also partly to reconstruct the home
which they no longer have so strange
that maybe like two thousand years ago
people were absolutely capable of
nostalgia in exactly the same way that
we are now even that those history that
that story of nostalgia is at least two
thousand years old and it's something
which continues to evolve and in its
evolution it's always engaging with its
kind of cultural verticals
economic context so maybe not algae is a
form of energy which we
the gangs within in a productive way
rather than dismissing that's fair
I have a question for Maria
going from style more to typology and
how to imagine other forms of living and
how because I really appreciated the
maps that you showed of these other
cultures and it reminded me of some
conversations I had also in Japan for
instance where there are alternative
forms now of you know living together
and also I heard recently in Venice for
instance with the sense of ownership as
well old people and students who don't
have access to homes in an innocent of
this go living arrangement between say
you know a different look your own
grandma basically but I feel that that
kind of alternative forms of living are
very reliant on a certain or you know
people's willingness to enter in those
kind of alternative living arrangements
they have to be people have to feel safe
and often happens when there is a
cultural coherence so in Japan it works
really well because everybody's Japanese
and so we you know everybody had here's
to certain cultural norms and so the
question is if you feel that in and and
even the maps that you showed of you
know these other cultures they're very
coherent cultures and so the question is
if sort of the the nomads isn't here to
an extent proposing could exist in a
culturally diverse yeah
world yeah I think this is it's it's a
crucial question it goes back a bit also
to mind just question about colonialism
so how do we accept and well the fact of
poor Elizabeth century how do we
actually construct a frame for that and
of course the case that I know the best
is exactly the case of the home that you
were mentioning before and indeed in
many cases the examples that we have
right now of known what I would call
non-domestic living are definitely very
reliant on the target group being
cohesive and somehow or entering this
kind of voluntary relationship that
requires a lot of commitment homogeneity
from a certain point of view it could be
diverse in terms of Asia but it has to
be maybe consistent in terms of the
politics of these people or the some
kind of belief let's say which I think
is a problem and and and I agree for the
moment the solutions that we have are
very limited but I think it's still
better than nothing because for me it
still goes back actually to this
question of imagination or imagining
actually that what we have right now is
not the only solution we could have
other solutions and maybe these first
attempts at types of living that go
beyond family very imperfect but at
least they they challenged our
imagination of what actually living is
that maybe actually we don't have to
live in permanent society a family
environment and so on and so forth and I
don't really have an answer for that
because it is true that all the cases of
non-domestic living that I have seen
presuppose a form of social imagination
social organization sorry that is at
least as restrictive as a nuclear family
it's just different and of course this
is the shortcoming until now
so scale is interesting there again this
because maybe I'm just thinking talking
that maybe doesn't have to happen then
on the scale of this sort of new thought
living arrangement may be sort of
pluralism can happen in one scale above
that sort of exactly next door or even
at the scale that is smaller because for
instance recently I mean the more I talk
to people the more I keep thinking that
as much as we might like this communal
living kind of scenarios most people
still do live in a family condition
maybe the problem is not a nuclear
family per se but maybe the problem is
the way in which the apartment has
become such a rigid diagram that
enforces as some would say me for these
you know general roles you know age
hierarchy and so on and so forth but
maybe there's nothing wrong with the
family per se but there is everything
wrong with an architecture that becomes
such a rigid diagram that only has one
way of being interpreted if we could
imagine in fact a way typologically of
diffusing the function so let's say that
the gestures that you do in everyday
life day in a way that is less
restrictive so maybe it has to do with
maybe as much more molecular scale much
much exactly for instance we know right
now that there is no need for the
kitchen to be just one space you know
like this idea the kitchen is right you
know it's very rigid the appliance that
has to sit in one space you cannot move
it so you know in that room you're going
to have the woman of the house and so on
and so forth technology now allows us to
do many things that are not in fact
actually so rigid and we're in fact even
the idea of preparing a meal might be
much more shared with the members of the
family but that's just to say the ways
in which actually maybe we can have a
much more molecular imagination and then
maybe a larger scale imagination that
has to do we form software link that are
not the house because I think that's
another bit bit another problem for me
personally have you obsessed so much
about the idea of the house for a long
time my whole architectural imagination
was on the scale of the house and
the street pretty much but the reality
is that there are so many other scales
of association including the workplace
including they are physically perhaps
social clubs including I should the
places where we go to do sport leisure
and so and production of culture in
general but maybe we are not really
taking two into account and the dollar
there again places like the IEA places
like where we spend in fact a lot of
time our our world spaces our offices
our gym and so on and so forth
we know that I think one of the most
incredible inventions typologically I
think in London was any of the club
actually where in fact actually man of a
certain certain social layer found a
certain degree of freedom from the
restriction of quite rigid family
leaving the was of course codified by
you know class rules and so on and so
forth and and of course it was only
allowed only to male citizens of a
certain social class but I think within
that it was a form of social
experimentation with a way of being
together that didn t raise the house or
the need for the house I think that's
interesting but when you brought up the
map because if we take it beyond the
scale of domestic I like the fact that
the map becomes a kind of self-portrait
that looks at how we see ourselves and
potentially that was one of the big
problems and any kind of these political
crises that have happened around the
world that maybe countries have very
little awareness of how they see
themselves in the relationships the rest
of the world and there's a kind of map
making exercise or something that could
be used as a provocation in the same way
as you were talking about images being
used as a provocation to kind of realize
how interconnected everything is but I
also liked when you said that France
didn't exist until that map was made and
in a way it's a documentation of
ourselves that makes us exist rather
than just inhabiting a space and I was
curious in a way it's like I would love
to see a map of like the three of your
presentations kind of put onto one map
because I think you framed the kind of
origins of the British nostalgia and and
the problem you talked about speculating
on ways forward and
marine talks about the kind of invisible
political force and economic forces that
kind of contribute to that and I'm just
curious about how the map can be used
maybe in a way as a way forward to
provoke or speculate on a way out of
these kinds of ideas of divisions or
borders I mean I think it would differ
with each country like in the
Netherlands I think a big part of the
problem is the Netherlands has a very
defensive nationalism and it's it's a
it's a type of nationalism that has been
framed in terms of innocence so like the
Dutch at the certain point discovered
that they were basically too weak to
hold on to their colonial possessions by
military might
so they positioned themselves
internationally as kind of the peaceful
peace-loving country that was you know
had only good intentions and and this is
kind of a new form of nationalism was
was was taking shape that ultimately led
to the kind of court of international
justice being in the hague and this is
always like it has contributed to an
image of the netherlands as well
basically non-aggressive so like we yeah
the good guys and and everything that
happened basically happened to us by
other people doing things to us and
basically what is interesting is it's
not just in terms of cartographical
representation but it's also in terms of
historical representation that that and
those entire episodes that do not kind
of line up with that image of the
netherlands are basically
they were just not being taken up so
there's actually now in the Netherlands
there is a large discussion about our
colonial heritage and and the fact that
what we call in Dutch the police actions
in which is actually a war of
independence basically was really a war
we were the ones actually persecuting
that war so I think that that would not
be imaginable in a country like Great
Britain so I think every country would
have its own kind of weird elisions and
kind of arrangers and so you would have
to have a specific type of map or
specific type of historical redressing
that you need to do in every place your
ad if I can say something a bit
superficial but in fact you know
sometimes you have kids actually see a
lot of things that they don't always
understand but you know when you you
know when you grow older maybe you
understand some of the intuitions that
you have that the kid actually were
quite profound
I was actually always a shocked by the
fact that Edie Olympics all
nation-states have to have this
incredibly western-style you know
anthems which are very bizarre because I
mean why would the countries that didn't
even actually perceive themselves as
nation-states until very recently have
to have a european-style flag a concept
that was that was not even a thing
actually three-quarters of the world
with the European style of fake
Beethoven kind of terrible
so I think that that goes back to the
question of the map I mean why why do
why did we explore actually this format
of the next nation-state throughout the
whole world and what can we learn
actually of territories that conceived
of themselves from the graphic point of
view but also from the legal point of
view at different times different types
of entities that are not the state
because we also know that as you were
saying before because of this pure
identities the nation-state is bursting
at the seams it doesn't it doesn't work
it has created you know disasters such
as you know Lebanon or Syria you know
places that have been created out of out
of nothing or Palestine Israel for
instance now so I think we should really
question a narrative really at the root
because it's a narrative but it's also a
legal form and as much as actually for
our countries probably the Netherlands
Britain Italy somehow you know the
nation-state is somehow organic with our
cultural development it really is and
for three-quarters of the world it's
something that we exported and I think
that should raise some questions and and
maybe it's actually time to question you
know following actually what are other
ways of conceiving of the state maybe
actually to challenge ourselves as well
spatial problem and again it's a that
the map is but the solution and the
problem you could say that is
interesting though is the place which
does feel like those kinds of boundaries
potentially are changing is the is the
workplace like the kind of changes that
you see in
now how people occupy space or how space
is structured the space of work
absolutes are more radically different
now and then homes which have basically
states
atrophied for very long time of course
that they were never like they're
similar hundreds of they're completely
completely different entities but that's
that seem strange and you wonder whether
you know why that might why that might
be what makes the home such a kind of a
space resistant to any form of of change
when when other places and other types
of space see money potentially more
fluent I have my own very cynical in
fact the state has all the interest to
keep the family this kind of their
welfare for free pretty much so they
need us to behave like that because then
they can offload a lot of things that
they could maybe should provide and you
know and basically outsource it to the
home I think it's also a market in the
market exactly I came in from that's a
point of view designer the the layout of
an apartment would be essentially given
to you by an agent so but what they
think they could sell you know in terms
a number of bedrooms range Minh kitchen
whatever I think which so it's coming
from it's coming from the market in some
banquets even if everybody looks as if
or that's totally like because it
doesn't because it's not assessed on it
you know within its own terms it's only
it's only seen in relation to the market
that's that seems to be why certain
things are absolutely preserved because
the model the model has
exactly the thought of well I don't know
I mean I think maybe here comes my
experience from the US in a little bit
and I think if you're talking about work
and if you're talking about you know how
the workplace is being disrupted the
home is already quite quickly also being
disrupted by the same sort of impulses
which are mostly economic and now for
instance I would say in New York you
cannot live anymore and own a house if
you don't both work but it means you
know already it's not possible to have
say domestic they were done by anybody
of the core family you need to find
alternative living forms and the sort of
incredible push the words say cohousing
not something social but actually as a
way to just get more money out of less
square feet I think it's something we
should be worried about if the if I
think if we don't come with a strong
alternative Silicon Valley will disrupt
the home in a way that it's probably a
less attractive you know living together
then then the traditional home in that
sense yeah that's true I mean I think
that I mean both things that are true at
the same time I mean it is true that we
designers also have not been so good
maybe at at pushing typological
imagination so you know there is a kind
of tidal change also in housing but it's
just very slow and maybe much less
experimental and less creative but it is
true that there is a shift recently the
statistic that I showed me the most
about London is that in the last maybe
15 years bedrooms are growing larger and
larger and larger and living rooms are
growing smaller and smaller with the
same square meters in a way the same
size apartments in same size flat you
have a shrinking a sphere of social
interaction and then a growing sphere of
essentially hoarding of objects I guess
because that's kind of
individual is more important than any
collective space what if you're renting
them out Silicon Valley envision where
are those the Silicon Valley visions of
the nation's thing all of those
fantasies of like floating off from the
California coast never paying any taxes
well there are smart cities at this
moment and smart countries maybe but I
guess like the point that I made earlier
but going thinking of other ways of
imagining the state
I guess at its founding the European
Union was that kind of experimental
project to try and think of a thing
bigger than the state and in a way it's
I mean maybe it needs to be reinvented
but I thought I mean when you brought up
the these examples of nationalist
movements the populist movements instead
of trying to divorce themselves from the
EU are now maybe using brexit as a
cautionary tale and seeing finding ways
they can critique the EU from the
insects at least on your part of the
conversation and on a day where reason
may presented her plan B is a very
similar version to plan a I was just
curious if maybe the UK could learn from
that kind of approach like that
observations I guess from the
conversation but maybe at this point we
can open it up to the audience
hi great talk just start with our
conversation I I wasn't gonna I wasn't
gonna share this thought but because
it's a bit disjointed but I couldn't
help it was and what Maria mentioned
which is what I was thinking is that it
really reminded me love what was been
said about an article that I read in
about the end of the economic
instability 2008 towards 2011 which kind
of talked about the there might be a
different way of looking at this
economic stability that it's here to
stay and actually the perpetual state of
the Carius ness if you may want to say
that that there is actually a way to
start looking at prosperity within like
one day you'd have a job the next day
you're freelancing the next day you're
kind of cleaning dishes whatever it is
like actually is a and I'm just
wondering if Britain in a weird way
since 2016 is entering this political
instability state where it's kind of
politically a nun coming from the Middle
East I mean there are countries in
perpetual political instabilities over
there and they prosper that they don't
prosper in in the sense we understand
countries to prosper but people live in
this instability you don't know whether
war is gonna happen tomorrow and that
has been happening for 70 years and war
condom will goes so I wonder if there is
a possibility that all of this energy
that we extend into kind of creating
states of stability all of this you know
if it is possible to kind of start
believing that instability is a way to
live and instead of thinking of it as a
as a map that is like just one image I'm
just thinking of electronic I mean it's
a little bit
something that kind of changes one day
you're living with your family the next
day you're actually friends on that you
know it's kind of with this gig economy
there's something happening gather that
could really you know allow us to kind
of shift and move in and out of the same
things rather than find a new way to
think about things it's just kind of
you're moving around yeah I think your
intervention I mean most people would
understand the state of precariousness
to be like something negative that
somehow needed to be overcome so your
point is actually that we should get
mentally used to it I mean I would say
that I think the the the big problem
with with economic insecurity as it is
being experienced right now in big parts
of the world but also in large parts of
Europe after the financial crisis I
think a lot of those anxieties are being
projected onto the cultural sphere so
where there used to be some kind of you
know social economic solidarity where
people would put their money into a kind
of a insurance knowing that they're not
gonna use it that much but that other
people might have chronic illnesses or
you know like the you would have the
same with all sorts of different social
security schemes you would have the
trade union and all this kind of things
when those are all kind of institutions
working around social economic
solidarity and I think that what we've
seen is the gradual erosion of those
institutions also due to this process of
flexible ization and precarity you're
talking about and I think really I
believe that this whole can
this cultural appeal is a projection of
that kind of anxiety onto the cultural
level where people would go like okay
you know I'm insecure but at least here
there's a politician that you know that
defense my identity rather than my kind
of economic interest and I think that's
a very kind of dangerous situation that
we would need to address and therefore I
think that kind of a long term policy
that tries to promote kind of a more
social economic solidarity instead of a
culture or ethnic solidarity it would be
key to changing the present political
situation so I want just to bring it
back to if I lose my track in the
staccato of criticisms the conversations
bring me back to that place the first
thing to say is you know this is nothing
new at the AAA it's fantastic it's
really optimistic the conversation and
really unless it is because you know
back in the 90s when I used to teach
here there were other issues and other
problems unprecedented brexit I can see
that but the first thing to take away
from this conversation it's only design
can solve it in my opinion and I'm
talking the technologies it's some
technology for social technological
conversation was missing from from what
you said but I'm sure that the unique
masters can bring that back into some of
the things you were saying and I'm not
talking about parametric's
so so bringing it back to those design
and denaturalized situations for
instance maps are great but it's a
completely wrong paradigm because what
has happened since that day is
population and the second thing is
happened we don't have the energy
anymore to create even the maps have
drawn currently in terms of the circular
economy so one of the things we should
do is bring that seminar to the AAA
anyway because you will learn very
quickly how that affects space and
planning and actually brings together
the two conversations you were talking
about in a very quick way and I might
just suggest one only as an engineer so
I've had this conversation and I think
there's a whole argument if you REM you
want to go to the countryside and if you
Renzo you want to build tall buildings
right if you go in between those two
spaces the combination and you know this
more than most of us could be very
English about this cities where I think
the word Thorian used if you if you look
at it's difficult to talk about Japan
and India and places like that is a
monocultural they're not pluralistic but
one thing is that they remind us that
identity is not important it's where
your act not only where you've come from
so if you go to the space is in between
that in between the really dense space
and the really countryside except both
of those are dead I think we have no
choice but to grow cities I think we
have no choice but to deal with
population and therefore urbanized
everybody talks about killing it but if
we can find solutions and it's not smart
anything smart is not smart if you can
find solutions through architecture and
only I think architects can find this
because you have I really believe this
because you have the ability to bring
together under very difficult
circumstances a solidarity in the rest
of us and this this is something you
lost barley you lost because you don't
technology often I think
but that's just me and my own agenda if
you can actually bring these things back
and look at the space between the city
and the rural for example I was asked
this question you know what would you do
about global warming
if if you sleep vertically the doctors
tell you this it's possible as
investigations going on this the size of
a bedroom that we use here today very if
you really do sleep vertically you can
fit 36 people in a typical bedroom what
that mean what that means is in bedroom
space is what I'm getting at 50
kilometer so the fundamental issue is
with our bedrooms of far too big how can
we rethink that and actually the medics
are thinking about this before you are
so my my prompt would be drilling to all
of us that optimism again and I'm
already getting it I'm really excited
I've just come from all sorts of develop
a conversation already how we can get
maps or analysis diagrams to say what we
want know what you want so we can get it
to say almost anything and then
everybody believes it so I'd say you
move away from that would find stop
getting stuck in at the tectonic of
typology but find solutions where in
between cities and what is there in
space because in for example in India we
know that at least 400 cities are
considered to be small because they have
six million people what is the type you
can do in there or what is the
architecture could do to change that I'm
gonna stop there
yeah that's face between the the city
and the countryside that's kind of part
of the problem of the idea of nature in
in in Britain especially in England in
the it's thought of as being nature and
unspoiled of course it's like being
spoiled it's completely spoiled already
which is also fine but it's also the
space I supposed to be Japanese the
Howard but recognized it in the face of
the problems of the 19th century City
that kind of in the city of the
industrialization and he's like
ridiculously naive idea that you could
take the best of the city and the best
of the countryside leave out the bad
bits and infuse them together like some
kind of childish equation and produce
something entirely new you've got the
garden city and I think that that kind
of weird experiment I think is it's is
definitely has definitely been lacking
in terms of developing new models since
you'd say the post-war reinterpretation
of the Garden City and then it's it's
clearly possible to make these kinds of
like fusions between different ways of
living and it's possible to do it by you
know almost by superscription like it
has Eponine how we're dealing like on a
soapbox going around the country getting
people to invest you know on a on an
individual basis not as not as a state
institution not exactly as a private
developer either but in some weird
relationship or some kind of weird
States between
communal and private so it's clearly the
new models can be developed maybe in
exactly the places that yours suggests
think any ability it's interesting you
said you were even to a Developer Forum
where they were trying to see how many
bodies they can back into the room right
and so it also means like where where
since there is no more State Building
right there's like the technologies that
are new can only be invented by people
who have access to capital basically and
they typically invent these new typology
x' in order to make more capital not to
necessarily change other human
conditions so the question is really
what are other paths towards testing new
technologies other than you know going
with the developers have to say or do we
just have to all become developers this
could also be
or become developers nor do I want to
suggest itself build an arcade but I
think there are solutions in
architecture that you should be able to
find and they're not entirely
technological rather than the technology
drive you which we do I mean often
engineers will come in and tell you what
your house needs to be like because if
you don't do that it'd be fired because
you can't afford to build it that's the
wrong way around if you come from the
other direction I think you might find
solutions I think it's a very
interesting point that goes back to the
previous question about instability and
I think in a way we can talk about
economic precarity and but also there's
a question of actually different type of
maybe political governance that is not
the state as this kind of rigid form
even the world says it you know the
state is a state and and I think your
point about technology and creativity
makes complete sense because at this
moment in time we would have also
technologies that would allow us to come
together in forms that might not be the
state and so the same kind of creativity
that you're trying to challenge us to
have I think on the scale of the house
we might also have in or at the scale of
the neighborhood for instance we could
also have I think on other scales as
designers what what kind of form of
coming together we can design also
thanks for the technology that we have
today that is not a nation-state because
to be honest when you when I personally
think that the representative democracy
was invented by I don't know 200 years
ago it's it's still a bit funny that
they still around with very little
changes if you think about it okay yeah
I can both now pretty much this is the
only change actually that was
you know if you leave that aside
actually has changed very very little in
two hundred years
so maybe also there is a time actually
of not being satisfied with what
Churchill said it's it was like least of
all Helios and that was already like you
know what 80 years ago so maybe this is
a pre also to the next generation for
the students and it would be interesting
actually also to know what they think
you know at all scales from the house to
the state and we of using technology so
on that other questions from any
students so I think a lot of this the
issue is about I think repens
representation and reproduction of
images so the way the architects
represent buildings now you know they're
very gray there's not very much people
in there trying to address image for the
sake of architects sake and I think that
we need to think more not so much like
developers but maybe like the Sun where
we can show new forms of architecture
that maybe simplify and diversify those
images so I think spatially we can start
to promote different ways of living in
spaces so if you look at DFS for sofas
you know the sofa is always the send
central thing in that room it's always
you know purple they you know these are
the images that really the public are
looking at so and I think technology is
quite important so we can sort of
address that in new forms of the way
that we're connected through social
media you know the reason why the leave
party was so successful because they
were very quick on getting on to that
element of technology and how people
using social media to force certain
ideas so I think that we can definitely
inspire different social models of
the home by as architects projecting
those images in a new way so if we go to
the example of VR kinga's you know he is
the best advertisement and as some
architects maybe might think he's a bit
too forceful and on those ideas I think
that he definitely can and does make
change in the way that people see
architecture it's been very enjoyable
you pointed things out lots of things
come to mind and it's incredibly
complicated
I think policy and design as a teacher
and practitioner of some of them and I
think abstraction and forms of
representation and class here in Britain
seem to me now practicing here to be
some of them seems to me that in
Scandinavia perhaps in the middle of the
nineteenth century there was a
Reformation Denmark fell back on itself
it ceded land for Sweden lost the war
with Germany Keokuk or gone big thinkers
started looking at fisherwoman and
labourers to educate which to me despite
castrating expressions for a degree
promoted a modern liberal social
democracy it brought about architecture
I think which was abstracted there was a
degree of abstraction which you may
associate you probably with modernism
which maybe has a nasty taste to its
stigma but it occurs to me that I
Architects need to think in an
imaginative unexpected creative way with
policymakers very often architects at
catching what's thrown out and it's
trying to push water up a hill but it
does make me think about the role of
abstraction and architecture experienced
in a direct bodily spatial way which I'm
realizing even now and teaching is very
complicated thing to talk about and and
I think words can eclipse art and
experience but it's not so much a
question is more an observation in this
lecture on ceiling we've used images and
we've talked about images as as well as
words and I wonder if it's worth
thinking about the pre lingual
experience not to be anti intellectual
but a kind of pre lingual experience the
architects I think I have essentially to
have a knowledge of the sizes or things
how bright something might be how big it
is resembles and it takes us into a
language of kind of familiarity and
abstraction and I think here where I
used to teach I don't know who's who's
flying that anymore but I think in
Britain it would be a very interesting
thing to revisit and I see and also in a
lot of anonymous architecture which was
very brilliant and the names of the so
we don't know so I guess I'm suggesting
looking at familiar
of all things as well as the tangential
marginal peripheral things to bring in
for the conversation and not to neglect
that because I think the collecting the
past can be very dangerous it's not so
much a question or an observation and
commending you in five minutes to be
answer maybe there's a board I which
wasn't previous though I just say the
problem the problem in architecture is
you have this in British actors you have
this like kind of schism between
tradition and it's it's it seems to have
gone away and it's come back again which
is very much like kind of the political
landscape as well and I think that that
is it's a false dichotomy and of course
much we can learn from the past which
doesn't have to end up it's as parity
and pastiche I mean I the other thing
about the same response is a plea for
bodily and visceral policy
culture 2019
and how problematic this is from the
point of view and seeing as well it's
coming out of the room as the desire of
us designer bringing back new images or
bringing back new forms of ideas rather
than just criticizing and I think this
is an example of another mistake in that
kind of or in that kind of sense and I
bring it back to what you were saying a
couple of times is talking about the a
as this place of a sort of community etc
and I just wonder whether you think the
school has done in the past years has
kind of managed to break out of itself
in a way that for example the the
curators of material haven't been able
to do and as another question beneath it
I was there with some people that have
worked there and one of the things that
has suffered was that they were not able
to interact with the local community and
construct will construct a path together
of what material mm they would have been
because of bureaucratic kind of hassles
and I wonder whether you think our
institutions as well as architecture
Institute our designers institution in
order to break out of this you know we
are the architects I need to create the
images of the future which i think is
kind of a bit not the point like the
point is that we need to all imagine
your futures as a society or else we're
kind of losing it another time so I just
wonder what do you think is just a
problem as architects just being a
curators and designers as being like
this egocentric kind of intellectuals
that want to call a drink lectures to
find a solution or if it's a problem is
the two institutions and bureaucracy
that stops it from being I would like to
respond to this
since I'm European with the Vina living
in the US for a while in the u.s.
obviously from the outside looks like a
horrible place where nobody wants to be
where big walls are being erected but
the role of the architect there at this
moment it's very different maybe even
than the way I imagine being an
architect when in the Dutch we produced
books called super Dutch that then went
around the world that I think created
the diagram architecture that though so
prevalent where you would be sort of
coming with a proposition now when
you're interviewed to be an architect on
a project the first question you ask is
how are gonna bring the communities
together
so how specifically in the US where now
there's such a big you know challenge of
identity politics for instance we're
doing a library in Cleveland they don't
want to know what it looks like they
have no they don't absolutely don't care
what it looks like because you're not
deciding what it looks like what they
care about is how are you going to
engage the different constituencies how
are you going to design the conversation
and how are you gonna make sure that
every voice feels recognized within but
you're proposing and so it means a
complete rethinking of what you actually
need to do as an architect which is much
more to do with indeed imagining yeah
conversations imagining what are the
ways in which those conversations can
happen sometimes we can we actually
design or you have to design say a game
for instance for people to play in order
to tease out conversations because a lot
of people are also maybe not able to
articulate necessarily what they want
and so the question is much more about
how to design this process of
conversation rather than sort of
projecting or drawing or you know giving
an answer before you actually have have
listened and I think that might be you
know one way also to rethink education
it's such a good point because also it
goes back for me to the question you
were raised before this kind of
dialectic between the need for up and
let's say the emergence of abstraction
on the one hand but also the need for
identity on the other hand and the two
things of course go hand in hand
because the more the world becomes
abstract the more we need identity
somehow to compensate and George Baird
actually gave a quite beautiful
definition for me of the type of
architecture that enters this kind of
dialogue that you are mentioning so the
bits neither completely abstract nor
completely you know brand the ball that
say and he called it the loving
dimension of architecture loving
dimension he caused it in French
architecture so it's like this kind of
dimension of architecture should list
and somehow which I think it's a very
beautiful way to put it because it
doesn't give up actually the possibility
for figures to emerge for narratives to
emerge and these narratives should be
also readable by the audience but at the
same time it also recognizes the fact
that we are now in an age essentially of
abstraction and then it's somehow
there's no going back
let's say I mean Star Trek something it
should propel us forward or not that
should make us look back but about the
question of the school I've been
thinking actually very often about
actually what is our agency out there
and I think actually Florence point
makes complete sense in fact it actually
gives me a lot of hope but I think the
other half of the story is that the
thing that there is a shocking lack of
special education I would call it in
school so in general I can only judge
about Europe we are not trained as
European children to understand the
space and territory at large I mean you
start studying it at university if you
study architecture and I think that is a
very shocking and I think actually it's
a huge missed opportunity and as
architects we should lobby at least here
in the Netherlands
the Netherlands and you know sorry seven
years in the Netherlands so it thinks
about spices
exactly maybe it's the only one of the
few places where actually architectural
culture is in a way trickles down in
fact actually to other layers of the
population but this is urgent and and in
Britain is really something that we
shoot a lot before and push war this
kind of special education if we don't
want to call it architecture should
really arrive down to kids because we
study music we study literature we study
art so why not understanding on space I
mean if you think what what are the
problems which have been driving many of
these kind of political kind of crises
I'd say they've really that spatial
problem
it's space which is absolutely and the
fact that we are not trained to
understand specially these problems it
means that we are completely kind of cut
out from a form of agency that we don't
have because we cannot I mean we now by
now maybe we are supposed to be able to
do that but as citizens we are not
provided we can't see them I mean yeah
and we can we kind of draw the maps and
we can't draw the maps
make the model so however you want to
describe it then we can't propose just
wanted to follow up a little bit on this
discussion that you had on the
alternative modes of governments and
organization to the state and then some
of your talks there was this kind of
journey from the home to the
nation-state
and as much as I understand this diagram
there is seems to be as one intermediate
link missing or scale which is the scale
of the city and then we spoke about a
city but what we've seen in the past
years is kind of emergent what people
started to call city states or a certain
kind of autonomy of cities which has to
do with the basically the cities don't
have the same kinds of responsibilities
estates - but they have much stronger
identities I was just wondering what
would be your comment on this kind of
emergence of this new entity on the
European or Western but also global map
and how is that what were you I was just
part of a discussion on that subject
last week there is this new municipal
estate movement emerging especially in
Europe there are kind of different
different countries in which there are
kind of mostly progressive forces
organized around cities so like in
Ferguson Barcelona and Madrid have
political organizations that are very
much locally City based and you have the
same now in Amsterdam and there is this
fearless cities conferences being
organized and what they're basically
arguing is that the city is becoming an
alternate space of organization which is
providing another frame than the
nation-state and considering kind of the
the era of globalization we are living
in a lot of the national decision-making
is being moved to kind of
higher federal or supranational levels
but that means that kind of more other
forms of decision making will be
devolved to a kind of the city level or
the regional level etc so I think it's
it's really interesting but what I hear
at the same time is that it's also kind
of very limited so you have this book by
Benjamin barber kind of cities becoming
you know the next thing in changing the
world and the thing is that still the
majority of decisions on kind of
budgeting and socio-economic policy are
made on a national level in lots of
countries so that prevents a lot of
cities don't really have that much
independent sources of income so they're
very reliant on still on national states
for for their policies so it's it's an
extremely difficult position to be in as
well I think if you go to him which is a
sort of big property fan which is really
about money the way that it's organized
this you see sometimes regions but most
often cities setting up stands and what
they're doing is sort of offering
themselves are
to a small number of like international
investors say from you know from the UK
you'll see London with a big massive
tent you'll see Coventry in its small
desk in the corner over there I guess
it's very European yep in Europe in that
Sanji what you see is that the idea of a
city as a sort of brand and it's trying
to operate kind of in as much as they
can as a sort of pseudo corporate entity
I don't know I don't know if that side
of it it seems incredibly depressing
because it reduces the possibility of
the city to - to something which is
really like it seems there has fewer
possibilities then then cities
definitely should have I think there's
one other thing though which does work
on this scale which is mostly has to do
with climate change as well and actually
so for instance is c40 which is now at
the moment that barons didn't or the
Paris agreement wasn't signed on climate
change maybe cities mayors got together
and said we're gonna actually stick and
we're gonna achieve those numbers and I
think that because it is local because
it's maybe at a smaller scale that
you're talking about because maybe it's
easier to get people sort of you know
corralled around sort of common goals
that actually has an incredible
potential and I think for instance the
fact that Trump didn't sign it but all
the mayors did means it actually sort of
something that you know seems to be
national policies actually resolves on a
lower level so I actually think there's
a lot of leverage there as well and I
think that that's something you know we
should not underestimate I understand we
have to close yes
one more question if there's an urgent
question in the wood so many urgent
question I'm originally from the US and
the past few days some Democratic
candidates have come out and this new
stuff about Trump has come out it seems
it feels to me at least little like the
country is turning a corner and in
Britain as well the last kind of week or
so I'm wondering whether you think that
if this storm were to dissipate without
any real resolution whether it be a bit
of a missed opportunity in some ways for
us to ask the kinds of hard questions
that we are asking now
it's a rhetorical question right there's
a choices that needs to be made at
particular moments like what choices
were made in 2008 was there any reform
was it simply to prop up the system so
it could kind of rebuild itself and come
back worse than worse than ever so I
suppose you're absolutely fine what do
we want to do nothing better for a
relationship than a breakup thank you so
much for the finally what's really
interesting to hear all your
interventions and I think the the thing
that keeps popping in my mind is free
time it really feels that perhaps the
the question of home and domestic space
and homeland is so linked to being
functional all the time and perhaps
architecture really needs to rethink
spaces for what we will know spaces that
are non-functional that our allow us for
some degree of creativity so I just want
to hear your take on that I'm all for it
but
yeah I mean I guess part of the part of
the problem is they're the manifestation
of absolutely every activity was that
millennial burnout piece that was
floating around weeks ago is that is
that you know everybody five jobs in
order to pay for the imaginary part
Milanoo of the fluorines describing like
the economics of the current
circumstance which is so hard to
maintain I wish for any reason this is
exactly part of the problem of the model
which we kind of stuck with exactly
because it's I mean I think it's a very
good question to close because we go
back to the beginning that the thing
that actually we feel protects us our
home or our homeland is in fact very
often just a device to make us
productive and and I think you're
totally right so the question is how do
we retain actually the positives of
belonging us as manager was saying
earlier so how do we not throw away the
baby with the bathwater but definitely
how do we open up these spaces for
uncertainty that can happen at different
scales and different ways and for some
of those imaginations I recommend again
going to the show at the Design Museum
and I would like to correct one
statement in the beginning because we
leave we live in a time when facts
become very subjective but I did not
curate the show but that's first I never
actually hear curated the show we design
the environment then the show is up till
March 24 I think this has been a really
amazing discussion I want to thank our
panelists but also to thank all of you
for being here for I think two hours
worth of conversation which is no mean
feat and I think it's also nice time to
remind you that there will be two more
lectures in the series the next one is
on the 11th of February on the topic of
border and on the 4th of march on Exodus
and so we hope you'll come back for
those but for now please join me in
thanking our speaker
[Applause]
