thank you for coming
my name is Theodore spiralis and I have
the pleasure of working with a lot of
really good people and I have the
pleasure I think of coming to this place
as a kid who was 22 years old without
any real clue and following up I think
on the conversation that we started with
CJ yesterday
part of the whole process I think of
discovery is actually really trying to
understand what architecture really is
and part of that I think is really being
in an environment and in a framework
that allows you the opportunity to
really try to discover what that could
be and I don't think you do that by
yourself and I don't think you do that
that of nostalgia I think you do that
was working with other people and part
of that is also not really making
assumptions about what the nature of
work actually is so I stand here I guess
almost every time with some degree of
humility a lot and I still feel I think
very connected to this place and I think
after two days today I feel more so
mostly because I think sustaining I
think a certain engagement and things is
really difficult and anybody who tells
you that this thing is easy well they
don't have a clue actually
beyond that I think you know Patrick was
mentioning how we sort of try to evolve
a research project and I also think it's
very important to state that we could
disagree and I think we do a lot but we
also have a lot of respect and I think
the idea of respect is not necessarily
personal the idea of respect is in terms
of actually really seeing what it
actually means to really try to work on
these things and to be generous enough
to try to share that and to try to make
that as accessible as much in discourse
and practice resources in this place as
much as any other place that could be
honest with you has a limit of resources
in terms of literal stuff but in terms
of generosity I think it's one of the
few places that I would say remain as a
space where that is somehow assumed that
that's the state of affairs of things
and as far as I'm concerned that that
should continue the talk today was
supposed to be more of a conversation so
if I'm really honest I'm going to have a
conversation with myself with you with
people that I've had conversations with
and I think in some way have started to
shape I think a lot of the things that I
I feel a bit strong about specifically
in terms of actually what we've been
looking at over the two days I think a
lot of them are real speculations about
things I think kids come here with the
ability to actually really want to work
on things and I know it's graduate
school opened and this is the only thing
that I'm going to say about that I don't
think we've ever said no to anything
other than the fact that if you have
ideas and there are ways of working on
stuff you actually have a commitment to
demonstrate that and you earn I think
that commitment and you earned a
capacity of actually exploring these
ideas I think just through really
engagement communication and dialogue
and so for today's talk at least in
terms of the conversation we've spoken
about future but the future that we're
speaking about is really about today and
I wrote a really short little thing that
I threw up on the website which was
really about two words the future and
culture and one could argue motivate
motivated much of what could be
considered progressive design thinking
historically what once gave agency as a
rallying point for an attitude and
approach towards design theory and
technology has been for some time in
question who speaks of the future today
what defines culture Marshall McLuhan
reminds us that if one speaks of the
future then we must look to the present
because we live in the past he also
reminded us that culture is what most
people do every day if this should be so
within our contemporary today then would
by necessity we may need to expand
beyond people and to include I think
these dynamic agencies algorithmic
machines synthetic ecologies as part of
this dialogue of how we interrelate was
I think a much deeper ecology of and as
we refactor our everyday within an
ever-evolving interface of communication
how will these relationships evolve how
will we engage and as we speculate if
there is such a thing called future and
culture today we see it on this we seek
it understand how architecture and
design is thrown into question what new
architectures will evolve and push
design into the future of
present McLuhan I think is a really
interesting character because one of the
people that I was going to engage in a
bit of a conversation as one of her well
let's put it this way is the
longest-standing faculty of this school
named David Green and he's also our
newest faculty and the DRL someone we
should have sound on this one because
they're afraid of the from the moment of
birth people are sent that the
environment the new environment around
them is hostile
it's a real threat to their whole
existence and so every time an
environment changes we hated to seek
security and comfort in the old
environment I was delighted to come
across a passage in Shakespeare a few
days ago and a familiar passage which
suddenly revealed the same message one
touch of nature makes the whole world
kin that each with one consent pursues
newborn gods
though they be made and molded all
things possible the new is always made
up of the old or rather what people see
in the new is always the old thing the
rearview mirror the future of the future
is the present and this is something
that people are terrified of and if
anybody knows David's he would be into
that and you'll see why McLuhan I think
is an interesting character for him and
also Buckminster Fuller and part of that
was about really trying to explore what
these things are trying to understand
something doesn't necessarily mean your
proponent of it you're just trying to
understand and to try to situate it and
he put a book out called the medium as a
massage and used a quote from Bob Dylan
we said but because something is
happening but you don't know what it is
do you mr. Jones of architecture mr.
Baida now do you know what architecture
is I don't know anymore
I used to you know the subtle player
form in sunlight and all that a is for
architecture the mother of the Arts or
was it the mother of the Arts I
mean what is anything anymore in this
sunny Global Village what's our what's
music what's good what's bad it all
seemed to be so clear then the art of
building the quest for beauty
all those mind-bending discussions about
form and space and meaningful style it
all young David green red still the
coldest guy in this place he wrote an
article in AD in 1969 which he titled
are you sitting comfortably
uncomfortably sorry and then I'll begin
and he tried to speak about things at
the time I think in this place
it was obviously Cedric price and Gordon
tasks and arca gram but there was also
discussions with Siam and all of these
other kinds of things with the
Smithson's and he wrote this as a kind
of open letter David likes to write love
letters and this love letter was for the
future and I'm just gonna read a little
bit of it because I think in some way
even if his words are problematizing it
it's not well knowing arca graham do you
realize that this isn't negating
something that's actually trying to
discover something it says the future is
today like in a McLuhan sense the future
doesn't exist and it's impossible
existence can only be imagined by making
probable predictions based on the
present and past events and information
is rocketry a viable prediction given
information available on energy sources
in 1830 today is tomorrow the
identification of future is favored by
being turned on by the
and how about that do I the future have
no body no eyes am i the future of a
world love garden am i soft jelly food a
galaxy of electrodes as the birth rate
declines the artificial womb comes into
use routine housework disappears and
work becomes a low muscle activity high
brain endeavor mid 21st century women
will become completely equal to men
socially and economically seconds will
no longer be tied to childbirth tell me
something new the greatest industry
sorry
it's not seconds at sex
I think everybody's 18 so it's okay the
greatest industry of the early 21st
century will be an amusement supply moon
vacations personal rip reaction motors
enabling people to move through the air
as scuba divers move through water the
present is the future the future doesn't
exist now does it do it now new sense
will appear can I touch you do I need
you or do I imagine you does earth need
man does man need legs two legs need
feet why do you care why do you care
about me the future okay so if David was
here pretend that was the voice of David
he continuous then that was that passage
feeling that architecture hasn't caught
us and it's all a hindrance because I've
been an ocean around for some time that
it ought to be a good idea to drop
everything and start all over again you
can see it in music and art and I
suppose we ought really to do that with
architecture a is for architecture
what's that but where do we start
got to start with ourselves each one of
us in situation that we find ourselves
in the day of the expert is dead when to
do it yourself as a power tool public
opinion as a technology and the earth as
a zoo in space okay so if you've been
here the last couple of days you could
probably think that some of those things
were kind of open for interrogation and
some of these kids just like David would
be speculating about things and McLuhan
and others like Obrist and Copeland have
taken on board this kind of strategy to
sort of make statements about the world
and I think today we live in a time when
it's easy to say something and it's
difficult to actually work on that
project and part of the reason that
people have a difficulty with working on
the project is because they don't
actually feel that they have agency and
I think one of the things that we are
trying in a certain sense I think with
our 20th anniversary and titling this
agenda constructing agency is to try to
understand that we can sort of bring
that back in a certain way the
discussion about future and I think many
of us would say future is something very
60s or 70s it's true that nobody really
talks about that stuff but actually it's
promoted in a certain way I participated
in this thing called future fests in
England and London in particular which
asked what was the future of democracy
the future of global machines money
musics worlds and invited people like
Snowden and George Clinton and John
Ronson and
oh and Jones and a whole host of people
up I was asked to speak about the future
of machines and I always thought that
the future of machines was architecture
if you look in cinema for a long period
of time I think this idea of future was
being discussed what happens actually
when were a moment when science fiction
has become fact so if you're French
new-wave kind of style and you're Godard
fan and you like things like Alphaville
you'd see moments like this actually
that would throw that into question and
I always thought that this was an
amazing little moment in the movie where
this young lady basically says no one
has lived in the past and no one will
live in the future when we speak about
living and I think it's important to see
how architecture has always really
engaged in this in really different ways
so this is an experiment from the
architecture machine group ten year
experiment that became the Media Lab
that was part of the communication
revolution we've seen that world kind of
come into fruition and architecture Wars
in a certain sense an important part of
that if you see the Media Lab of having
some kind of influence which many people
do but things like this life in and
computerized environments it's
interesting it has a McLuhan s kind of
strategy of communicating things with
Quentin pure and this is today what
happens when we actually sort of evolved
that beyond just kind of slogan and
actually start to see how we participate
with all of these things that are around
us technology is not something outside
of us we are technology this is deep
dream this is computer vision programmed
by Google and basically used through a
neural network to sort of identify
patterns so we do that all the time
but these tools are doing more than that
and I think within architecture it's
doing a lot more but one of those things
is trying to understand us then they
think at the heart of it actually this
is what all is really happening now
there's a premise about trying to
understand us means that it also has to
make certain assumptions about us and by
making assumptions and about speaking
about optimization and about thinking
about things in this way we start to
believe that that's actually what we
want you start drawing a bunny rabbit or
thinks it's a bunny rabbit well you
actually get a fully formed bunny rabbit
this isn't the idea of drawing like
Peter Cook would actually be very
nostalgic about this is something else
this is actually a kind of very
different than new world but it's not a
new world in terms of the discourse and
the discussion you know people like
Gordon tasks was talking about that all
the time in the way that he sort of
spoke about when it comes to the issues
to deal with systems or how do you one
really sort of see the humanity within
these things and he said man is prone to
seek novelty in his environment and
having found a novel situation he or she
will try to control it what does that
really mean control within a lot of the
stuff that we've been doing I think
we've tried to fundamentally see
architecture is something that's very
spatial not beyond screen and this idea
of the digital which to be honest I
haven't heard the word used in the DRL I
didn't hear it's actually so much when I
came here in 99 and so when we start to
talk about the world as almost like
three dimensional voxel ization were we
could zoom in things are scalars but
they're relational
we could develop strategies to think
about things as behavior and we could
try to sort of work on a methodology and
the workflow which actually problematize
is the very nature of the thing that
we're trying to explore if we make
assumptions if we try to work in a very
linear way and what I've always kind of
found very important is that these
things no matter how complex are
accessible because in some sense they're
principled and that principled aspect of
things allows us to sort of work on
problems it doesn't necessarily mean
that those problems are easy or
definable at first but I also think that
in the process of actually how a lot of
the work within the DRL has evolved I
think one of the things that we've tried
to do collectively is to think about how
we can actually work on these things
sometimes people think that we build
these things because we feel like these
robots are ready for production to take
on the world
fundamentally what it is is that we're
trying to educate and understand what it
actually means to say what we do and to
actually have the courage or conviction
or actually just recognizing that this
is the world that we live in that we
have access to this stuff and having
that access is as much about making
things kinetic as it is for those things
themselves to understand themselves as
much as they do us so when we start to
actually think about the scales and the
relationships and when we start to
actually ask ourselves questions about
what is it that we're actually looking
at you'll see some projects like this
trying to think about that if I say
something like a provocation it doesn't
matter if it's a person or a piece of
sculpture or whatever people think that
I don't like people I like people
but when we start to think about this
world of information and communication
and to move beyond the kind of
conversations of top-down or bottom-up
to think about real-time to think about
actually how we actually deal with
complexity today I think it's important
because when we situate some of this
work if we don't sort of engage with new
terms of reference we sort of start to
revert back to kind of assumptions made
and maybe assumptions made when people
didn't actually have access to this so
sometimes you know we can look back and
say it's kind of our Capgras misc
or it's something like this or it's
Keesler or whatever and of course it's
part of a lineage but I think we have to
actually see what the differences are
become very big business like big
science the reasons are tied up for the
fact that in that we're living in an
Information Age when you live in an
Information Age culture becomes big
business education becomes big business
and the cultural explosion or the
information explosion becomes itself
culture it knocks down all the walls
between culture and business as between
education and business there's no longer
any gap between the campus and the Wall
Street or very big business he's talking
about 1968 it's not talking today and I
think it's important to kind of
understand that you know sometimes we
sort of pull out quotes or we sort of
kind of very superficially look at
certain things but the context of where
we operate and I think the dynamic of
what makes something contemporary today
is it's very important for us to really
try to discover what that is and I
always really believe and I think if
they share that
architecture today whatever that
definition actually is has to
participate has to really engage in this
information rich environment that's out
there it's shaping our lives and the way
that we need to operate within that is
to construct frameworks that allows for
change allows for difference allows for
things to be latent or unknown the
challenges I think also which are not
obviously to architecture but they're
much more in terms of how we speak about
some of these things is that some of the
same people that are constructing this
new world are also undoing it because of
fear of some of the things that they
actually start to second-guess
themselves because this isn't a problem
of an individual this is really the
nature of a new kind of situation which
is the nature of the collective some of
these problems are so complex and so
entangled with other things that this
idea that we can specialise in something
is limited of course we can specialize
in something but if we don't construct
interfaces to make that meaningful I
think that's important so AI is
obviously something that is in
conversation quite a lot today but it's
a term that's been around for a long
time it's had its glory days and it's
had its not so blurry days but at the
moment when we have people like Gil on
must speaking that it's problematic or
something they're speaking about the way
that it's being conducted today it's not
against AI it's basically how we think
about it because if you start to think
about the world as it is and use it as a
blueprint for how these systems should
manage themselves then basically what
you're asking them to learn from is
basically what you already know and I
think that this is part of the challenge
and I think part of the things that we
need to think about and this doesn't
extend in some way just holistically
towards systems that we speak about or
robotics or industrialization you have
somebody like James Lovelock who you may
know as
the principle gaya scientist speaking
very adamantly about ecology and
environments and so forth and he's quite
notorious recently because he basically
said that to deal with the future and
the future I think for him is a bit dark
the future would actually mean the
survival of humanity would mean that
two-thirds of the people in this room
would have to disappear for the
one-third to survive and when he says a
provocation like that and he's actually
a very distinguished scientist it's
either he's maverick or he's just
basically looking at the world slightly
more objectively and maybe more alarmist
and now he's written another book funny
it's called a rough ride to the future
because obviously he's not pushing
forward that kind of extreme thing
because if it's so extreme and actually
people don't feel like they have any
responsibility or accountability to sort
of work on these things but the funny
thing about where he sees the
possibilities for this to be kind of
augmented is in something that we work
on all the time and we talk about it and
it speaks about the general assumption
about robots and he says instead of
robots going to war with us and taking
over the world which is the way it's
portrayed in science fiction I thought
what happens if we join with them and he
uses very basic things he has a
pacemaker and he was basically sort of
saying that already we have this much
more hybridized idea of what those
things actually are and a lot of those
conversations I think we're always kind
of evolving and you had people like Roy
Ascott who was talking about this notion
of the construction of change
Roy was on the cybernetic committee that
was part of fun palace that obviously
resonates with in this context quite a
lot and he says cybernetic methods may
be characterized by a tendency to
exteriorize its concepts in some solid
form to produce models and hardware of
the gnat
the artificial system it is discussing
it is concerned with what things do and
how they make them and with the
processes within which behave it takes a
dynamic view of life not unlike that of
the artists phenomenon are studied and
so far as they do something or a part of
something that is being done the
identity we give to what we perceive is
always relative yet it presupposes a
whole
everything changes ceaselessly we
investigate our world best by seeing the
system of the process before evaluating
the thing cybernetics is concerned with
the behavior of the environments it's
regulation and the structure that
reveals the organization of its parts
cybernetics is not only changing our
world it's presenting us with qualities
of experience and modes of perception
that are radically altering our
conception of it and this is coming out
of a discourse of cybernetics which was
very much second-order which is about
observers in the world each observer
having a kind of radical constructivist
concept of the world which meant that
everybody's world is their own and we
have to not make or presuppose the
assumption that we understand each other
and in a certain way I think in some
sense it's a very speculative and open
and abstract thing but on the other hand
I think when it comes to the systems
that we design I think it's important to
be able to understand the deep meaning
of what that actually entails because I
think that is really at the heart of the
much deeper speculation about where all
this can go
speculation I think is very much at the
heart of architecture and sometimes
people speak about modern and postmodern
and sometimes people say we were never
postmodern and sometimes people say we
would never post digital and if I'm
really honest with you I feel that it's
a bit of a distraction yes we can say
that but what does that actually
fundamentally mean if you continuously
look in the rearview you're not really
addressing the complexities that are
dealing with only every day before you
enter your office before you actually
enter this place as an educational area
and when you look at people like frank
lloyd wright's at a time but proposing
something like broadacre city it wasn't
even an issue about talking about
architecture and you had flying machines
it'll drone like pods that are moving
around he designed little vehicles that
you see there that were single occupancy
mono wheels and when I look at some of
the work that my students have been
working on we've been working on those
things as well and we were working at
the scale of urbanism and we were doing
parametric urbanism we tried to develop
our own flying machines it's not like
we're doing something so radically
different it's not special for that
reason it's special because it's
important to work on these problems
working on those problems means that you
also understand you're not really
working on these things by yourself so
we've obviously had a lot of stuff going
on with drones but also we were doing a
lot of drones in the DRL when it was
still legal to fly these things and get
them lost in central London
which we did a lot but for example you
have Rafael o DeAndre actually working
with drones and this is mostly about
having a completely controlled and
constrained environments to monitor them
and this is really to show that that the
Xterra t of the vision system and the
reaction obviously the drone but I
always really liked it because always if
it's a drone interacting with another
drone or a person interacting with
another drone I think this kind of human
to human human to machine or machine to
machine aspect of it I think is very
important because it actually means that
it's part of a much deeper kind of
possibility when you see some of the
projects that are in the DRL some of
them are incubating ideas that I think
other generations will take on board so
one of my teams made this almost
hovercraft
they made a hovercraft version of
something that very easily could become
a drone and they speculated with that
idea and they decided not to do that but
it's part of this larger world and how
those things come together how a lot of
the projects like the one that you see
on the side is part of a lineage of just
looking at these kinds of
transformations of cubes and spheres and
sometimes I get some colleagues that
like to think that I'm very primitive in
my kind of Greek nature in this it's not
that I have any real interest in cubes
or spheres but I do have an interest in
exploring some of the ideas and the
relationships between things and they
seem to be working pretty well but what
they start to open up as a problem of
population and the idea of actually what
do you do you can work tangibly with
small populations if you're really
hardcore maybe you do thirty fifty
hundred two hundred you're trying to do
something like this that has half a
million if it's a particle system that
has no real
identifiable intelligence that's one
thing if you tried to keyframe an
animation like this maybe you can get
away with it to a certain level but are
you really addressing the problem and I
think we've worked on all versions of it
and we still do today because one of the
things is that we're sort of trying to
build up the knowledge and the capacity
to understand first and then to take and
form decisions because of that and I
think Patrick spoke to that today quite
long the other one is to sort of
discover things you may sort of in one
sense do something with the assumption
of trying to control something but the
one you actually do something regardless
if it works something else is the
possible as well if you're open to it
and I still quite like this and it's
still one of my favorite videos and the
DRL and for reasons that are completely
personal but with my brother we work
quite a lot on trying to make things
that enable people to be curious and to
really sort of participate but when I
see my students kind of discovering that
for themselves I actually find a moment
of self-reflection which was that
discovery that I had actually with
Stephen to continue this kind of
dialogue or if it is an evolution you'll
understand that a lot of these things
were actually brought out without the
main purpose this is Walter gray Walter
his wife and a child
it could be a line could be nachi in the
room and what's interesting is that this
was a study of brain science these are
the first kind of autonomous robots
that's was shown and the Festival of
Britain is 1950s she is the first you
look at colleagues working on different
places where our students actually
visiting some of this stuff Biagio and
Greg working with these things these are
products that are coming out into the
world right near our streets it's not
science fiction actually people are
actually working on this stuff question
is if I need a kind of robotic backpack
that's something different function but
it's really starting to open up so I
think some real challenges when things
actually have their own agency at one
scale that has certain implications
we've been talking I think the media has
completely been perversely fantasizing
what the challenges of an autonomous car
is no technically it's an amazing
challenge but realistically the way that
it's being problematized at the moment
is is actually just like an uber driver
just not gonna talk to your machine or
maybe you will maybe you'll have those
confessionals that you really couldn't
have with another human and in the DRL
to be honest we've been working on
things like that too we dealt with
self-assembly the first version of that
octavian and young and Natasha were
working on mobility with me and
developed an idea of a single occupancy
car based on a shared model like the
Berkeley system to augment
infrastructure within London when we say
that architecture can be an
infrastructure it's interesting to
understand and to qualify what that
really means so for example in this case
we identified the fact that most cars
are parked 90% of the time they're idle
if you could have something like an uber
system and you could have a shared model
could these things be distributed in the
city and actually create space as well
why are those things important because
we couldn't come up with that brief as a
brief it had to be something that we
discovered but the speculations about
these things are also always there I'd
like to use the slide quite a lot I
think I've used it in pretty much like
the last one
lectures but I think it still means a
lot to me because this is 1913 this is
scientific America decisions this was
really cover to try to explain actually
what the city was and it wasn't a piece
of propaganda it was the kind of promise
these weren't technologies that weren't
being used at the time and some of those
things were actually being tested like
skyscrapers and Zeppelin's and all of
these other stuff and so if we look at
that and we look at actually what we're
looking at today I think it's it's an
issue when you look at stuff like a
Osaka Expo there are moments actually
when a large event actually really did
prototype things and brought people
together from the ARCA gram guys from
the metabolism for a lot of the people
in the audience before social media and
and really the Internet when you look at
the scale of things today we've talked
about scale and we've talked about
automation this is ok excuse my Chinese
chin down
automatic portlet just opened completely
autonomous and we're talking about
autonomous port systems that are
managing one of the largest ports I
think currently the largest port in the
world we have a version of this in
Rotterdam we have people like
rolls-royce investing basically in
carriers that are going to be completely
unmanned and what does that really mean
well it actually means that it's
fundamentally of something else so we
could talk about if these things are
fantasy or not but this is our world
today this is how we manage things and
the next investment in terms of
autonomous vehicles is not your personal
vehicle but it's how to get these goods
off C and onto land and if you really
see that that's your world today then I
think maybe you would be more encouraged
to actually considerable actually what's
your role in this because if you think
that these things define the city if we
sort of talk about how the automobile
all of that kind of stuff changed the
idea of urbanism and it did and history
serves that as a purpose then we should
actually try to understand actually what
happens now because in some way that
1913 model maybe is not that far away
except it doesn't actually come from us
so it comes from Amazon talking about
deliveries dropping it into your window
or it comes from companies speaking
about autonomous vehicles and the
question is well what is this new
urbanism what is the future of the city
if we're going to have highly densified
kind of consolidation of humanity and
what does that mean when we actually are
looking at systems that are going to be
actually autonomous or at least able to
take decisions on their own and so we've
I think in the DRL have been forced from
the beginning to really look at
different models of organization and
some of them were about spaciality some
of them were for
configuration but as a project as kind
of evolved we've looked at everything
we've looked at termites we've looked at
history of architecture we've looked at
synthetic systems material systems all
trying to discover how we can sort of
try to understand that and I think part
of the speculation of this idea of
culture is also to understand what what
this kind of stuff is you know this
could be Amazon it is could be other
places as well my brother works for a
company called gilt groupe and they were
one of the first people on the East
Coast to basically use a Kiva system to
manage basically daily tens of thousands
of interactions of goods and contexts
moving throughout the world and so when
we start to look at that stuff and then
we have a conversation about something
that we term building I think we
actually have to say well actually maybe
building isn't the right word anymore
maybe we have to think about the
terminology to make it more accessible
we obviously believe in buildings and in
architecture and all of these things but
maybe I learned quite early that the
architecture doesn't necessarily mean
building or what true architecture is is
in building it's not the act of building
but if you know almost like three
quarters of the world is being built
without architects we have to actually
speak about certain differences that
make a difference thinking about those
things also changes the nature of how we
approach things speculations of my
brother about the future of fashion
where it's not about fashion anymore
space making when we speak about the
challenges of Technology and its impact
on people we we have these kind of
situations which I think are really
really unfair because the way that are
discussed on the one hand makes this
thing so simple so here we have Lisa
dong he is a world renowned go player
and obviously he is basically playing
alphago and it's one of those kind of
man versus machine
this kind of setup which obviously isn't
really true I mean literally it's true
it's a piece of software against a human
but actually it's thousands of humans
developing a software iterating every
possible pattern and playing the game so
first time he lost he thought he was
just nervous second time he lost he got
frustrated he felt that he was a total
failure third time he lost I mean
completely destroyed this man and the
premise of it was flawed from the
beginning because realistically instead
of learning from him who would be the
world's number one go player that makes
moves that are basically being studied
across the board the challenge was not
to learn from him in in that sense but
the challenge was just actually pattern
every sort of occupational kind of
strategy of pieces on a on a pattern and
that's fine but basically it doesn't
progress anything what does it mean at
the end of this thing that alphago is a
better player and when you look at the
history of these kind of automatons it's
over a hundred years and I have tried in
a certain way to sort of map out some of
these things and when you look at the
kind of timeline of history you can goes
back as 1949 and actually really see
that these systems were being
implemented was in the discourse of
architecture and some of the people are
familiar like I mentioned Walter gray
Walter and negroponte but other people
like Basque and Edward and Arabic who
was working down the road at the UCL
with projects like the center were
already kind of speculating on some real
stuff and this idea of learning I think
was also very important
and now systems learned I think is
important in that sense and Pasque I
think is a very appropriate model for
that because he sees learning as a kind
of byproduct of trying to understand and
control something so the novelty of that
if incrementally you build a model for
novelty allows this thing to actually
assimilate knowledge
and these propensity czar the root of
curiosity and the assimilation of this
and they impalement to explore discover
and explain his inanimate surroundings
address to the social environment of
other men they lead him into social
communication conversation and other
modes of partially cooperative
interaction when we consider I think
some of the discussions that we have I
also like this example it's kind of
usually led prior with an image of
Joseph Kossuth but when we speak about
things having their own agency usually
people just keep looking at their phone
the phone doesn't really have so much
agency when you ask that the chair
understands its chair Ness well what's
chair like I think this becomes super
interesting because you actually have to
really start to articulate what you
actually mean and it goes actually
beyond language they become something
out there and in the history of a lot of
the computational experiments and as I
think it's something that drives a lot
of the discussions that we have for a
long time now you have people like Karl
Sims but he was doing this in the mid
90s talking about evolving creatures are
talking about the taxonomy of forms
talking about how could we design things
that are basically things in themselves
but how they come together would allow
them to actually drive behavior we don't
have a fixed body plan body plans are
emerging things in the studio we we try
to explore that stuff all the time
what's the difference between having one
spring while one spring can roll and
curl but if we have three Springs we can
basically make a walking behavior those
things are pretty fundamental what
becomes problematic though is actually
one we deal with very complex problems
but we deal with the orthodoxy and
conservative conservative nature
of actually our is sort of let's call it
fetish about things and I don't mean to
undermine mr. Ishii Burroughs lifetime
experiment but the lifetime experiment
is actually to recreate himself or at
least the image of himself he speaks
about it from a Japanese perspective
though that it's acceptable because
actually machines have sold okay I'm
gonna play it so you hear it from him
instead of me
[Music]
professor furoshiki Segura is Japan's
foremost android scientists and Geminoid
hi1
is Japan's foremost Android
[Music]
inspired by Japan unique spiritual
beliefs they are blurring the boundaries
between humans and robots it's a
question of where the soul is know what
Japanese people have always been told
the soul can exist in everything and
anything so we don't have any problem
with the idea that a robot to master
roshi and then this is what really
scares people this is Boston Dynamics
and Boston Dynamics was really like a
virtual youtube company for a long time
because that's all that was able to be
seen and then it was bought by Google
and then people got really afraid except
some people think that Google are good
people but you start to see this kind of
stuff and you see that the Xterra tea
but you also see I think fundamentally a
little bit of a problem right this is a
kind of cyber Terminator like thing if I
can build a robot that can do anything
why would I build it in the image of
myself it's not that different of a
problem when it's slightly hybridized
like in this video then people should
really get scared
still can do everything the other one
can do but much faster can lift things
in ways that obviously we wouldn't lift
it but you understand what I mean like
it has a capacity to understand itself
at least right and all of those self
regulated systems we look at a video
like that and we say like wow there's
some technology out in the world we
don't look at that stuff in the cars
that we drive we don't look at that
stuff in almost all aspects of
automation those kind of deep-rooted
human stuff is also a part of my
interests and when I first came here I
really was interested with Vasilis to
really try to explore this idea of
identity and face and we we tried in
2003 and 2 to develop strategies of
actually dealing with that camera
recognition we were exploring all kinds
of stuff with Nick and other other
students of ours here and we developed
kind of systems and iterations to do
that a kind of Porter machine and if you
look at our world today you start to
look at stuff in a very different way
even the description of the face is also
something that's very open for
interpretation this is an algorithm for
face alignment this isn't an algorithm
that's trying to understand your
identity but this is an algorithm
basically creates a probability based of
the resolution of that face in terms of
the points mapped onto it not only of
your emotional aspects of things but
actually what that gesture will be so
sort of capturing that stuff and
starting to see that even how we are
seen by the systems that we create are
fundamentally different we are not
looking at the face and if you start
seeing the stripped away from all of
that stuff you would understand it in a
world that actually is just as abstract
as some of the notational systems that
we have and a lot of the things that
I've been working on with minima forum
a lot of the things that we've been
doing in the studio here the DRL is
really trying to explore those kind of
worlds and those kind of worlds are
important because these are snapshots or
a moment in time and those moments you
could sort of capture them but I think
it's the space in between those moments
that I think are fundamental because
it's not an issue about selection it's
something fundamentally different and
just like my student discovering stuff
we try to put those things out into the
world
this installation actually opened today
or yesterday in Beijing and the
interesting thing is that every time
that this thing is shown in a different
context the idea of culture actually
reef actors its meaning so if I'm honest
in Sweden we couldn't call it petting
zoo because that's implicated something
when it was translated when now it was
basically launched today and the
translation for all of the works which
was something at the Barbican came back
with a title for the project I feel a
little bit shy of saying this talking
about sucking cats don't ask me I asked
my students to think that it was a
translation issue and I was told no feel
we don't use these characters so much
and so if you type in petting zoo
beijing you can find out for yourself
but to do these kinds of things is not
so much about the kinetics we were also
trying to explore vision systems and
trying to understand basically how can
you identify an individual in the
similar way like some of the
technologies that are being used for
facial recognition or phone things and
the difference between a blob detection
strategy the difference between kind of
a skeletal strategy and when you start
to see these things in the city because
sometimes it's just looked at well oh
you guys used to connect
and some libraries and all of that stuff
and I've never really foregrounded the
technologies we use because I actually
don't care but when you start to see it
in the domain of the street when you
start to identify all of these things
you start to situate that relative to
some of the kind of cultural readings of
these things so when petting zoo was
actually first shown at the frac and
then at the Barbican we were getting all
of this kind of stuff that to kids
basically were trying to make robotic
pets but they're not really interested
in ads they don't want animals in the
zoo and and at the end of the day we
were just asking about replacing the
kind of so-called living thing was an
inanimate saying that behaves like a
living thing and the funny bit about
that is the cultural aspect of a lot of
the synthesis I think comes back to a
lot of things and it's some people who
say oh you're a very technologically
optimistic about stuff or you go to the
other end or you become someone like
David which at the same time is very
much an optimist but has a lot of
self-doubt and I think that that's
actually really important and at the end
of his article he basically said which
was titled that this was in definition
of what the cybernetic forest would be
ignorant the one that I spoke to you
about before about the future he
finishes the article by basically saying
select your favorite dream and let's
swap dreams that's what it's all about
like the song says you can be in my
dream if I can be in yours always
remembering your dream can be mine
mara here's my dream and I think like in
a really interesting way and David as I
think a poet and I've talked a lot about
him today because I asked him to
students from the undergrad jimana
and say it loudly because I can Amaya
I just wanted to sort of pay my respects
and asked him to basically define for
him what future on what culture is and I
got back this half-hour dialogue which I
would have played but I think everybody
is already pretty much dead about it but
I'll post it because I think it's
beautiful but the first question that
David asks is why did I ask and then the
second question was actually not to
respond himself but to ask the students
who were asking in the question and
David's good in that way and I think and
somehow I think it's important to ask
ourselves better ways of asking
questions so I don't want to sort of
bemoan this but they do want to describe
one last thing I use a specific image
which I thought was really interesting
and it's another love letter but this
one is a love letter that was actually
written by an artist named solo wit and
solo it is interesting because for
people like guys and then for a lot of
the formalists in New York he was part
of the Rican SEP shoe ization notes to
conceptualize architecture and a lot of
those things if you look at a project
like that what fits very directly in
that but at the same time he also had
another side that he wrote maybe one of
his most personal pieces of text as a
letter to another artists a month after
he saw her and he wrote it not as a love
letter this isn't about intimacy this is
about the idea of doubt and creativity
and actually once in a while not caring
about what everybody else is thinking
and having the I think the ability to
actually work and see work as something
that's just fundamentally yours and you
take responsibility of that but you
don't necessarily have to be a slave to
other people's opinions on it and I'm
gonna read it to you because I think
it's a nice letter for this place too
and I'm not a guy who reads and when I
was on script this morning I didn't add
Ross Lovegrove and all of that kind of
stuff so excuse me if I'm not an orator
like David but I read it anyway and so
it says dear Ewa what could be a a it
will be almost a month since you wrote
to me then you have possibly forgotten
your state of mind I doubt it though you
seem the same as always and being you
hate every minute of it don't learn to
say you to the world once in a
while you have every right to just stop
thinking worrying looking over your
shoulder wondering doubting fearing
hurting hoping for some easy way out
struggling grasping confusing itching
scratching mumbling bumbling grumbling
humbling stumbling mumbling rambling
gambling tumbling stumbling scrambling
hitching hatching bitching moaning
groaning honing boning horse
hair splitting nitpicking piss trickling
no sticking a scowl geing eyeball poking
finger pointing an alleyway sneaking
long waiting small stepping evil eyeing
back scratching searching perching this
merging which I didn't know what that
meant
grinding grinding grinding away at
yourself stop it and just do and that
was his real advice to another artist
that wasn't really meant to be read it's
the only piece of text that is actually
written that's really personal this is
artists that actually didn't draw his
drawings to sent instructions like a
computer but in a strange way when it
came to actually speaking to someone
else about the nature of creativity the
idea of self-doubt and actually the idea
of in practice he really felt that doing
things actually gives a lot of
legibility and that's not an issue of
doubt actually that's an issue of
responsibility and so I leave that
because I think maybe that's something
that we can consider and I think people
have been really generous sticking
around and I just want to really thank
our critics and I want to thank our
students and I want to thank our staff
because I thank Patrick and I know that
actually we want to be able to do any of
the stuff that if it wasn't for all of
these guys working with us and I
actually want to thank also again who
kind of helped me to put this lecture
together because like a lot of things in
this moment in time we're doing a lot of
things
and I think the support of other people
have always been really important and I
thank you for your attention I don't
think you have questions because there's
nothing really to ask I'm not really
even sure I said very much this was one
of those things that I felt I could have
this conversation with myself just in
front of a lot of people so I don't
think that there need to be we go and
have a drink and enjoy the day and
like other people in the world I think
it's technically Friday and we're
supposed to be out and about that's what
I've been told anyway thanks so much
[Applause]
