thank you for joining us in the second
session of new canonical histories a
lecture series that actually tries to
bring individuals voices into this room
that make us reflect about the way in
which we have been thinking about our
past and our histories and obviously our
present with an eye placed into the
future as a way to try to understand how
do we bring new values and new ideas in
the making of institutions and obviously
architecture today we have a very
interesting voice someone who'd say well
well and then pause and then after that
trying to describe herself becomes an
entire adventure and so I will not try
to describe someone who has written
books who have absolutely nothing to do
with architecture is that even possible
someone who actually has studied as an
architect but also practiced I would say
as an activist an agitator as an
educator as a politician if you want of
ideas and institutions let's let the con
idea that began if you want in this
school back in the 70s as a way to try
to produce space a safe space for ideas
to grow and develop what a safe space
means within an institution like school
of architecture something that is
constantly being rather fine what does a
safe space mean and safe in relationship
to who and to what what are the values
the politics that we need to be aware of
something that we constantly think and
reflect the way in which the unit system
in certain way has been exported
exchanged something that I'm interested
in because of course in a world in which
the idea of globalization homogenous
ation is actually perceived as a
dangerous thing I'm very interested in
how things mutate and how things change
and how do we learn from that process in
which an idea travels and then comes
renewed and actually allows us to
rethink ourselves so this idea that we
live in a world in which everything is
becoming a bit more of the same I think
is what we are fighting with this new
lecture series what we are trying to
understand is how different we are
and in that difference how actually can
we design
and think of the world differently
Leslie Loco as I said before defies any
one description I know some of the notes
that I've received like she actually
went from a cocktail waitress to a key
words worker and office manager among
many other things
she actually obviously became an
architect she studied at the Bartlett
and she holds a PhD from the University
of London and what I like is that in
that line of a CV she defies all the
kind of canonical ways of trying to
describe oneself and actually tick the
boxes of achievement because achievement
is something that is always spoken with
the word with the presence and I want to
thank her for being here today and for
bringing with her a set of characters
that actually I seem to represent the
kind of new way in which we want to
think about architecture about lectures
and about this lecture hall that has
seen incredible voices telling us what
architecture is and what architecture
could be what architecture education
could become and today she's joining
into that legacy busy school has 81
nationalities and the truth is that
behind view on nationalities or
passports what we have is languages what
we have as ways of seeing the world what
we have is specific individuals that are
able to represent collectivities and
ways of thinking and reflecting about
who we are in this school of
architecture what we actually do do is
to teach people not to be architects but
to be citizens of the world and today we
are welcoming one into this lecture hall
so Jeremy thanking Leslie into the AAA
so thank you so much either can everyone
hear me yes so good evening everyone and
thank you all for coming especially on
this very very cold night it's an
enormous pleasure to be at the
architectural association and first of
all I'd like to thank manager and Eva
for their very very kind invitation to
speak in this series new canonical
histories I'm especially delighted to be
speaking in this series since the word
cannon is very much at the forefront of
current questions around pedagogy
teaching and education in South Africa
at the moment partly as a result of the
student protests of 2015 the roads must
fall protest movement and 2016 the fees
must fall but also because of geography
where we are in the world in a
socio-political context but also in
history tonight's talk which will be
about 45 minutes long is split into a
number of different parts which may
appear slightly random but I assure you
there is method to the madness it's
partly due to the subject matter but
it's also to do with the way in which
many of the issues I'm going to touch
upon race class identity culture and so
on are experienced everything from
randomly and arbitrarily to legally and
structurally and it's all but memy
reminds us so powerfully the exploited
experience exploitation as their reality
so in other words while writing new
canon or scholarship from a previously
marginalized or subjugated position such
as currently is happening across Africa
and in South Africa especially I think
it's important to understand two things
one that there is no self without the
other in other words again there can be
no black or white history there are only
histories told from multiple
perspectives vantage points and
positions some of which are indirect and
often violent contradiction
and - I do think that the proper place
for this to happen is the Academy there
is no other place once you strip away
all the paraphernalia of the University
the management and organizational
structures the divvying up of subject
areas into curricula the learning
outcomes and the examination processes
the accreditation the finances and so on
once all of that is put to one side what
remains is the pursuit of new knowledge
that in my opinion is the proper nature
of the academy but in contexts like
South Africa it is further complicated
by the means by which new knowledge is
both produced and assessed in an
architectural sense the writing or the
articulation through drawings films
manifestos or whatever of that new
knowledge is never neutral it is never
without bias it is never without intent
knowledge is produce in an almost
endless cycle of making and making and
remaking as new truths in inverted
commas are uncovered and tested and old
lies are put to rest I would therefore
like you to both bear with the
juxtapositions of scale place and time
in this short talk and at the same time
seek within yourselves your own
histories experiences and perspectives
to place these in relation to one
another and I hope by the end of the
talk you'll have formed a mental image
or impression of a place that is under
enormous and sometimes unbearable
pressure yet at the same time is full of
possibilities some of which we can't
even articulate yet but we can feel and
this aspect of feeling as opposed to
knowing as an important one not just in
the context of a society in the throes
of reinventing itself both to itself and
to others but also in the context of the
production of knowledge which is horrid
historically has had little time or
appetite for feelings so I would like to
start tonight by saying that pedagogy
and geography and oddest distinct from
one another as you might first assume
knowledge is not universal
what you know is largely dependent on
where you are which shapes both your
worldview and your view of your place
within it the word pedagogue comes to us
from the Greek pedals which originally
described the slave who accompanied the
master's son to school explaining the
natural largely natural environment
along the way leading the child by
example by observation and instruction
well as teachers and pedagogues we no
longer take a walk through the forest
and the students we teach aren't only
the Masters sons and despite our
relatively low pay architectural tutors
are not slaves in the conventional sense
but the idea of learning through doing
and making through observation of the
relationships between trial and error
for example is an intrinsic part of the
educational processes particularly in
especially in schools of design so I'm
talking about a very specific context
this evening South Africa but I'm
reminded in a very special way of the
very first public lecture I ever gave
coincidentally in this very room at the
a a during Africa 95 which is the
year-long celebration of all things
African that ran in London I think in
1995 and 2005 and at that lecture pretty
much in exactly the same spot I spoke
immediately after Jono Aero the renowned
South African architect and I rather
personally reminded everyone but it's
all too easy to label South Africans as
the bad guys when in fact the same
issues apply almost everywhere the
comment did not go down very well with
the audience but 24 years later it's
interesting to note the South African
students are again leading the way in
terms of their attempt to deal
meaningfully with these very vexed
questions of race and identity through
their demands for a decolonized and
transformed curriculum or pedagogy even
if there is absolutely no consensus yet
on what that curriculum or pedagogy
might look like but Africa 95 is not the
only thing that has happened at the a a
over the past 40 years that's relevant
to tonight's talk when I found at the
Graduate School of architecture at the
University in Johannesburg
2015 there was only one possible model
in my mind the unit system and not just
because I don't know any other system
why was the unit system the right model
for a context that is 6,000 miles and 40
years removed from its original home in
inverted commas and in reading and
research in both Boyarsky MBA a I found
the parallels between Chicago London and
Johannesburg both striking and
unexpected all three cities have
undergone periods of intense protest
civic unrest and challenges to their
educational systems albeit at different
times but you ask his vision took shape
against a backdrop of change in both the
US and the UK and it's in the wider
context of societies in moments of
crisis sorry I'm gonna skip over that
slides quickly but tonight's lecture is
being delivered the political and
cultural pressures that have been
building up in South Africa over the
past 25 years belong very specifically
to this time and place but societies
everywhere across the globe are
experiencing convulsions I have a number
of videos to share with you and I must
apologize to a couple of people in the
room who have already seen this one
video already for me there's a very
clear and importantly redemptive
difference between discussions of race
and racism which although linked are not
one in the same thing in the context of
architecture race encompasses many deep
and profoundly imaginative conditions
everything from language to color to
surface to history sensuality ritual
migration and the long and wonderfully
complex history of diaspora in the
African context this speculation takes
many forms but one of the most powerful
expressions of the relationship between
tradition and modernity between the
rural and the urban between Christian
and other belief systems between wealth
and poverty
and all the myriad byproducts of a 2000
year old history between north and south
between Europe and Africa and a far
older much more ancient history of
migration Out of Africa as was just seen
in the short video clip can be seen in
this other clip that I'm just about to
show you which I hope you will forgive
me for playing it in its entirety it's
three and a half minutes
it's a music video by the South African
rapper questa in collaboration with the
Nigerian American rapper wale and it was
shot in Katla Hong Township just outside
Johannesburg by the South African
filmmaker Thibault Houma Lupe I'm gonna
play the whole video not just because
it's a catchy song but because it
depicts very powerfully this endless
traffic between past and present between
here and there between tradition and
modernity as I've said between differing
belief systems between landscape and the
city and yes between black and white but
also an importantly between almost
everything and anything in between so
I'm like African other African countries
architectural education in South Africa
is an amalgamation of three major
European influences the boughs are the
Bauhaus and the British post
independence most African countries
adopted the system of their former
colonial rulers but the historical
tension in South Africa between the
Dutch and British resulted in a blended
tripartite model which now struggles to
bring a forth narrative on board that of
the African majority who make up 90.1
percent of the population and whose
story for want of a better word is
barely reflected in the country's
pedagogy architectural or otherwise
twenty four years ago Mandela called for
reconciliation over retribution asking
80% of the population to forgive and
forget' to build their so-called rainbow
nation without fully interrogating what
it was they had inherited the failure
both at the time and subsequently of
South African universities to ask the
hard questions to interrogate the sense
of shame and to deal with the guilt on
all sides not just the most obvious -
it's the current legacy that future
students must live with not the African
menace
that in Becky promised would be there's
transformation and decolonization are
perhaps the two most overused words in
South African education discourses from
politicians to professors everyone has
an opinion on the subject but no clear
idea how or even why it should be
achieved as the Cameroonian political
scientist susheel in bombay reminds us
whilst the terms be colonization
transformation and curriculum have
become key buzzwords the definition of
what it means to decolonize or transform
a curriculum remains a gray area there
is no clarity about whose responsibility
it is to undertake this process the
educational experience implies more than
the topics covered in any given course
it encompasses the attitudes values
dispositions and worldviews that are
learned unlearned relearned
reformed deconstructed and reconstructed
whilst undertaking a degree the
decolonization of buildings and public
spaces is not a frivolous idea and it is
inseparable from the democratization of
access we are talking about the creation
of those conditions that will allow
black staff and students to say of the
university this is my home I am NOT an
outsider here I do not have to beg or
apologize for being here such a right to
belong such a rightful sense of
ownership has nothing to do with charity
or hospitality it has nothing to do with
the liberal notion of Tolerance it has
nothing to do with me having to
assimilate into a culture that is not
mine as a precondition of my
participating in the public life of the
institution it has to do with the
ownership of a space that is a public
common good it has to do with the
expansive sense of citizenship that is
itself indispensible for the project of
democracy which itself means nothing
without a deep commitment to some idea
of publicness
when I arrived in at the then Department
of architecture at the University of
Johannesburg in 2014 there were 11
students in the master's program all
white
today there are 98 of whom 62% are black
and on Monday the 4th of February next
week at the start of the new academic
year we will be 123 the GSA will the
Graduate School of Architecture was
formerly constituted as a separate
school in 2016 is now Africa's largest
post graduate school of architecture so
I'm fully aware that the unit system is
old news in the UK and is viewed in some
quarters as a London centric and
somewhat outdated educational model
however in the African context it has
been nothing short of revolutionary and
I want to spend a little a few minutes
exploring why to explain why the unit
system in its preferred method of
exploration I would say design research
has been so successful in the African
context I would like to SPECT sideways
for a moment to literature and to a
novel by the South African writer JN
could see her which although is
excellent is not his most famous work
the novel is Elizabeth Costello which
was published in 2003 and its
protagonist is a celebrated ageing
writer who travels around the world
giving lectures on topics that range
from literary censorship to
vegetarianism due to the fact that her
first novel for which she is most famous
is about women's liberation her
interviewers expect her to be an
energetic fighter for equality eager to
discuss the importance of a woman's role
in society
she is not however much to everyone's
disappointment including her own son who
often wishes to but she were just like
any other elderly woman in one of the
chapters Costello accepts a free cruise
on a ship going to Antarctica in
exchange for entertaining passengers
with an undemanding series of lectures
she finds herself paired with an African
novelist Emanuel Ax dugu who she met
many years earlier at a Penn conference
in Kuala Lumpur and whom she has always
thought of as a bit of a poser
but she's no longer certain or confident
about making such judgments which of us
is who he seems to be she asks herself
she listens to herself giving her
opening talk the future of the novel and
is not sure that she believes in what
she is saying anymore
indeed she no longer believes very
strongly in belief belief may be no more
than a battery which one clips into in
order to make an idea run but a new
Gould lectures with more Verve on the
novel in Africa but what he has to say
seems depressing to her African culture
he says is essentially oral and hostile
to private silent reading the African
writer can draw on this oral culture to
create a different kind of novel from
that of the Western literary tradition
but he still will not have an African
readership he's condemned to make his
professional life outside Africa writing
for foreigners I'm going to quite a very
small section of the novel spoken not by
a new gue but by Costello since it seems
to me to get directly to the heart of
what African students of architecture or
literature perhaps struggle with the
English novel she says is written in the
first place by English people for
English people that is what makes it the
English novel the Russian novel is
written by Russians for Russians but the
African novel is not written by Africans
for Africans African novelists may write
about Africa about African experiences
but they seem to me to be glancing over
their shoulder all the time they write
at the foreigners who will read them
whether they like it or not they have
accepted the role of interpreter
interpreting Africa to their readers yet
how can you explore a world in all its
depths if at the same time you are
having to explain it to outsiders it is
like a scientist trying to give full
creative attention to his investigations
or her investigations whilst at the same
time explaining what he or she is doing
to a class of ignorant students it
too much for one person it cannot be
done not at the deepest level that it
seems to me is the root of your problem
having to perform your African Asst at
the same time that you write it in the
context of African schools of
architecture like it or not exactly as
Costello States but staff and students
must necessarily act simultaneously as
interpreters and investigators
explaining a world that is often
invisible to Western trained eyes both
to themselves and to others yet at the
same time exploring it in all its depth
it is a difficult and complex task
design research with its emphasis on
intuition fluidity self reflexivity and
an expanded and expanding view of
process led investigations seems to
offer African students the much needed
space to explore prior to explanation
not during it and this has yielded
unexpectedly rich results three texts
for me have been very instrumental in
shaping both this talk and the broader
experiment of unit system Africa first
is Irene soon was fascinating and
detailed and as yet unpublished doctoral
dissertation at Alvin Boyarsky between
the well laid table and the marketplace
boy asked his experiments in
architectural pedagogy which was
submitted to Princeton architecture but
Princeton University in 2013 the second
is ego or Mariana bitch's essay Alvin
barosky's Chicago an architectural
critic in the city of strangers which
was published in the AAA files in 2010
and lastly Nadine Gordimer collection of
political essays the essential gesture
which was published much earlier in 1988
both soon whoa and Mariana vich writes
at length about boy a skis
insider-outsider status and the effect
it had both on his management and
pedagogy a constant outsider may a
novice writes he operated outside the
profession outside traditional
institutions outside any obvious
homeland the son of European Jews who
had migrated from Russia to Canada via
England married to an English woman he
changed houses cities and countries
within the first forty years of his life
with an incredible frequency but this
restlessness was also the product of his
intellectual and academic background
it's interesting to note that his early
teaching career both in London and in
the early 60s and later in Chicago in 65
was played out against the backdrop of
protests that reflected wider social and
political changes in the UK fresh from
the 1958 RIBA Oxford conference decision
that the future of architectural
education lay in the public university
system Boyarsky successfully opposed
william allen's plans for a merger with
Imperial College where the prevailing
post-war orthodoxy tended to wors
professionalism and the scientific
standardization of education at the AAA
he encouraged the opposite preferring
Brookes drawings discourse and debate I
have always felt he said that the
curriculum is a horrific thing but while
by auskey did not address or discuss
issues of gender race or ethnicity
directly there is evidence in his own
work that approaching architecture
through a more elusive an instinctive
psychological categories such as
identity and psyche produced much more
interesting and valuable results his
unorthodox stands led ultimately to his
own dismissal in 1965 back in the u.s.
in Chicago where he was hired as an
associate dean at UIC the Vietnam War
was escalating the Black Panther Party
was about to become a major player in
the civil rights movement and the city
itself was beginning to disintegrate
along class and race lines from which it
is still trying to recover these
external tensions marinovitch rights
empowered him with a revolutionary zeal
that he hoped
could change the school we hope to do
our bit by channeling channeling the
students energies and upsetting the
state curricula but the third text that
I'm interested in relevance and
commitment is the transcript of a
lecture given by Nadine Gordimer at the
University of Capetown in 1979 on the
state of art in South Africa in it she
explores not only the different social
and political conditions which apply to
black and white writers and she was
speaking about writers at the point but
also the seemingly in a radical book gap
of the existential and psychological
distance which lies between them 1979
was not a good year for South Africa
Forster after whom the infamous Central
Prison in South Africa is named was
President Nelson Mandela had been in
prison for 17 years and the state of
emergency which signaled the end of
apartheid society and governance was
only six years off
Gordon's talk was focused on one
essential question can men and women
make a common culture if their material
interests conflict her argument at the
time was that the nature of South
African art understood in its widest
sense was primarily determined by the
conflict of material interest in South
African society but she acknowledges the
fact that every artist in any society
has to struggle through the labyrinth of
his or her chosen medium of expression
whether painting or writing building or
sport that is a condition of his or her
being she expresses doubt about any
artist ever finding himself or herself
in a wholly harmonious relationship to
the external power of society but she
also goes on to note that there can have
been few if any examples in human
history
of the degree variety and intensity that
exists between the South African artists
and the external power of society it is
from the daily life of South Africa that
have come the conditions of profound
alienation which prevail among South
African artists the son of various
states of alienation is the nature of
art
south africa at present drawing on
parallels between Boyarsky and the
formation of the Graduate School of
Architecture is always going to be risky
for one thing the GSA is only three
years old and it's too early to say
where the unit system Africa will have
anything close to the impact on
architectural education as the original
unit system did the University of
Johannesburg is also and always has been
a public institution there are no
private universities in South Africa I'm
certainly not Alvin Boyarsky but like
Chicago and London in the 60s and 70s
Johannesburg is at the center of
wide-ranging and potentially
revolutionary changes which mean an
unprecedented expand lasting changes can
be made I want to return and this is
coming to the end of the lecture
momentarily to Gordimer from a
disintegrated consciousness all seek
wholeness in themselves and a
reconnection with the voltage of social
dynamism opposition to an existing
society implies a hunger to create and
identify with another and better one the
aberration of a set of values implies an
intention to create and identify with
another set for the artist these
implications become part of the
transformations of reality which are his
or her work relevance and commitment
pulse back and forth between the artists
and society relevance has to do with
outside events commitment comes from
within there are many ways in which
alienation is both constructed and
experienced it can be described as the
condition of rejecting and all being
rejected to bring this conversation to
the audience at which it is targeted
architects the black architect in South
Africa lives in a society that has
rejected his or her culture for hundreds
of years but he or she has turned that
alienation in the face of those who
rejected him and has made his rejection
the point of departure towards true self
true identity but on the other hand the
white architect belongs to the white and
here
European culture that rejected black
read African culture and is now being
rejected by black culture in turn he or
she is the non European whose society
historically was speaking refused to
acknowledge and take root with an
indigenous culture producing something
new
he is the non black whom black see as
apart from indigenous culture and for me
the really interesting question is both
do not yet know whether this is a dead
end or can be made itself a new
beginning and I have one last video
you'll be relieved to hear and it's only
a couple of minutes long
[Music]
welcome to safe space session six the
kind of things that we want you to do
today unless to do the problematics
of race and identity which are a lot of
the things that we've been talking about
but to move into that space which is the
freedom of creative expression
so on that note I want to talk to you
about the zombie the zombie profoundly
disturbs one of the central tenets of
Western thought which is that things are
either one thing or the other you are at
the dead or alive
male or female inside outside black or
white and we began safe space looking at
the position of the other and in a sense
what we're asking you today is to move
from the other to that space in between
the other than yourself
what we're going to ask you to do is to
move into the next room there's some
sheets of paper we're going to ask you
to construct a binary opposite of your
own what we're asking for you all to
find is the place of beauty in the
inside it I've decided in decidable safe
space in a way has been about knowing
yourselves we're now asking you to prove
it
I love it I can see some people are
already beginning to disrupt the logic
of the paper don't be too complex don't
overthink things use the binary that
said something to you that has meaning
for you
[Music]
like my joy like gender-neutral
it's neither male/female black and white
I'm too black for white people and too
white for black people right so for me
it's like I'm always that person in the
middle the walls that were made before
are what define the understanding I went
and got into this world that you know we
was working familiar but not majoring in
today Julie Miller shadow the
territories of the unknown and we try to
figure out who I am now in this context
this actually started with the whole
African light thing and I'm gonna throw
it the other way around I consider
myself a light of African so I mean I'm
not black and I don't consider myself to
have a black culture but I consider
myself to be African and there's so many
lines between that so just kind of
asking the group in general how many of
you think how many of you believe that
to be African you must be black so
you're talking about lineage how does
one define lineage we come back to the
same systems of classification who is
one thing who is another who is pure
[Music]
very interesting is just looking at all
of these pieces of work number one with
a black person or white person did any
of them just thing can we sing whether
male or female did any of those things
everybody can feel free to say if you
can
[Music]
someone throws something else in there
which is to say all of those experiences
the resentment the rage the envy when
you take those qualities and they stop
destroying you they become tools it's
hard to describe how privileged I go to
school the students challenge the world
is roaring actually it's full and if
you're weighed down by I'm in taking
your eye off the ball you have a head
start because those are powerful tools
and I think this is what we're trying to
say to all of you in this brave new
world of your profession it is up to you
to decide how you want to use those
tools
the power of architecture is that we
create these spaces that we clearly
divides this wall that we have around us
divided and how we start moving them
it's a beautiful challenge it's making
it easier to just acknowledge each other
as what we are how we can listen people
and actually explore embrace in between
our differences the differences between
how we see things and how they might
actually be and how we might imagine
them and our perception versus another
person's perception and playing those up
to actually create something new I can
actually in between spaces the most
scary space to be and possibly that's
how we can actually move forward
[Music]
Bob Hoskins so that's it thank you
[Applause]
thank you so much it's as as we are
trying to somehow open up the
conversations about pedagogy and the
conversations about this rewriting of
histories it is so important to have
people who are actually actively trying
to do that in different context and so
it seems that the some of these sessions
know this safe space are literally
trying to deal with philosophical
questions these questions of empathy the
idea of the other and in a certain way
one would assume that in fact
architecture over the last few years has
gone through a strange journey of
professionalization in which these about
making buildings when in fact is about
making communities and productive
producing subjectivities and so that is
very clear and apparent from the way in
which you engage with the students and
with the school my question then goes
into how does one then go back into if
you want some of the most traditional
ways of understanding the idea of
building drawing and understanding
architecture in terms of material
production how does one then start and
translating those questions and could
you maybe give us some sense of how
within the curriculum or non curriculum
some of those questions get translated
into questions of representation
material technology it's a very big
question very good question and in a way
it goes back for me to the example I
gave of Elizabeth Costello that when you
are trying to explore something you
cannot simultaneously explain it and I
think South Africa is unusual for for
many many different reasons but the
question of representation is a really
interesting one when I first went to
teach in the States in the mid 90s I ran
a cultural theory course and I realized
very quickly in the u.s. the lens
through which you understand power is
always through representation so when
you switch on the television you see an
advert there's
Chinese person a black person a white
person it's a kind of a microcosm in a
sense of the world that you see in the
UK you analyze power through the class
structure because you know that's the
kind of paradigm that dominates British
culture in South Africa you do neither
so on the one hand there's a desire to
use representation as the means by which
you remake the world but at the same
time there's a insecurity about delving
too deep into the power structure so
what you get is a very very sin the near
of representation and I think one of the
reasons why the unit system was very
instrumental for the students was that
we took away the pretense that there was
any kind of universal representation
there was any universal language there
was any universal knowledge and actually
students were encouraged to find their
own language literally whether that was
through film through writing or whatever
it was so we took the if you like the
formality out of representation and
opened it up as its own tool where this
hits building is still unresolved I
think there are many within the kind of
professional spheres in South Africa who
would say you know what they do is bad
arts now that's a conversation that
happens everywhere but in this
particular context because the
explorations have been Liberatore it's
been very difficult to close it down so
there is a delay in a sense in coming to
the idea of building or the idea of
materiality because students are still
working through the ephemerality of
ideas but for me the quote live out of
your imagination not just your history
is a really powerful one and I think
it's particularly powerful in this
context where the weight of history has
almost erased the imagination so it's
it's an interesting context and I don't
know that there are any clear
conclusions yet yeah I mean this was a
way to try to open up the floor for
questions and comments I mean this is a
conversation that I could monopolize for
the next
don't want to do that and so do we have
questions in the audience so I guess I'm
almost uniquely privileged to comment on
this having lived in both countries and
studied in both countries and taught in
both countries in fact sorry you know so
I've lived in both countries I've worked
in both countries and taught in both
countries and the gift that I gave me I
think really is just understanding the
constructedness of the status quo but
you can't take anything for granted
really and I think that's really just
stepping back from that and listening
and watching and understanding is it's
almost it's a very underbody task in a
way I think instead of trying to
necessarily create just observe as well
yeah I mean you know in Ghana we have a
saying which loosely translates as you
know travel and see and in a way it
means that sometimes when you leave
somewhere you are able to see that place
more clearly and I found in in South
Africa I'm not from there which allows
me to see certain things in certain ways
but it also absolves me from the
emotional responsibility of having to
deal with what you see it's a very
unusual position yeah in a sense I think
that that position is valuable for some
time at a certain point you you you make
a decision to stop being the outsider
commenting on something and to take on
board the conditions and I'm not sure I
can do that I'm not from there yeah
Thank You Leslie that was very
interesting I think I recognized one or
two last year I was interested in the
photograph that had in the background a
very European looking building which I
assumed was a university building
somewhere and I just wondered what's the
present generation of young architects
attitude to the colonial architecture
the legacy they began and if you like of
of South African architecture
presumably some of it as architecture is
quite good yeah
and I just wanted to how that how that
filters into the consciousness of young
architects in South Africa today so
again I think when we talk about post
coloniality there's a tense do you think
that all colonies are the same and
actually there's a there's a fundamental
difference between dominions and
colonies in South Africa was a Dominion
and that means that unlike colonies
where the colonial power came took
whatever raw materials and you know
basically left that independence these
were settler communities so you know New
Zealand Canada Australia South Africa to
a certain extent
former Rhodesia etc and the knock-on
effect of that is that particularly
architectural II the depths to which
those settler societies embedded
themselves in the landscape is very
different from somewhere else and so the
the architectural context in South
Africa is is deep modernity is it's in
the land it shapes how people think it
shapes how they understand public life
it shapes behavior in a way that it
hasn't done in places like lego sacra
Dakar or whatever so you have a kind of
different dynamic where you are both
part of the thing that you are
trying to destroy but at the same time
you but I say you don't mean me
personally you are not wholly invested
in it it's a very strange relationship
and I think one of the dangers of the
student movements in 2015 and 16 was
that they conflated a number of
different demands fees access curriculum
pedagogy they became one in the same
thing and the revolutionary spirit of
free education has meant a very very
quick underling of everything and for me
this is dangerous because I think what
Africa is moving towards is an intense
period of translation of translating
between past and present and that act of
translation is something that Africans
do every day I don't think there's a
single African alive who doesn't speak
more than one language the act of
translating things is in it's in our
very DNA an architecture doesn't really
acknowledge that you are either one
thing you are the colonial or modernist
or European or something else and I
think that's a complete false dichotomy
I suppose what prompted the question
because it's something I'm actually
thinking about something I'm writing at
the moment to do with heritage was the
protests against the successful Road
statute and how you know that's
obviously a very kind of obvious symbol
of what have you and yet architecture is
if you like the cousin of that language
so you know the the Georgian houses of
the UK are paid for out of the proceeds
of slavery for example which is very
rarely mentioned in discussions of
conservation and so on so that I suppose
I was just interested if there was a
different attitude to the architecture
and there is to you know sculptures and
monuments to sculptures and monuments
have become very easy targets because
you look at them you you don't let say
inhabit them in quite the same way and
this I think has been the difficulty for
architecture
as a profession is how does it separate
itself out with what it looks like from
what it does and particularly in the
South African context because the
relationship between apartheid spatial
ideology had such an embedded
relationship in terms of what people do
how they live where they live the
circumstances in which in which they
live I think for a new generation of
architects it's very difficult to
separate the effects of architecture
from what it is so I think Rhodes was a
very easy target if you look behind
Rhodes for the kind of classical columns
of UCT well there you're entering into a
different kind of aspiration and I think
you one also has to remember that for
many post-colonial newly independent
societies education is the means by
which you you you you move education is
progress so in a sense the the idea of
the university it's the aspirational
emblem so you might want to remove
Rhodes as a statue but you're certainly
not going to destroy the university
because that's the very thing that's
gonna get you from A to B so I think
these questions are deeply what's the
weather complex seems like such a copper
but they are complex they're they're
also psychological their emotive as well
as being physical and I think one of the
interesting byproducts of the the kind
of pressure particularly around
education means that there are a lot of
things that are now up for grabs which
is a it's an exhilarating place to be
difficult yeah
hi I was had a question about when you
said but it's difficult to explore
something and simultaneously explain it
and I guess this is more about
architectural education and being a
student and how do your students find
like a way to manage that if your course
is more encouraging the exploration of
an idea especially in the context of
being an African student for example
here in the West and you're trying to
explore your own histories while at the
same time graduate and get a degree it's
yes I was just wondering like how did
you find the balance and how do you
manage the success and how of your
students as well I would say we have we
have a very simple rule in the school
which is no work no talk so if you come
to tutorials or you come to class or
whatever and you haven't produced work
we will not speak to you and it's been a
really interesting mechanism because
when issues are very complex when
they're deeply emotive the impulse is to
talk forever so tutorials become therapy
sessions and there's an endless deferral
of actually making something and we
decided very early on as a as a teaching
body that no matter how bad the work was
we would have to speak to the work and
that's has given students confidence to
keep on trying making failing trying
again we also say to students that if
you're gonna fail you fail fast we don't
sit and wait around for you know endless
iterations of it you you you make the
work through making it that's been
really productive in a lot of cases
students start out actually not knowing
where they're going which i think is the
same for students everywhere but the
emphasis on production I think has been
very productive for them yeah
hi I just let me go back to the
decolonisation idea so you said
something about it could also mean own
in a space or like belonged into the
space or nothing like you're not allowed
in a particular space but then in
regards to the public because there's
this thing about architecture crossing
over like how does the public say it so
like he was saying aesthetically some of
these buildings would look really good
so what I'm good right
you know just open people in a sense but
like like in places like China you have
all these cities that are basically
designed for like like a whole different
city or whole different place for
whatever reason every wedding photos I
don't know but how does the architecture
cross over when you decolonize
decolonizing
in a sense you know like is it just
aesthetically is it just like a kind of
mental thing how does that cross over to
the public and not just like a body of
Architects or educated people so
answered that question in a couple of
slightly different ways I don't speak
Zulu Xhosa
and there may be you know across the
speakers in this room but I have been
told on good authority that there is no
word in either language for public or
private which is similar to many other
African languages you have a word for a
stranger someone who is not known to you
but you have a word for someone who was
a clan member or might be distantly
known to you and so what I find
interesting is that we take these terms
that we think of them as being universal
and if in the language of the place that
you're trying to enact this architecture
there is no understanding of what the
public is and what the private is how
does one understand public space so the
very terms by which we describe teach
articulate architecture to me are out of
sync you know in a very deep and
profound way with the way in which
people live if you took out the terms
public and private from architectural
discourse I'm not sure you'd be left
with very much I mean the whole
discipline is predicated on this
relationship between those two spheres I
think what's interesting here is that
there are other kinds of spheres coming
into existence
and what we're trying to say
particularly in the school and that's
why I think the school is so important
is that there must be a period in which
we are allowed and I use that word in
inverted commas to explore explain to
fail to retry to remake those questions
before they can ever become canon you
know part of the decolonization effort
has been will you know that's no longer
valid bring something new you can't
bring this thing new we don't even have
the tools to describe what it is that we
don't want let alone what it is that
we're gonna bring and that for me is why
the Academy is so important because it's
the most fundamental level that's the
place where you need to do that kind of
work so I think there's a tender there's
a tendency to think about decolonization
is just taking a couple of columns or
you know knocking a statue down or that
are taking some decoration of a facade
but it's actually a much much deeper
much more existential question and I
don't mean that the conversation always
tends to be that somehow Africa or
blackness or whatever is inferior to
Architecture that it has nothing to
offer to the subject for me it's the
complete opposite way around
architecture cannot deal with these
complexities not not in the way that we
currently teach it so
um this goes back to one of the videos
that you played and then like the video
showed the girl explained in her
perception of black and she went on to
say that it happens to be the color of
my skin her perception was quite
negative yep so my question is and what
is your perception of black in
architecture for me it's the most
interesting inventive imaginative
creative rich literally amazing trope
I'm not interested in racism race for me
is something else something deeply
creative I think I think it's some of
these questions I think are extremely
important for us here in the school how
we actually teach the history of
architecture and how do we brave the
fact that we don't know how to tell
history differently but it is our job
and it is our task as scholars and as
architects and as pedagogues even as the
slaves of a different world to actually
keep on telling these histories
differently and I want to thank the
Kodama key staff within this school who
was actually taking the challenge of the
colonizing architecture history and I
just want to thank you and I wanna ask
everyone to thank you very much for a
very inspiring lecture thank you
[Applause]
