hi I'm Simone Yanis a director of
sustainable environmental design program
here at a School of Architecture in
London it's Tuesday
fifth of December 2017 3 o clock and I'm
here to introduce the program our
program has a global reach we deal with
most climates where there are cities and
with urban context in many different
countries our students come from some 50
different countries both north and south
of the Equator and we respond to this by
dealing with different building types
and and climates I will show you some
slides that illustrate the way in which
we approach our program and its tasks
our key objectives to improve
environmental quality in cities to
achieve independence from non-renewable
energy sources and to develop an
environmentally sustainable architecture
which can adapt to climate change
at the core of our approach is research
and we learn how to do research by being
able to focus on important questions
like for example what makes a good
environment indoors what makes a good
environment outdoors supporting our
research Ames is out on program which
consists of a number of lecture courses
that deal with concepts the principles
for design a number of workshops
software workshops that give us the
tools for analyzing and undertaking
design research and projects which deal
with practice and as I was telling you
which is global over the last 20 years
our students have developed some 750
projects for something like one hundred
and fifty six cities in 60 different
countries and very different climates we
measure we measure environmental
conditions and we need the measurements
to calibrate software that allow us to
model and simulate conditions thereby
extending our capabilities so rather
than have to measure for a whole year we
can simulate the whole year in just a
few seconds and that allows us to
predict what might happen in a virtual
building over time and also across space
in its different rooms and spaces from
the simulation we can engage with design
research and back to civilization if
that is needed as we develop the project
London is our laboratory for half of the
year in our first two terms and we start
in the first term of the year with
taking on the study of some selected
London
Lyn's what these buildings tell us and
in the second term the insights the
findings from these studies are input
and starting questions for design
research for design projects what can we
tell back the dissertation project is
the main piece of work done individually
by our students and that allows an
individual agenda to be developed
provides choice of context climate
building type research agendas and so
forth there are some favorite topics
that our students like to engage with
one of which is the urban morphology the
way in which the urban block shapes
itself the issues that that entails the
possibilities that we can have in
improving its ecology and environmental
performance that's the strategic level
but also at the most specific level of a
design project that looks at innovative
ideas for the expression of the urban
Block in in different climates we're
looking for a new architecture for the
tropics an architecture which to some
extent it's inspired from the tradition
of the climate of these areas and
expresses the principles in innovative
ways the transitional space the space
in-between the perforation of the facade
of the building in order to allow air
permeability the good level of shading
and solar protection and so forth and we
like to promote our work wherever we can
and here you see an exhibition of 12
projects by 12 of our Indian students
which would brought back to India -
under bad in December 2014
on the occasion of the
the international player conference and
another presentation I tend to present
about 10 to 20 papers a year in journals
and conferences and also like to win
awards now I would like to introduce my
colleagues here on a loose deck off who
has just finished our MSC in sustainable
Environmental Design and the loose
welcome back thank you
how was your experience with attending
the program my experience was very good
in the first term everything is quite
new your teammates are new the software
that you learn is new the tools that you
are using and this makes everything very
excited but also very challenging at the
beginning and one of the first things
that we did immediately was going to the
buildings that we were supposed to
analyze taking spot measurements
conducting interviews with the occupants
talking about their experience and with
that in mind we started to analyze the
current performance office ask about the
damage I forgot maybe to mention that
the first two terms the projects are
team projects yes what was your
experience with the team it was very
very good we all came of course from
different backgrounds different climates
different countries so everyone had
their own experience some people already
worked quite a lot so they had a lot of
professional experience other people
came directly from University so they
had maybe more academic experience and
this could blend to one project and one
of our aims of course with these
projects is to collaborate with
practices it wasn't practise London
architectural and engineering practices
and you quite likely that that you
you had a very well-known London
practice and studying their buildings
and then being able to return to the
practice and present the work in fact I
have a slide that shows the team
presenting I was seeing the slide
yes so how was that collaboration with
the practice it was that useful yeah
yeah they first provided us with all the
informations the basic drawings etc and
then at the end when we proposed some
alterations to improve the performance
of the dwellings we could come back to
the architect project architect and
discuss what we had found out and it was
very interesting to see that a lot of
alterations that we proposed also
crossed his mind somewhere across the
longer that design process and but he
couldn't implement them because of
practical or financial reasons but I
think it was very interesting to to see
the link between our outcomes from our
research and to see how this in real
life and real practices is yeah being
adopted thank you let me now turn to
Raphael Raphael Alonso who recently
completed the mark in sustainable
Environmental Design Rafa how was your
experience and in that first part of the
year
mm experience was very interesting in
word team of four people working
together it's a fast almost from a
different continent we were
seeing the offices of hok international
practice so where's where but they were
very supportive they allowed us to get
into a building take measurements they
were helping us to making some surveys
to see how the performance of the
building was impacting the people
satisfaction with the environment and
from there from that we took all that
information made search simulation on
our research and we're able to go back
and present those findings to the to the
team and to a broader audience of like
the building managers and some and some
other thank you we have we have some of
these reports here on the table I'm
sorry we can't bring them to you now
well we move to turn to where the
insights of the first project somehow
have to become starting points for the
design research that we'll need to
design project the first time that the
principles and the tools that we try to
teach are going to be used in a
substantial way and those how was that
experience with you it was very
interesting to see how the like you said
the Prince took principles that we
thought we had to implement them from
scratch so we had to design a mixed-use
development yeah
from scratch and in that way I remember
that we had a lot of discussion in the
team between a lot of interesting
discussions about how we should form the
map the massing because there is
something that can sometimes be a
tension between the most sustainable
option and the architectural a preferred
one and the the first term really
changed our design approach completely
so we had to find a balance between what
we learned before coming to the AAA and
implementing everything that we learned
in the course and here you can see that
we developed some passive design
principles for
housing and studied the daylight
performance of them yeah and two Indians
improve the outdoor comfort conditions
and we could in some way quantify with
our massing strategies how we could
improve certain and that they love GI
that we occupied you so much
at some stage yes yeah the the loggia is
used for mainly in spring or fall when
the outdoor temperature is already quite
low so about ten degrees but the indoor
temperature in the low job is already
satisfying so you can really use that as
an extension of your home Rafa I know
that you had a very intense second term
experience with this design project
which in fact became almost a
professional project
actually we found this place next to a
square every retelling inside and
because of the community being very
strong supporting some regeneration that
somehow picked up for a bit more time
our year proposal was looking at how the
buildings are around and the animation
would impact the environmental
conditions in the square and provide a
more comfortable outer environment and
then how to shape the building so that
it will be comfortable for the users
consuming the bare minimum energy so on
the end would happen again you had a lot
of concern about the ways in which the
building adapts both seasonally and
between day and night yeah we looked a
lot into those polycarbonate devices
that somehow blend with
they're building and adapt daily and
seasonal seasonal were saying and we
even made like a prototype and we're
testing it and making some measurements
to see how it would actually perform in
reality so now I'd like to ask you about
this the the process of the dissertation
I mean from the team projects that we
had in term one and two then we all of a
sudden left you on your own and how is
that done and did you feel lonely some
sometimes yes but as I mentioned before
we I had a really good cooperation in
the second term with my teammates so we
also try to help each other throughout
the dissertation process and we could
always like text each other with either
technical questions or the direction of
the project so that really supported me
along the process to make it less slowly
and of course you have a very special
topic the conversion of churches in the
Netherlands I mean how did that topic
come to you yeah I'm aware that because
of the dense country that I'm from it's
very hard to find taken plots to develop
dwellings on so people start to occupy
and convert vacant buildings which we
have in large quantities available and
for instance churches so that's how I
came across the topic and again I
visited the buildings and were able like
the converted churches and was able to
conduct spot measurements and try to to
unravel the characteristics of this
special topology and in fact you had
identified the different types of
churches and and for each of those you
had categorized the potentials yes which
we see now on the screen and of course
one of the one of the issues was a bad
day lighting wasn't it because in some
cases we have very large windows and in
other cases the stained windows do not
allow enough so that that was another
part of you
study and how to divide yeah these big
volumes yeah because in order to to let
them be make sense like to let multiple
people live in these churches you have
to subdivide them and also is it
possible to create a sort of dual aspect
so that even in a west-facing single
sided oriented dwelling you could still
receive daylight from both sides yeah
and could you maintain certain areas of
the church still untouched so that you
could still experience this special
character precisely so how do you feel
about it now I mean that project is very
promising I mean since this is happening
and there's a great deal of potential
and both environmentally I guess and
also of course architects really are you
going to continue with this project yeah
I'm planning to do to like contact
certain institutions who deal with who
know which church is going to be coming
available
I could also contact the occupier and
show them my teasers and tell them I can
transform your church in a sustainable
way so that you don't have to pay a huge
amount of money per month on energy
maybe that will like convince them to
hire me and give them advice ruff I know
that you two started with a topic that
you had in mind from I do not remember
if it was from the very beginning but
anyway from early on and which you have
carried to its completion with a design
project we we have in fact and and you
continue to be interested in in the
particular topic of embodied carbon and
so can you
yeah I would say about you your
experience with this
XANA mark dissertation now of a longer
duration also long day hmm
it is true that the initial taking is a
good time to pursue your personal
curiosity or your research interest and
in that sense I have always had a
curiosity about the body pheromone so I
started researching a bit about it in
the first research papers mmm checking
that it would actually make sense to
pursue that in a bigger scale and a
bigger project as dissertation so when
we started I remember like analyzing the
five pioneering buildings here in the UK
and Europe and that somehow was setting
the basis through a very intense
research period extracting the lessons
that would actually be applicable for
our letter later design proportion so in
a way there was this first stage of
research somehow shared with my MSC
emesis colleagues and then I took the
all those outcomes to design a building
at home can see it on the screen like a
building of his building in central
central London the challenge here was
more to able to will surroundings in a
very very dense urban environment and
how the building mass will respond to
that providing an environment for the
for the people working there of course
while minimizing operational energy the
energy used to operate the building and
then the energy used for for the
materials to actually build it we had
spent quite a bit of time shaping this
building so as to enhance improve the
the potential of day lighting and fresh
air for for ventilation and so the form
the the form that eventually followed is
the result of this detailed analysis
here we see some of the views of it yeah
actually in the curves on both sides
were somehow shaped to allow the maximum
daylight in the building and at the same
time they allow the Sun to reach to
those corridors are very very specific
moments of the year
like lunchtime in autumn that this one
is mostly needed and then all those
environmental strategies result in
temperatures that are kept inside the
building naturally without mechanical
system in the comfort range but also
impact heavily on the design and how to
perceived on the interior and from the
exterior it performs different and it
looks different well thank you thank you
both I I'm told we we have some
questions well one question that that we
have is about the distinction between
the MSE and earmark and sustainable
Environmental Design
now what happens is that our students
come primarily from architecture they're
mostly architects occasionally we get
one or two engineers usually either
civil engineers structural engineers and
so essentially the notion of design and
being able to apply the principles that
we teach in the context of a design
project is their paramount whether
they're doing the MSE or their mark
however the conditions and the timing
allows the ax marks both a reflection
and a little bit more time in their
hands to develop a project for which
usually they will go back on location in
their own country
study the urban context take some
measurements study the build precedents
perhaps starting with traditional
architecture than any contemporary
precedence that either reflect what is
being built all the best of what is
being
and then developed a design breakin come
back to develop the design project what
is there is no such time for the
embassies in doing that and so
essentially the distinction is that with
embassy we'll look at design
applicability that the research that the
students undertake culminates with
certain principles with certain results
guidelines and these become the basis
for applying either within a certain
building type to its variants or across
across the climatic regions of a
particular country whereas the mark
dissertation finishes as a design
application that is for a specific
context climate and site so that's the
very commonly asked question what are
the phase now that is something that I
know very little about but I know that
the phase will be announced by the a
school's website in January 2018 and
will I become a qualified architect upon
completion well almost all of our
students are already qualified
architects in their own countries and
they they do not seek qualification here
they they seek specialization which is
what we offer
can I apply without an undergraduate
degree in architecture well yes possibly
with an undergraduate degree in some
other disciplines like engineering as I
mentioned at the very beginning most
welcome what are my career prospects
after I complete this program 1 million
pounds please for this question what do
you think well you must have been quite
good both of you different what are you
so I'm working now as an environmental
consultant so we advise architects on
how to sustainable the build their
projects and you and you graduated two
months ago how about you yeah I think
you're advertising your new company we
my colleagues here
I met a best school and the program we
set up our own in practice and we're now
working doing sustainable environmental
design consultancy for architects have
to get up do we have to take I have to
get up because my nose is running
ok it's winter here if anyone is
watching and so yeah we finish the
program and right after we've done this
and practice when we are working with
architects I are on the world at the
moment which quick and finding finding a
job I mean yeah
how are you finding like working in a
big practice I mean I think it's it's
it's nice that you because in
consultancy you must also notice that
you switch very quick between projects
if that projects on the same time yeah
if you if you are an architect probably
your project will be taking 10 years but
we we just give some advice and then we
move on to the next project so I think
that's quite interesting to switch
I think our very specialized field and
somehow like growing up there is like
some yeah becoming more and more
demanded and do you do you want to
return as an architect ever it's a
challenging question probably at some
point I'm sure right now we are very
specialized in this consultancy which is
what I most liked I working next to
architects and shaping the building
together not necessarily going all
throughout the stages so difficult to
answer
yes okay well I'm really very pleased
for both of you thank you both for
joining me on this and thank you for the
audience well I have a slide there with
my email address and our website address
for people who want to ask any questions
at any time well thank you very much for
watching and bye from the in London bye
