and so it is it is quite telling that we
have an exhibition as such at the
architectural Association one of the
main questions we get at forensic
architecture every time that we present
our work is what does architecture have
to do with human rights or what does
half architecture have to do with
forensics or or any evidentiary
techniques and the answer we give
usually is that we need to consider the
way that warfare is happening today so
in the past warfare used to used to
happen in open battlefields and where
people would militaries would meet and
now more and more war takes place in
cities so contemporary warfare email is
mainly urban which means that somehow
the buildings themselves also become
witnesses to the events that take place
and perhaps within this kind of
formulation we can consider spatial
practitioners architects Urbanists urban
planners as having a very specific and
very unique perspective into into
warfare and in understanding how war is
conducted so architects know how to read
buildings know how to read the traces of
buildings know why buildings of collapse
can understands if a building has has
collapsed from an earthquake or it has
been bulldozed or it has been targeted
by airstrikes or shelling and so somehow
within that kind of formulation I'm
really excited to hear the work tonight
which has these two perspectives and a
kind of a more an understanding of
weaponry in the way that it is used and
an understanding of of urban planning
and architecture within the kind of
larger and kind of umbrella of herbicide
the term that I think we have to be
talking more and more about within this
context so it is my great pleasure to
introduce the two speakers today
and first Ana de Courcey wheeler is an
advisor for article 36 which is a
uk-based not-for-profit organization
working to prevent the unintended
unnecessary or unacceptable harm caused
by certain weapons and a member of the
international network network for
explosive weapons ana has previously
worked on conflict prevention at the
International Crisis Group the freedom
fund columbia school of international
political affairs and NYU's school of
law
she has began her career in Ronda
investigating and documenting crimes
committed during the 1994 genocide and I
was also working in on post genocide
access to justice and Amara zhuzh is an
architect at of Arab and partners
international here in London she studied
architecture in Homs in Syria and
completed his PhD in architecture at the
University of Bath current research
focuses on local international responses
to destruction and displacement in Syria
and the politics of reconstruction which
is a really interesting question I would
like to hear more about his recent
article a tale of a syrian city at war
destruction resilience and memory in
Homs was recently published in the city
I'm very excited to hear more about it
and we'll come back with with questions
just to let everyone know the format
will be 20 minutes presentation by Ana
20 minutes presentation by Amer and then
we will open it up for the discussion
thank you very much
thank you
so I'm gonna start off with a slight
apology which is that I am recovering
from a lung infection and possible
cracked rib so if I start coughing don't
worry I'm not about to expire and I have
a video that I can switch to and excuse
myself for a quick minute but today I'm
going to focus on the humanitarian
impact of explosive weapons so put more
simply the harms these weapons caused to
civilians and in particular I want to
cause about talk about the scale of the
harms that we see as a humanitarian
organization the range of physical and
psychological harms their cause to
civilians as well as the impact on
buildings and essential infrastructure
and services so first and very briefly I
just wanted to give a quick explanation
of what we're talking about when I refer
to explosive weapons what we're talking
about and what is of particular concern
so when we talk about explosive weapons
we're talking about weapons such as
aircraft bombs artillery rockets mortars
grenades and some IEDs and these weapons
function by projecting blast and
fragmentation around the point of
detonation that so the the core of the
definition of explosive weapons and for
us of particular interest and concern
are those weapons that have wide-area
effects so that affect a large
geographic area around their point of
detonation and this can be because of
the sheer scale of explosive force that
they project essentially something like
a large aircraft bomb the size of the
explosive this can be because of
inaccuracy of delivery so there are
certain weapons which are by nature
rather inaccurate they can land
somewhere within a wide area such as
artillery systems and weapons that use
multiple warheads or multiple firings so
something like a multi barrel rocket
launcher and just to give you a quick
demonstration of what this looks like in
terms of firing on a town or city
Geneva International Centre for
humanitarian demining has launched some
what they as it's essentially an
explosive weapons simulator so you
choose your weapon you choose how
populated your area is you choose the
distance and the direction of fire and
they simulate what that impact would be
on an urban area so here it just as a
small example I've chosen a multi barrel
rocket launch bm-21 this is widely used
in recent and current conflicts it's
Russia next name is Hale because it can
launch up to 40 122 millimeter Rockets
in just under 20 seconds so 40 Rockets
20 seconds and it ranges up to 20
kilometers and at a range of 20
kilometers when a full salvo of 40
Rockets is fired the lethal area extends
up to 600 by 600 meters so just to give
an impression of of what an impact would
look like you'll see in this previous
picture you can see the the red cross
marks the target and you can see in the
next picture the expected area or
pattern of harm that we would see so
moving on from that some figures which I
find particularly illustrative and
striking when we're talking about the
impact of explosive weapons in populated
areas so 92 percent this is the
percentage of civilian casualties that
we see when X place explosive weapons
are used in populated areas so that if
you're talking about 10 people killed or
injured nine of them at least are going
to be civilians and this is a consistent
figure we see year-on-year and this is
perhaps an underestimation these are the
figures drawn from work done by action
on armed violence and they track the
casualty figures from English reported
media from explosive weapons so that's
already just a very thin slice
of what these kind of incidents look
like on the ground in in most effective
countries each year around 60 to 70
countries experience explosive violence
so this is a problem that's by no means
confined to high-profile complex or to
certain regions of the globe it's
widespread from Latin America to Asia
Africa Europe the Middle East no region
is spared around 40,000 civilians were
reportedly killed and the battle over
Mosul gives you a sense of the scale of
tragedy the scale of civilian harm who
are seeing and 80% of Recker was left
uninhabitable according to the UN now
these just give a numerical snapshot
that shows the scale of the problem
we're facing and for me they provides a
very stark reminder of the sheer levels
of the civilian harm that are inflicted
by these weapons and there's certainly
no doubt among those of us that are
working on it and really no doubt at all
that civilians are the ones who are
disproportionately affected by the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas
and I just want to be clear here that
I'm not talking just about the
intentional targeting of civilians
there's a lot of great work being done
around the targeting deliberate
targeting of schools and of hospitals
and trying to raise awareness around
that and it is of course a huge problem
but what I'm talking about is not just
intentional targeting but actually the
impact on civilians and on civilian
infrastructure that happens even when
militaries are targeting what is a
legitimate military target purely
because of their choice of weapons their
choice of an explosive weapon with
wide-area effects and I think when you
see figures such as these it becomes
really clear
badly we are failing to protect
civilians in conflict and that's
something I'll come back to you later
when I talk about possible responses and
the harm is unfortunately familiar to a
lot of us we witness it almost daily on
the news part of ongoing conflicts and
there are aftermath we see it in Yemen
Ukraine Afghanistan Somalia Iraq Syria
though it's occurring in many other
states that don't so readily make our
news cycles and we're seeing
year-on-year tens and tens of thousands
of civilians are killed and injured from
the use of explosive weapons in towns
and cities the death and maiming of
civilians is the most immediate and
visceral form of harm caused by
explosive weapons so the civilians next
to the detonation of a large exposed
weapon are almost inevitably killed the
blast wave from an explosive force can
cause traumatic amputation of limbs
fatal blood loss organ collapse and
significant brain injury the heat from
the explosion can cause severe burns to
those at close range weapon fragments
and other materials that are projected
by an explosion can pierce and impair
vital organs shred limbs damaged
eyesight people can also be propelled
into other objects or crushed by
collapsing or damaged structures
resulting in death or life in altering
injuries these include complex factors
and spinal and brain damage and of
course the impact of blast and
fragmentation wounds can be especially
acute in children who's smaller younger
bodies are more vulnerable and whose
bones are more pliable and whose
injuries can be particularly difficult
to treat and rehabilitate and then for
survivors the injuries they suffer can
result in long-term debilitating
physical conditions including the loss
of limbs blindness loss of hearing and
as I mentioned before brain trauma and
then even once the immediate fighting
has moved on basic safety remains an
ongoing concern for these civilians not
least due to the threat of death or
injury from annex
ordnance and beyond the physical injury
those exposed to explosive weapons can
also suffer severe mental trauma I put
up here a story collected by one of our
members humanity and inclusion who have
done a lot of work with Syrian refugees
mental trauma can not just affect those
directly affected by explosive blasts
but also first responders and medical
personnel people who experience the
death of loved ones in some cases the
loss of many family members can be
subject to significant grief and
psychological trauma including
post-traumatic stress disorder in
practical terms this means they struggle
to function in an occupation in social
settings and they suffer elevated risks
of chronic diseases explode exposure to
explosive weapons can also be
particularly traumatic to children at a
critical a critical time in their
psychological development with long-term
effects on their mental health and
children living through bombardments
often display significant behavioral
changes including stopping talking
severe depression sleekness Ness and
bedwetting and augmenting this extreme
level of civilian suffering is the fact
that the bombing and bombardment of
towns and cities and peds even stops
entirely vital humanitarian access and
aid to those in need and certainly what
might in other circumstances be a small
injury can result in wounds festering in
lack of treatment and in we've seen time
and time again the loss of limbs and and
sometimes loss of life going beyond
civilians and looking at the
infrastructure and services even more
people are killed and injured due to the
collapse of buildings or subsequently
the damage to infrastructure that's
vital to their well-being so when we
talk about the impact of explosive
weapons on civilian populations and we
talk about civilian casualty
whereas often we're seeing a very small
very short-term snapshot of what the
real harm is so this destruction are
damage to vital in structure which is
often centralized in towns and cities
can leave people without homes without
shelter without schools and access to
education without hospitals and access
to medical facilities and often at a
time when medical services are most
urgently needed it can destroy power and
water supplies and sanitation systems
it's no coincidence that Yemen is
suffering one of the worst cholera
outbreaks third year running I believe
alongside an incredibly destructive
civil conflict as well as destruction of
water and sanitation and the impact it
has on everyday health it can also have
a huge impact on the ability of other
services to run such as healthcare which
as I mentioned can make preventable
injuries and illnesses life-threatening
this harm is long-term and the effects
can be cumulative I wanted to show this
video this was put together by the ICRC
and it for me demonstrates the way in
which urban services in particular can
be affected by explosive weapons due to
their interdependence and their into the
connectedness it's only I think a
minutes or half long so so have a watch
and see what you think
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
all right see if I can get out of this
name so I think what I hope that
demonstrates is what I have been talking
about in terms of the ways in which the
interconnectedness of infrastructure for
example the taking out of a power plant
can have a huge knock-on effect what the
ICRC and others term reverberating
effects that really affect other
essential services we can all understand
that a hospital being bombed or shelled
means that hospital is rendered out of
use what becomes less obvious is when
services such as power electricity water
are affected how that then has a
knock-on effect on things like education
and healthcare so having given the brief
overview of the the effects and the ways
in which the bombardment of towns in
cities has an incredibly detrimental and
destructive effect on human life and
human ability to go about their daily
business I want to have a quick look at
some of the possible responses I've
flagged international law there because
it inevitably comes up but it's not my
focus today there are laws against
deliberate targeting of civilians but a
measure of civilian loss of life is
technically allowed for under
international humanitarian law known
more colloquially as collateral damage
one of the things we are working on as
part of this broad a piece of work on
explosive weapons is challenging some of
the underlying assumptions around what
level of civilian harm is deemed
acceptable when balanced against a
military target more importantly I
wanted to move on to sort of some of the
some of the work we've been doing as the
international network on explosive
weapons to move state
opinion on this to try to address some
of the harms we're seeing one of the
things we've been working on especially
is trying to promote greater recognition
among states and other armed actors of
this specific pattern of harm there is a
sense amongst both populations and state
actors that this is just what war looks
like now and there's a certain
acceptance that this is how things are
which we very much fight against and
we're asking for a firm commitment from
them not to use explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in towns and cities
successive UN Secretary General's have
for about a decade highlighted this
issue as a top humanitarian priority and
more and more states are expressing
their concerns and committing to action
we've had over 100 states now have
spoken out in different international
fora on this issue expressing their
concern at the huge civilian damage and
loss of life that is caused by the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas
we're also asking for militaries to
revise or otherwise develop specific
operational policies and practices that
better protect civilians
these can better guide the choice of
weapons in populated areas they can set
an operational direction against the use
of those weapons that cause the greatest
risks to civilians and the UN office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
has compiled some military and policy
and practice that shows that where
militaries have restricted the use of
explosive weapons there has been success
in better protecting civilian
populations in particular they looked at
some of the International military
action in Afghanistan and in Somalia and
then fundamentally we see international
political actions specifically an
international political declaration on
explosive weapons
a very powerful tool to respond to the
kinds of harms that I've described so a
number of states have been leading
discussions on this issue for following
calls from the UN secretary-general it
wouldn't be an end in itself
but it would focus attention on
responding to the specific humanitarian
issues associated with these of
explosive weapons in populated areas
it would require commitments designed to
drive activities that prevent and reduce
civilian harm and require action by
endorsing states such as a commitment to
avoid the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in populated areas to
develop national level policies and
practice and to assist affected
individuals and communities it would
also contain a commitment to monitor the
harm caused by explosive weapons to
provide a better framework for
understanding this humanitarian problem
and whilst that might sound like pie in
the sky dream or a pipe dream this this
is actually an issue that's moving
Austria has recently announced that on
the 1st and 2nd of October they will be
hosting an international conference with
the express aim of kick-starting a
process that will lead to an
international political declaration on
this issue so we are seeing movement
though we expect significant pushback
from from particular States but I think
we have numbers on our side in this case
so I'm going to end on that hopeful note
and pass over to my co-panelist who I'm
very happy to be sitting on a panel with
as both my sisters started their careers
at Arab sadly not as architects but it's
wonderful to meet
[Applause]
okay great thank you very much everyone
for coming today and thanks Amnesty
International for the invite an
organization that I had marked for a
very long time for the defense of Human
Rights and also for opening our eyes to
the horrors of war that we are
witnessing can recover I mean from
getting in city and that no one is
talking about so thank you very much
misty and I for hosting this event what
remains of the city when seventy-five
percent of it is destroyed and what
remains of communities when over half
the population is displaced from their
homes what remains when the markers of
the past are deliberately erased what
remains of memory and what remains of
places we loved and what remains of us
over eight years have passed since the
start of the start of the crisis in
Syria 2011 marked a turning point in the
modern history of the country with the
mass displacement of millions of
refugees 12.2 million refugees
sorry 12.2 million displaced people
inside me outside Syria and the changing
dynamics of conflict amidst the killing
of over forty four hundred seventy
thousand seven people in Syria since
2011 as the community to start 2016
another tragedy tragedy has been taking
place or beside the killing of the built
environment and the deliberate
destruction of its social cultural and
spacial fabrics in Homs the third
largest city in the country and the
force of this presentation entire
neighborhoods have been erased to the
ground based on a series of interviews I
have taken with Syrians inside and
outside Syria I will explore in a
presentation the emerging relations
between the Orban past and the present
a citizen struggle to survive to sustain
lives to envision future memories of the
pre-war homes and the surviving parts of
the city have become imagined and
material material places of refuge for
many horses in the world of remembering
reflecting and seeking to the Richter to
reconstruct a vanished past but also
must be used to rethink the city and to
imagine its future by using this as the
Polish kind of approach to the urban and
narrating the stories of Syrians at a
time of conflict I hope that this
research brings the element of a human
agency to the question of Syrian
reconstruction an element that is always
forgetting in the questions of the
construction
I hope it's also human life humanizes
individualizes the struggle of Syrians
cities at war in Syria as an Aleppo and
recurrent a resort and we see now with
live and for long time lately have been
radically reshaped by conflict with the
massive destruction off of the
environments there are 6.1 million
internally displaced Syrians in Syria
making it the largest internally
displaced population in the world
contested divided and several times
besieged Homs has been transformed by
the world which destroyed the familiar
and transforms the sphere of everyday
life of urban citizens schools must
churches unfinished buildings turned
into collective shelters traced in to
transform that transformed into in-home
and local markets and suburbs were
divided to divide communities from each
other by urban frontier
checkpoints walls entire neighborhoods
have become jungles of rebel and ruins
some people have come to feel exiled in
their own City disorientated and lost
this they lose the sense of belonging to
the city that they
and to their homeland as the structures
spaces and the people they cherish where
are no longer there in time for then the
intense destruction of the built
environment involves more than
destruction of the material objects and
culture and the destruction of community
architecture thwart at war Robert
Whitman highlights that to lose that is
familiar the destruction of one's
environment can mean a disorientating
exile from the memories they have
involved it is the threat of loss to
one's collective identity and the skill
continuity of those identities monuments
synagogues mosques churches museums and
libraries become the target and the way
to erase the collective and individual
memory of communities this deliberate
and widespread destruction of urban
environment has come to be known as or
beside in cities under siege or beside
is defined by by Stephen Graham as the
political violence intentionally
designed to raise or kill cities or
beside can involve the a strong
nationalist targeting of spaces of
cosmopolitan mixing the systemic
devastation of means of living in modern
urban life or the direct result of
demonized people and places and places
declared to be unmodern
barbarian frankly in pathological or
some human the herbicide of Syrian
cities has not been limited to
destruction of the markers of the past
as we saw in my own door ancient city of
Aleppo
it has included people's ordinary houses
and homes expelling millions of of them
from their homelands displacing
displaced within or outside Syria the
suffering of these people is not going
about closing the property or being
forcibly displaced but as communal one
of you CL says it is also the the
powerful symbolic erosion of security
social well-being and place of
attachment in the aside or the willful
destruction of home the authors have
noted that the willful destruction of
loved home can thus be one of the
deepest wounds to one's identity and
self-esteem for both of these props to
such a sanity I reside in part of
objects and structures that we charge
when war entered the Syrian city it
dramatically changed the day-to-day
routines of citizens people have found
themselves and displaced multiple times
living in doand neighborhoods and losing
the right to access certain areas in
their City but despite the mass
destruction and monumental displacement
of citizens from conflict zones such
what we see in Syria people find
extremely extraordinary levels of
resilience and curious mechanisms and
strategies to carry on with their own
everyday life thus to better and
understand the processes and effects of
Orbis life and domicile
there is a need to move beyond the
physical destruction of cities toward
understanding the impact of such
destruction on people and the ways they
cope resist and respond to the conflict
and crisis in cities the destruction of
homes the alban conflict in home started
in the very early stages of the syrian
conflict and the city was given the name
as the capital of the revolution
demonstrations took place in a city
centre and especially in this part of
the city the
clock tower asaji de clock tower and
since early 2011 Homs has been heavily
affected by by this body crisis today we
have fifty percent of homes
neighborhoods heavily damaged and
further twenty-two percent of the city
partially damaged this mass destruction
and tons of tangible built environment
as well as the wider violent conflict
led to the large displacement of ibrahim
homes i'm showing in this screen this
place where people marched in a city
center and then how this clock tower
turned into a simple where it has been
recreated and reproduced as a site of
memory in different places where the
site was no longer accessible by people
so we can see it was on refugee camps or
in other neighborhoods or cities
misplaced houses have either left the
city mainly to other cities or to run
areas to Lebanon or to Lebanon or have
been displaced internally in Homs there
are in turn displaced people who had to
flee twenty-five times because every
time they moved to the world follows
them Christine
a Syrian woman who is based now in
Europe said when she returned to Homs in
2017 the city that we used to know is no
longer existing it's ugly ugly ugly many
houses share similar feelings of pain
and grief when they talk about their own
loved spaces many of which have vanished
being vandalized or destroyed the
destruction of neighborhoods have has
impacted on the lotta memory and the
sense of attachment to the city people
used to know their army and architects
on homes talk about the sense of
strangeness that he felt in his own City
he said when I first saw the destruction
I felt powerless what can we do nothing
will be solved anymore
I felt emptiness and everything was
negative when I was between their wounds
I felt loneliness solitude and distance
distance from my people and my society I
felt a stranger in my own City
yes mean an architect in-home sources
told me that destruction destroys me
I wish the city has rebuilt soon because
it's based the heart summer the
residents in Homs described losing their
sense of attachment and belonging to the
city not only because of destruction of
the built environment but also because
of the death and displacement of many
horses they no longer recognize the
people around them no longer are able to
find the same neighbors or the
shopkeepers there are no longer able to
sustain their connections and friends
because of the movement and displacement
in his appearance of money now responses
to displacement under structure now
before singing on this and in this
section there are several local and
international organizations working in
in Syrian response to a destruction
displacement I missed here some of them
one of the active charities that called
Jamaat Albert a charity that was found
in 1956 but it has now expanded
enormously with the crisis it has an
engineering office which was the only
rehabilitation of returnees own in 2017
the church in collaboration with the
UNHCR rehabilitated 214 apartments in
the whole city in Homs so 1300 people
have benefited from the project such
projects enable ideal is to return to
their doand homes and bring back
actually damaged areas and house they
also do a lot of projects beyond the
physical rehabilitation doing to
encourage my care societal efforts in in
a society one of the people who work in
this charity Amalia Talbert talked to me
and said that the happiness of being
able to provide shelter to one family as
the reason that makes us forget all the
fatigue and the hard work we go through
all these are forgetting when you see a
family that was staying in one room or
in a staircase in abandoned building or
school he said the collective shorter
returning to their home and you are able
to help them doing so this is the
ultimate goal of the project and the
code that I'm working for on the ground
my DBS and those who support them have
adopted several mechanisms and
approaches to access shelter hosting has
been one of the chief mechanisms of
support in turn displaced people
including 30% of the city in 2014
families and friends who have more than
one properties or those who have fed
before the war or who have migrated
before the war have offered their own
properties to friends and relatives
hosting shows the cultural connections
between houses that can also help those
outside Syria to protect their homes
since many of these house could be
rooted or questioned by others when they
move another primary sponsor
displacement has been the emergence of
connected shelters where IDB is lived
together in shared spaces in schools or
most or churches or unfinished public
buildings this are a few examples of the
current rehabilitations the market in
homes colony of the UN agencies and the
palace or a restaurant can see destroyed
in 2014 and rebuilt in 2016 beyond the
work of the local and international
organizations there are individuals who
are working by themselves since nobody
is helping them and one person told me
everyone is an architect in France now
which means that because of the
challenge is that there is no enough
response to the challenges that people
have - this person has multiple degrees
but his king his flat
every day it has been displaced nine
times so far and he said I hope that the
tenth move will be back home there would
be I'll be living with my family
together now moving to the question of
memorial remembrance at a time of
destruction and displacement hamsters
have sought to sought refuge and memory
with the emergence of plans to reshape
entire neighborhoods of of Syrian cities
local architects and citizens are
reconstructing and renewed interest all
is identity and cultural heritage and
the sense of self belonging social media
signs have been created to archive
document and represent different parts
of the city to record before
even small details like images of
traditional houses doors windows or
ordinary scenes of people working in the
city have become very critically
important now since everything around us
is being erased members of the Syrian
diaspora are reimagining their former
homes and recreating spaces decorated
and designed to reflect the life they
had before similar themes of memory
identity and home appear in Halil of
each book places of pen for this place
person persons memory and identity is
performed reconstruct and renegotiated
daily for displacement radically
reshaped identity this compelling an
intimate description places of pain and
belonging that were lost during the 1992
to 95 war it was near inherited as well
as survival places in settlement
Australian Europe North America serve as
a powerful illustration of the complex
interplay between place memory and
identity these places of humiliation and
suffering are also places of desire for
displaced survivors in Waiting emulating
their former homes in the far corners of
the globe where they have visited today
with the or beside and the my side of
tangible and intangible cultural
heritage people are recording the life
they had before the war and remembering
the spaces and places they loved in many
cases they are no longer existing
revisiting the memory of the old city of
Homs and remembering sometimes
romanticizing the past in different
parts of the city are becoming more
critical now than before the war people
used the bus as evidence of where they
come they are coming from as a as a
marker of continuity of civilizations
that
and in the region maybe in the memory
and investigating the relationship
between the past of Holmes and his
future will be essential for drast
rooted and grounded reconstruction
projects that align with the memory of
urban citizens their traditions and
aspirations the aim of the memory
mapping project is to assist Holmes is
to recover to remember and to reflect on
the and contribute to the conversation
of rebuilding Syria vamsi respondents
remembered their time in a church for
instance or their works in the old city
of Homs but some of them was remembered
like more humble spaces like falafel
shops or Hamas shops so everything get
caught by a guy who said I want a Muslim
restaurant reopen I won't crash to Rio
and I want all these small shops that
people might like before the world to be
opened back which I'm bringing these
small conversations to contradict with
the dominant conversations we hear about
monumental and historical reconstruction
projects and forgetting about the
everyday so now it's not the question
that will face a look at this time of
crisis to remember what to forget to
rebuild exactly the reward city or to
reconstruct a new urban and social and
cultural fabric how much to remember and
how much to forget and one is enough
remembrances enough these are some of
the questions here an artist inside and
outside Syria are asking well as
reconstruction plans emerged some have
very same opinions as Grace who is now a
Syrian Christian living in in Qatar who
said that
hums and its own city should be
completely destroyed and rebuilt again
from scratch for her the wave of
destruction during the war before by
more ways of destruction after the war
however the most darkest I spoke with
have contradicting opinions on this
the future would be good yes Meena said
if we as architects and societal
specialists are able to build a bridge
between the past and future if we were
able to architectural bring the city
back to its characteristics and as a
society if we were able to bring back
the humanity the love to help each other
spreading hope and healing the things
that have been broken then the future
would be better but this will take time
I'm optimistic about a few a better
future and the need to learn from the
past and its mistakes we don't you keep
memory not only of the pre-war city but
also of the world itself might also
inform the work of artists in homes with
reserving the scars of war is a good
that many post-disaster cities have
followed like the remains of the Berlin
wall or the Coventry Cathedral that was
kept as it is ruined
or the the remarks of whistling the VNA
or did everything here both to remember
the past and as a quotient to the future
and ruin lost the critique Brian
generally asked why are we fascinated by
the winds he suggested that joins record
the girl the glory of the civilizations
and a certain end of our own ruin stands
as monument to historic disasters but
also provoked dreams about futures from
from destruction and decay ruins are
bleak but alluring reminders of our
vulnerable place in time and space I
think it's important not to forget what
were you to by whitewashing the
reconstruction of the remembering the
times of war in raising them will be
crucial for the future of Syria too
and remember and to never forget the
grief and the pain and tragedy of
millions of Syrians now this is just a
final slide reconstruction has been
destruction at times of chaos and
displacement reason researchers have
examined the impact of destruction of
the built environment and citizens
collective and individual memory and the
sense of loss we have when Beirut in
Lebanon when Beirut City Center in
Lebanon was cleared to be rebuilt after
the war
Hashem Starkey's MIT said it's created a
collective homesickness for base which
is even for those who still reside in
Beirut there are debates in Syria or
reconstructing the built environments by
raising entire and entire neighbourhoods
and areas and planting copies of high
high-rise buildings and vitreous
apartment buildings the are first that
the reconstruction can bring a new wave
of violence and that reconstruction can
be the new landscape of conversation and
that reconstruction can be a distraction
of all these destructive constructions
will be on the land soft with the blood
or the blood of our beloved Syrians
[Applause]
presentations and I've been starting the
first questions already and my kind of
my question is more more than
reservation and it has to do with those
two kind of strands of research that has
been kind of in a way to curated
together today and one of them seems to
be talking about the particularity of
the technology that is used in order to
create herbicide right so and
understanding that those weapons are not
designed for cities and understanding
that the weapons are indiscriminate the
precise or accurate enough and somehow
you know going along with this argument
we could argue for optimization we could
argue for more precise weaponry and and
the question there is whether this is
enough because we have cases where we
also have drones that are quite precise
that are used to for for quite specific
targets and yet we still have civilian
because again the kind of targeting
there is also a matter of intelligence
that happens from the ground and it's
very difficult in cities to know who is
in a movement at any given moment so one
of those arguments is let's figure out a
better way to conduct war and then
there's another understanding that goes
a different way of thinking about this
which is explosive weapons and the use
of lethal force in that scale not only
deactivates the target but completely
reorganize his life it completely
changes the frame of reference it's both
destroys vital infrastructures and
frames rhythms that have that are more
cultural or or ways of life that that
have to do with with either that kind of
a domestic way of life
family way of life very kind of a basic
understanding of identity and so what
why kind of observing those those kind
of two strands of thinking and you know
within those country that we presented
kind of contributions I would like to
ask how could we how do you consider
your role as practitioners of different
kinds and in somehow enacting change how
do you consider our olace by standards
passive or active by standards in in
kind of allowing both possibly allowing
this to happen and actively and somehow
doing something to to express our
discontent and how can we think both as
as civil society but also as
professionals and specialists and
experts in ways that we could challenge
that spirit I would challenge what we
see through this very specific case of
herbicides in house how do we how could
we think differently about it and what
kind of what kind of let's say active
operation or what kind of practice would
allow could become operative in various
fields and forms how could we actually
influence decision making
we like change Technic I think it's
really a complex and complicated
question to think about this because
it's beyond governments and parking
groups but what we what we're witnessing
these days in and this new Wars in
cities and cities but we can see that
not even one is targeted or a specific
site but this destruction of massive
very less areas are being used as
collective punishment or so it's not
only that we want to to fight when drew
but we want to fight everyone supporting
that cool and we want to destroy all
this neighborhood because we don't want
them here so that's the reason but other
point that I wanted to touch on regards
to tor beside that we can also witness
what what we call the peacetime
herbicide or the herbicide out of the
fighting context where yes because as I
said that people are seen
informant areas or informal settlements
they can be deposited and their
neighborhoods can be raised within the
years of Forman not because they are
fighting groups in that area but because
that's the shift from focusing on one
specific site or once this building
tools deliberately yeah so I can maybe
talk about a little bit about our
approach which is a humanitarian
disarmament approach which essentially
has I guess two key elements one is
promoting a better understanding of the
issue were looking at as a humanitarian
problem so promoting a more nuanced
understanding among audiences such as
this but also amongst governments
diplomats and militaries about the
impacts of their weapons choices and not
just in the immediate term there are
some militaries that subdue some level
of casualty recording it's the
techniques vary and and vary in efficacy
but bits of trying to show the broader
picture beyond that beyond the immediate
the immediate deaths and injuries that
they can see by satellite or by drone
the other another strands of our work is
thence of trying to elaborate on the
international legal rules that apply so
there is a entire body of law
dedicated to protecting civilians in
conflict and yet there is a need to put
meat on the bones of that law to
understand really what it means
in day-to-day decisions that military
commanders are taking and we work to
encourage that and there has been some
major successes in humanitarian disarm
and if we look at the mine ban treaty
recent nuclear weapons treaty ban to
cluster munitions ban they're always
going to be those who operate outside
the law but there's a lot that the law
can offer and a lot that international
structures can offer that we can push to
improve upon in terms of looking at how
[Music]
weapons are chosen and what weapons
should be used
I'm very firmly of the opinion that as a
humanitarian my job is not to tell
militaries what weapons to choose it's
not to advise them how to better conduct
military operations we have amazing
scientific and military minds working
for some of the armies around the globe
that have created such devastation my
job is really to point to the
humanitarian harm and say this is
completely unacceptable and not
necessarily to offer solutions as much
as I can point to particular operations
where where the operational policies
have managed to curb some of the worst
civilian casualties but it's really not
my job to do the weapon earing and the
weapons decisions for them or to sort of
promote precision weapons against others
as you say precision weapons have a
whole host of their own problems
so-called precision weapons can still
deliver a payload that is large enough
to have a wide area effect so it may
precisely hit its target but along with
its target it affects a huge area around
that point of destination and
and causes a huge amount of civilian
harm there's also the problems of
intelligence and how targets are chosen
so so for me I steer clear of that not
because I don't think there are things
that militaries can do better there's a
huge amount they can do better one of
the best things militaries can do is
share their practices with other
militaries so that best practices are
shared and worked and improved upon but
for me very much focused on on really
illuminating the extent of the harms and
one thing I thought was really
interesting in that hour's presentation
was the the ways in which the current
urban warfare is interacting with
displacements we are currently seeing
record numbers of displaced and we are
seeing records length of times of
displacement so people are unable to go
back to their homes both because those
homes have been destroyed and because
the areas have been contaminated so
badly from explosive weapons so we see
not only initial displacements but
multiple displacements you were you
referenced someone who had moved nine
times and was hoping the tent would be
an opportunity to move home this is a
very common story I think our of
partners humanity and inclusion recorded
on average 1313 moves within Syria
before people fled across the border to
Lebanon this is this choice of weapon
earring and this decision to wage war in
this way is contributing to the biggest
humanitarian crisis we've seen in
decades and it's prolonging it and and I
think for that reason that's our that's
our focus
talking about the displacement of people
to what extent underlying herbicides the
kind of hatred of the city you know you
talk about a love for the city with
people within it but the people that are
actually destroying it today that I hate
the city do you think do you think that
this is a form of counter-revolution
that we're gonna see more more
intensified in the 21st century is that
kind of what you're saying in your
presentation no no I mean I like what
Hashem said is also in the same week in
the resilient city when he described the
destruction of Beirut in the temple
reconstruction he said that that there
was a sense of like sense of like losing
that I believe or the trust in the city
and there was a sense of people who felt
that there's a need for this to be
destroyed like it's a many people before
the war in Syria thought of problems or
challenges in the city but not in a way
to distract the city and to be able to
play the new one but of course there
were many problems and challenges but
I'm not trying to say in my presentation
that people felt that way but there is
still that attachment of space
attachment to the small spaces to to the
story of the city but now as we're
witnessing there are people even with
good intentions who are calling for
the city so there's a proposal that was
published at the Riv a by a Syrian
architect calling to have to say that
the city is dead and we have to leave
the city and go somewhere else because a
proposal with a new vision I mean that's
the narrative that some people are
coming and that's what the object was
because I also said that the city is
it's full of problems that was the time
to destroy everything and start again so
before the war I remember when I came to
to thousands and tiny presentation they
talked about the project that was called
the hamsa dream which before the war
called for destroying the the city
center is trying all these humble
buildings and building brandnew high
[Music]
various buildings and tower blocks which
many people supported and many many
others were against and that was the
first time where people who are the shop
owners and the people of the city
marched in the streets and say we don't
want this to happen a stop before the
crisis so there was that push and pull
so there were some new artists who
called for this and like till now with
with the times education that you can
sometimes get in Syria you can be told
that anything all that it's not good
that you have to move it so you can't
have people who come from that
perspective and they say if a building
is for 50 years of why do I have to keep
it and why do I have to keep the social
and the cultural fabric of the city so
he have many people like this even they
could have good intentions and that
would be very dangerous
a similar case happened
in the average unit and the sum of 30
where as a conflict it was used as a way
into completely regenerates in the city
and his place in the current population
who's centered the erica was and so it's
interesting to see also how conflict
this is somehow strategize or use
tactically in order to enact a kind of
more long term change that might not be
read as such in the beginning but slowly
with it starts to become apparent just
you know displace a population with
another one
[Music]
first of all thank you for both your
presentations but one of the things I
thought interesting was you brought up
Robert Bevins book destruction of memory
and I remember I watched a documentary
based around the themes of that book and
a couple of years ago and like the two
things in that film that followed was
like a trying to get like cultural
genocide passed through UN law and like
be following the trial of a Muslim
militant who had destroyed a cultural
building in Timbuktu and like when we
come to looking at you know getting
similar laws for the use of weapons such
as in the first presentation you know
this cultural genocide conversation
started happening in the 50s and
obviously we need a bit more a Rapid
Response to go through UN law rather
than taking like 67 years again and
again be with you know that Muslim it
was very obviously was him who's doing
it so he was blond trial very obvious
reasons you know if a law would would go
to pass how would you kind of get
someone to who would actually be
responsible who would actually be up on
trial you know with you know when it
comes to like you ask of a military
governments or you know militias you
know maybe it's a bit of a tricky
question to ask because it's quite all
perspectives but no it's a good question
to ask because some this is something we
get from States and me being cynical I
always accuse them of wilfully
misunderstanding but but knowing that
it's not clear is it's useful to me I
can maybe be a bit kinder to my
diplomatic counterparts we're not asking
for a new law we're not suggesting new
law is made I have had some states
suggest that it should be law in them in
serve in a very enthusiastic response to
my my lobbying but but no we're not
looking to make new law what we're
asking States to do is explain what they
understand the basis of current law to
be and to elaborate how what there
means in the context of using explosive
weapons so we are not asking for a new
political new legal instrument we're
asking for a political declaration which
is essentially an international pledge
to stop or avoid using explosive weapons
in populated areas and they can sign up
to this willingly and it will be sort of
self self monitored in that we're
currently we've had 20 and let me get
the numbers right 21 Latin American
Caribbean states indicate they would
like to sign up to something like this
and they have issued a communiquÃ© at the
end of last year to that effect we have
had 19 African states do the same
essentially they would come together it
would give them a forum to hold each
other to account as States it would give
them a forum to exchange ideas on how to
better protect and assist victims it
would give them a forum to share data
and to share military policy and
practice it's not new law it's very much
them saying you know on the basis of the
high likelihood of indiscriminate
effects on civilians we are committing
to avoiding using explosive weapons in
populated areas it's not a very snappy
comms
message but it's essentially there's a
reason why that's such a good language
and it's it's essentially avoiding some
suggesting that this is a legal document
and that this is something that will be
criminalized and penalized in a court it
is essentially sub codes of conduct
standards of behavior and a collective
acknowledgement of what they believe
international humanitarian law means in
the context of using explosive weapons
is that going to be one of the central
pushes of the Austrian symposium they
mentioned
yes so they I believe they've titled the
con the conference protecting civilians
in the urban warfare it will look
specifically its explosive weapons and
the last session they will be looking at
what a political declaration should be
including and will then have two sets of
global consultations in Geneva where all
states all states are invited to the
opening conference all states will be
invited to to contribute to the drafting
of an international political
declaration and then we hope in the
spring we will have sort of signing
ceremony we had something similar it's a
school's declaration where States set up
to have a common understanding of how
military should interact with
educational facilities
there's obviously international law says
do not bomb schools the the intentional
targeting of schools is illegal under
international law but there was a awful
lot of gray areas in terms of militaries
using schools for bases or for storage
of munitions or or what do they do the
school has then been taken over by say a
rebel group does it then become a
legitimate military targets
so the safe schools declaration was
elaborated and set outs of common
understanding among states as to what
what was required of them under
international law even though it wasn't
a legal document in itself
they are currently or all in all in your
care at the moment having a conference
to cease of how this is going but it it
began with 50 state signatories I think
they're over 80 now so we're hoping so
for the same thing
I mean like here and my colleague
Susanna shouri they were organizing a
workshop at misfortune and Robert Levin
was sharing some of the sessions and it
was on getting evidence on the
destruction of cultural heritage and
where they got people from all over the
world with different backgrounds from
military from no damage of course that
the case that you noted and Tim back to
but I don't know if he would be
interested to comment on this
our workshop was specifically looking at
accountability and international
criminal justice so I'm just interested
why you don't want to criminalize this
so well realistically we will never get
not why I won't say never we will at
this stage have no hope of getting
States to criminalize the use of
explosive weapons in towns and cities
it's a non-starter politically these are
the weapons that most militaries have
they're cheap they're widespread they're
old-fashioned and designed for open
battlefields they're completely unsuited
to urban conflict and as populations
become more urbanized and conflict
becomes more urbanized they I couldn't
agree any more that they are completely
unsuitable
but getting States to create a new
international law criminalizing the use
of these weapons in towns and cities
it's it's a non-starter good luck
because even with the rules that exist
and the laws that exist in the and
criminalization and it doesn't really
always work as we know in fact rarely
works so the states that will do it will
do it anyway and the states that
probably wouldn't wouldn't do it whether
they've signed up or not so
yeah oh okay
I really enjoyed the presentation on the
herbicide in particular I thought I
think you touched on this slightly but
didn't necessarily elaborate it so much
because I think at the moment it seems
that herbicide is often kind of viewed
as a byproduct of kind of physical
violence or flight especially the people
from other forms of warfare but then
you've touched slightly on kind of the
intentional displacement of populations
in relation to like populations being
seen as this barbaric or oh you think
you could elaborate more about
specifically how this you know what
what's been happening was that in in
homes in particular I mean in Houston
particular multiple areas were received
at different times so they would besiege
one area of our neighborhood or from
some edema the whole city of Homs or
Atlanta or any other area there are
cases where entire walls were built
around areas and defenses
get out or end and eventually people are
given a chance to given the chance for
Snuggle somewhere else
so that's force displacement many of
these people were were displaced to
another city which which is the target
in many different other Warfare's you
can see the same patterns over looking
at a site that I mentioned in the
presentation and what we saw in in
conferences and in other cities is that
there is a correlation between the level
of destruction and because I'm from from
what I understand from a military
perspective this is kind of classified
as spatial control strategically from
military strategic standpoint so it's
interesting that one of the kind of
questions that started with which
Christina mentioned before is like what
does human rights have to do for
architecture and it absolutely has to do
human right human rights because I've
been architectures there's there's
evidence that architecture can be used
as a weapon you know but yeah
even now the emerging conversations on
the land ownership and the property
rights they are all organized and there
are admitted are emerging writings on
these issues like how do you easily in
wartime whitewash peoples ownership and
force people to be I mean it's awesome
Anthony's think about this and the
lecture but how you can in the name of
reconstruction and making the city a
modern one you can host the original
hope to be somewhere else that in their
own place
I think on that note I think we we
should probably set up a whole new
series of talks about how architecture
is weaponized but I think for today this
is a great be extended thank you very
much
[Applause]
