welcome to the AAA to everybody who is
visiting and hello to all of those who
you are who are residents here I am I
just have I my name is Samantha Harding
for anybody who is visiting director of
the AAA I have just the most this is the
this is the highlight of my year I can
honestly say I know it doesn't get well
it is a measure that there you go and I
you know I can't I can't say I feel like
I'm getting married it's just really
it's not gonna happen so it's okay I
just this is such a privilege to be able
to introduce John Walter and who was who
has been a friend for a very long time
but more importantly a colleague and who
I'd talked with last year in diploma
unit 7 one year that's all we got
but who knows you never know what will
happen next we'll just wait and see and
but it was the most incredible year I
have to say John is quite a lot younger
than me you wouldn't know but he is
quite a lot younger than me and I've
always thought he is actually my senior
because I have I don't think I've ever
learned more from anybody else in my
entire life maybe one and one other
person but I've learnt more from John
about everything really and I weren't
going to gory details but really
everything and mostly more importantly
related to this evening about the word
shonky which is just something a word we
all used around the house but actually
it really is something shonky actually
is something and john has made it
something I should I should also say
that John has made shonky something
because he is doctor of alien sex which
I don't know whether it while it is
obviously related but that that kind of
accolade what is that that that title
means that he can make a word exist in
the world actually because it means that
he's worked incredibly hard
for many many years to figure out what
that thing is he continues to work out
what that thing is but it means it
becomes part of a vocabulary and a part
of a global vocabulary in fact which
isn't is not an insignificant thing to
do actually so and he has done that
through literally blood sweat and tears
and phenomenal amounts of energy and I
have never known someone to work so
prolifically
as John or as politically I'm sorry my
grammars now and gone out the window
he's already started giving me gin and
tonic so that's not good not a good
start that just I have never known
anyone work as tirelessly as John and in
order to to be able to put a word really
or to validate a word in the in the
English dictionary you have to work
really hard and in fact there's only one
other person I know and it's the person
I refer to always my hero my other hero
Cedric price is I think he worked about
as hard as you did there you're on a
level
you both go up earlier you both went go
to bed later and you produce you work
you work through ideas and you work
through ideas by making things all the
time and by drawing and I mean all the
time you sit in a meeting and John has
already done the drawings for the
meeting and potently yeah and paid
attention to the meeting he also has
extraordinary discipline he disciplined
the unit for one year and this is a this
is a first for the AAA though it was a
unit as far as I know we started at nine
we had an hour for lunch and we finished
at five every single day and we got the
work done and a lot of work done and
that was just fantastically rewarding
it's possible there is a culture and
architecture where that's supposed to
not be possible and it means you don't
really work like that but actually it
meant we focused all attention was on
the work not much attention off the work
for that period of time except at
lunchtime and before
9 and after five when we were allowed to
do whatever we liked John lettuce which
is very nice of you thanks but I suppose
all of those things are amount it really
do amount to a phenomenal body of work
which has evolved over really a very
short space of time God knows how you're
gonna spend the rest of your life there
or how the rest of the world is going to
cope with the volume of work but I'm
sure it will it'll find ways and you
will find ways to make that work but I
just thank you for coming cuz you're a
busy man now
in fact probably too but I yeah really
where it's privileged to have you back
thanks
so you all go home now hmm okay what
time is it I've got my watch here it's
quarter to seven I'm gonna try and keep
this to forty five minutes because it's
Friday then we can have a drink and you
can buy a book I don't get any money but
you should buy the book so well I can't
remember the slides now but I'll ramble
through I'm gonna talk to you about this
show that I've curated called shonky the
aesthetics of awkwardness and I should
start by saying I'm an artist and I've
often used hospitality as a device in
what I do
and this is just to introduce you to how
this has come about this was a bar in
Whitstable called turn my oyster up and
being a generous host is an important
aspect as you'll see of what I've
organised and I've often used curating
as a thing that I do intermittently and
my artistic practice as a way of taking
ownership of where my work lives in the
world so I left the Slade in 2003 and
nobody wanted what I was doing because
it was too ugly and bombastic and
brightly-colored
and I thought well you're gonna have to
have it anyway so I decided I would
build the place for it to live and one
of those places it can live is in a
curated exhibition so this was a show
called two peacocks which was a took the
form of a department store and it was 11
artists I mean it ended in lot of
argument but that was kind of healthy I
was really trying to collapse people's
authorship but this is really a
precursor to shonky and it had a cousin
or a brother called lily and MIM that
was in Aberdeen in 2014 this is the car
showroom that James and Eleanor Avery
made this is some sort of car crash made
with vinyl and balsa wood and I suppose
this is for artists and architects you
can't wait around for somebody to ordain
you you've just got to go in there and
seize the space and take control and
decide how the works going to be placed
and
discussed and you should yeah you should
do that so the other thing that I did in
order to take ownership of what I was
doing was do a PhD which I'd always been
very SCORM full of artists doing that
but then I needed the money and it was
paid and I could pay the mortgage for
three years and I could also do this
very big project called alien sex carp
which was about how you might update
discussions around HIV and visual art by
using spatial design and maximalism and
so one of your questions might be why am
I here why we doing this talk here and
I've always been a visitor here through
knowing Sam and then teaching last year
with her but also my interests have
strayed into spatial thing was
architectural things through the the the
breadth of the things I make which need
housing and there's the only container
big enough for them is an architecture
of some sort and that informs how I
approached curating so during alien sex
club I had to think a lot about the
production values I was using and some
people might call it a cardboard
aesthetic but I would call it shonky and
when the Haywood Turing did a open call
for a submission for a new curatorial
open they do this every few years I
thought well I'm gonna do shonky I'm
gonna actually propose this as a show
with other artists and think about it
beyond me and my borders and I think
there were 150 applications and I got
this opportunity to bring this thing
into the world now there's a dictionary
definition of shonky which is something
of dubious integrity or legality or
unreliable or unsound
but there's a colloquial definition
which is very hard to really work out
whether it's a geographical thing or a
cultural thing or a socio-economic thing
but I've always known it to be something
that's not so much of a pejorative
something shonky does the job if it's an
object it just just what it just stands
up or
or if it's it's like the waitress that
puts the piece of paper under the table
to steady it that's a very elegant
solution to the problem I mean really
you should saw out the floor or sort out
the table but in the meantime you've got
the shonky solution which does it
quickly and that can be so another
another reason for being here and having
this conversation is somehow it's been
very useful in critiquing people's
architectural projects here because
sometimes people will do something that
looks a bit clumsy and actually it's a
brilliant answer or it's a brilliant
proposition for something but in another
unit it might be not considered it might
be dismissed as shoddy but I think it
might be brilliant so this needs some
more fleshing out so I'm gonna talk you
through some works in the show this
isn't a verbatim of the catalogue so you
need to buy the catalogue but this is
also it's got some other artists in
there there's architects in here as well
and I'm gonna sort of talk you see some
through some of the key themes so the
provisional would be one and this isn't
in the show but it's a good piece to
think about what shonky nurse is this
especially advices the way things go
which many of you will know or the
rip-off version on the Honda TV ad and
this way of constructing something out
of whatever is available to make this
sort of conveyor belt of amusements and
kinetics it's not only a brilliant
sculptural thing but it's also a kind of
mental it's a mental shonky and the
other person this goes on and then it's
about three minutes long so we're not
gonna watch it all but you can go on
YouTube and find it but the resourceful
most of it seems to be what's
exemplarily shonky about here and
another classic shock honk Meister would
be william heath robinson and this is
his proposal for some sort of deck chair
in the sky and not only i mean these are
useless
designs they're not things you would
actually build but they're there
ingenious they're idiosyncratic they're
stupid they're also brilliantly drawn
and the sink the six synchronous of it
is something about the shonky and
another person that nails the definition
is richard wentworth and this is from
his ongoing series called making doing
getting by and this is a bollard and
they've built a holding round it and
they didn't want to move the hoarding or
the bollard so they just negotiated each
other and there seems to me a very
beautiful way of coping with the world
that maybe the white cube isn't the
answer maybe dealing with the architrave
or absorbing the bollard is a part of
how we should cope and be pragmatic so
this is we're interspersed with some
installed shots of the show in Belfast
at the moment and this is Tim Spooner
his contribution to shonky and Tim I
don't think Tim's here but Tim is a
sculptor and live artist and often he's
made an iteration of this piece that he
performs with and it's a series of
tripods made of steel rod that have
motors attached to them and they dance
and jiggle and they're all on timers
including these funny latex bags that
inflate and whiz and were and all of the
cabling is part of it and it's
programmed to go off in a very random
fashion and including a series of fur
balls that dance around the room and
sometimes dive over the ledge and get
caught by staff lower in a different
gallery and there's something very
awkward about what Tim does there there
somehow self-portrait and there these
things can collapse under their own
weight so they're susceptible to gravity
and the invigilator have to reset them
every few hours depending on where they
end up in the room and he I haven't got
a photo of this but because the concrete
floor was so polished you had to make
little feet for them which do
you'll seem like another shonky moment
and this is a series of beaks that start
talking and this is a kind of display
board with some fuzzy worms on it that
every so often surprised you by whirring
round and a feature of the exhibition
I'll talk on different levels but a
feature of the exhibition is come in
Silvia have seated the fun
Silvia come on I'll be done by half
server so visitor our neck everyone
there's some pink for you here a feature
of the exhibition that I didn't even
know was gonna happen was and just see
this at there's an obsession with little
threads or cabling as a motif which was
a kind of accidental outcome of the
process so the handmade is another
tenant of the shonky and that's not to
be a peasant to craft but it's to say
honky-tonky this isn't about badness as
in bad painting so it and this bad
conversation isn't the same in
architecture as it is in visual art but
Philip gustin's late paintings are bad
with a capital B as is Martin Maloney's
sort of neo bad painting of the 1990s
and bad painting is indexed to classical
drawing it's all about sort of teenage
painting and not no perspective and
cartooning and clumsiness that's not
naturalistic and even though this is
somehow related to the shonky the shonky
is more indexed to bad craft this is
Carol Dunham who didn't we couldn't get
Carroll Dunham painting I was desperate
of a cowl Dunham painting but they all
in private collections and his paintings
are shonky in the sense that these
awkward's this is called bathers these
paintings were arrived at through the
through the shapes rather than the
subject the subject is kind of a
byproduct of the formal play and that
seems to be something intrinsic to the
shonky
but somebody that I'm found through the
research for the exhibition was Justin
for Vela and he is an artist based in
Las Vegas who makes enormous pinatas and
this is a lowrider that he made I'd
actually already had the proposal
accepted but decided that he still
needed to be in here and that process of
evolution in the show is a maybe a
surprising part of it so he's kind of
playing on his own mexican-american
heritage and using it as a light motif
this is a motel that he covered in
pinata for three days
it was a lot of work for that small
amount of time but he's interested in
the signage of Las Vegas and all of this
is made by hand so all of this tissue
paper is cut by hand and he has to train
people to cut it the way he would cut it
and that's again something about the
spirit of his touch is important in how
it communicates the viewer so this is an
installation that he did in Denver
recently where he recreates Frida
Kahlo's garden but based on the movie
version of it from her biopic and this a
I don't know how long it took maybe it
was three weeks and then it all gets
pinned at the end but he came into the
gallery and worked with us for the two
weeks of the install to make floor
nachos
and this is about nine meters wide by
about nine meters high and it's made
with the assistance that he trained in
the space and somehow having him in the
space charged the space up as well he
also decided that he would have Mexican
food every night in Belfast which is
easier than you think but maybe as bad
as you'd think so it's very important to
have the beans and the diced tomato and
the guacamole and the cheese and it's
weirdly the colors of that the way he
layered up the tissue paper became a big
part of it so so somehow the hand does
something that maybe charges up objects
with Aurra that even though we're told
within art history that that shouldn't
matter potentially it does if you're not
an art an artist maybe if you're just a
person that comes in off the street the
authorship knowing that justin favela
made this rather than joe bloggs made
this it's somehow very important and
maybe we should allow for that so
something I didn't do in the shows
include any ceramics and that was a very
conscious decision because there's a big
thing about ceramics at the moment and
you could do a whole show just about
shonky ceramics but it seems to me this
is very overplayed already and so I
would just not do it
it's a story erin angel and my heart and
various people you didn't make the cut
okay let's talk about the cannon so we
think in our internet age that
everything that there is a plural ism
and everything's up for grabs and that
there's no hierarchy perhaps but
actually that's not true there's certain
tastes and fashions and louder voices
and predominant ways of talking about
things and xiangqi is absolutely coming
out of alien sex club in the sense that
I'm thinking about how queer subjects
have been represented in the past and
Felix gonzalez-torres really innovated
how
Jovie AIDS was depicted in late 80s and
early 90s in a post minimal way and that
was that's been taken on by younger
artists working today like Prem Sahib
dealing with similar subjects and that's
in contrast with people that came before
them who were dealing with queer
subjects in very flamboyant ways so one
of the attempts within shonky is to not
resuscitate certain people's careers
because they're perfectly fine without
me but to reposition them at the center
of the discourse and so Andrew Logan is
a cult figure for certain people and he
makes these amazing sculptures from
mosaic and glass and this is called
divine in heaven this is the drag queen
divine in a rainbow on a cloud and then
I've hung it on a on a white and green
wall and Andrew was very big in the late
70s early 80s this is a portrait bust of
Molly Parkin so he's famous for making
these portraits of hemp or queer icons
and they were rendered in this very
naturalistic way initially but then
they're partly clad with mosaic and
resin so they have this they they go
between this very smooth real realm and
then this jagged awkward clumsy realm
and they have this excessive beauty
about them also this is this is a
portrait of his friend dougie fields
who's also in the show this is dougie in
front of a Louise Fishman painting and
I'll come back to her but what you've
seen as we go along is that part of the
show is about collaging these peoples
work together into a bigger hull this is
a hanging this hangs from the ceiling at
head height and it's a portrait of a
drag artist that won his competition
alternative Miss World and alternative
Miss World this is his costume for the
2009 edition so before RuPaul's Drag
Race or turns in this world was to say
it was a drag competition is slightly
wrong because really you could as much
be an alien
or high-fashion as you could be change
gender you could change which planet you
came from and this is an ongoing project
that has I think the last iteration was
2014 and Andrew always has a costume
here's a museum to himself in Wales
that's made out of two squash courts he
says he's the only living artist that
has a museum devoted I'm not sure that's
quite right but it's definitely the only
Museum and while has made out to squash
courts that has this kind of stuff in it
so you can go and buy Andrews jewelry
his good mates with Zandra Rhodes and
they're part of this little world of
people from that period and I think his
work his work is very important for me
and I think it should be more important
for the discussion generally because
it's maximal and we'll come back to
maximalism
a bit later so this was the 2004 edition
of alternative Miss World and their
theme this one was called neon numbers
and it's shonky is exemplary shonky in
the sense that it's Punk in some way and
I mean that in the 70s sense so one
strand of shonky nurse is it's humor and
I really wanted to include a German
humour because there's a particular
strain of Cologne based humour that is
particularly shonky and it grows out of
Sigma polka and it goes through Martin
Kippenberger and it comes to Qasim of on
Bonin and we might call it capitalist
realism or German pop art but it's very
dry and quirky and a bit off and that
seems eminently shonky it's just a bit
to the left or a good way of putting it
might be precision on the wrong length
so these are two clams on a shelf that
stare at you and they're made of velvet
and fabric and they have hinged back so
you can position the lids so the eyes
stare out at the right angle and they're
beautifully made things but there
they're vaad and they're deadpan this is
a close-up of a customer vom Bonin
painting where she stitched a website
just www you're not allowed in comm and
there's lots of these odd jokes within
these surfaces that somehow rhyme with
the cabling of the Tim Spooner thing and
we'll see other jagged lined things come
back in later so to go back to Punk
somebody that could have easily been in
this is Brian Griffiths and this is and
a lot of this stuff refers to things
that maybe I was looking at in the late
90s or when I was an undergraduate
student and these things were being
shown at the saatchi gallery at the time
so this is this cardboard aesthetic is
is actually slightly too slick to be
shonky my version of it would be a bit
more barged probably but it's definitely
precursor or it informs the thinking and
this is a video by dougie fields I'll
show you a portion of
[Music]
it's ridiculous the water is so much
drier your mind is like the blind
[Music]
so dougies a painter a pop artist really
that well we'll look at his paintings in
a little bit but he makes these videos
on his laptop or on his desktop computer
at home using all the packages that we
all have very basic as you can see not
very complicated editing but he he made
a website of his own work very early on
there is a museum to himself online in
and it's been kept as you can go dougie
feels calm or whatever it's called but
it's a kind of 1990s shrine
it's very geometric he's scanned things
in and then just color corrected them in
really cack-handed ways it's really off
I mean it's brilliant it's so you're
like it's really on the edge of good and
bad you're not sure does this person
know what is this person a professional
I mean it's but no it's very edgy and
then to bring his own paintings in with
his own diary of his footage from around
where he lives and the routines he takes
these videos seem to be odd to me and
then not yeah they're not tasteful
either but there's a weird connection
that I made with them to Jacobi
Satterwhite who's a much younger
American artist and one of the things
within shonky is to think of it as an
umbrella for bringing together artists
that haven't been exhibited alongside
each other before or considered in
relation to one another before artists
of different generations and
nationalities and who share a
sensibility that may not be obvious at
first sight so this is a portion of
Jacobi Satterwhite video
so these videos are made in the computer
by building cgi worlds but they're based
on drawings that his mother made when
she was in a psych ward and then he
becomes a dancer inside and they
sometimes have footage for his own so
this one is called funky boring and it's
um there's a series of sort of towers of
Babel that he visits it goes on for 12
minutes were only seen a tiny portion of
it but it's a kind of part of a less
that's not dissimilar from Dougie's but
just succeed with a very different
resolution so this way of using what's
available is important and plastic
fantastic our collective that are doing
in a slightly different way so they
comprised two key members and then they
for the purposes of shonky there's five
of them and this is a series of very
large tarot cards that they made all of
different versions of the hanged man or
the traitor card and this is how they
set out in in Belfast at the opening of
the show and at the opening of each
version of the show as it travels to
Dundee and Barry in Manchester they will
perform with these things and their
performances are rituals they're somehow
sort of pseudo religious rituals that
take on all the tropes of capitalism
they deal with Bitcoin or or the
Internet and they're visually excessive
they're the print you'll see they bring
together images that are sometimes of
very different resolutions and print
them together there's a lot of viruses
in these images as well and they're
interested in memes and how images are
spread and reproduced and mutate and
there's energy to their performances
that is raw and dangerous and very dark
and funny and they seem to be elements
of the shonky as well
so this is Kate leper who's an artist
based in New Zealand who studied here
the slide and she makes containers for
things in the past they've contained
things like leaves in this instance they
contain all the packing materials from
how work was shipped to Belfast
and this is a big hanging ball that is
suspended from the ceiling it's in front
of a big curtain printed with a hundert
Vasa building on it and Kate's work
suggests that it's functional but it's
absolutely functionless I mean these
things are decorative and they are
covered in zips and cables and pulleys
and levers but they don't do anything
they just sit silently in the space and
they are they're intriguing this is
another one that's strapped to a column
and they're made out of recycled plastic
and sat in and somehow they repurpose a
kind of 1970s biomorphic feminism and
update it and this is how one of them is
hung alongside some other works so
you'll see that there's I don't know
that I've got plans in here but I think
I'm put some things in for the
architects so this there's a big cobalt
blue wall a chroma key blue wall it's
not as chroma key as I wanted but they
were being tight on money and it's her
in front of - Louise Fishman paintings
and an Andrew Logan glass work which
weighs an enormous amount and I thought
that this was going to cause massive
ructions because Louise fisherman came
over from New York and actually she
didn't care how close they were to
Andrews work she cared about the
distance between her own two paintings
so you've got all this ego to contend
with when you're curating or something
and also I'm not professional curator so
there's that there's this other game at
play so okay there are some paths so
this is the this is the lower room and
you know I'm not doing this as an
architect would do it it's more about
blocking things out and
we didn't really build very much it's a
very low-impact show to erect so you've
only got a couple of columns in a wall
to build and then in the upstairs space
you've got to hang some curtains and
then the rest of it is is all temporary
so you have this cobalt blue wall and
this chroma key blue wall fighting with
each other so Louise Fishman maybe isn't
so well known here but she's very well
known in the States
she's in her late 70s and she's famous
for a series of paintings called the
angry women and it was angry Louise
there was angry Marilyn you name it that
there was angry her and her work lies
somewhere between Abstract Expressionism
and some sort of feminist agitprop and
these were two of the paintings that we
had in the show I'd known Louise's work
for a long time and then I got to meet
her when I was on a residency in
Skowhegan and immediately connected with
her and I've always found her paintings
to be incredibly ugly and I really liked
them for that reason because they seem
to do everything wrong often the way
they're layered they might peel off that
they're sort of technically there's
issues with them I think and also the
way they use black and that they deal
with they go they go into realms of
ugliness that other people would avoid
so there's a register there's a series
of marks and a register of marks at play
that collide in very odd ways and
they're unexpected ways
this painting which is somehow like a
flag usually you would put the thicker
layer of everything on last but hers has
a sort of watercolor wash of oil paint
coming over the top and you get this
lurid acid space buildup and they kind
of come they're quite physical they're
quite three-dimensional so if a big part
of the show has also been to get to know
these people and liaise with them and
understand a bit more where they're
coming from but also reposition them so
Louise has never even shown her work on
a colored wall before which to me seems
like a very mild move but to her is very
radical and then she liked it so maybe
she's just gonna have a show of work on
colored walls this isn't this isn't sort
of an aside that it's been very
interesting through the process to work
with artists and galleries and different
levels of generosity and understanding
of the project and weirdly the English
people were much more offended by the
word shonky than the American ones
partly cuz the American ones didn't know
it but the Andrew and dougie
particularly were very resistant to this
idea of shun keenest they thought it was
a slur on them to begin with so I had to
do some negotiating in fact Doug he said
can you call the show something else and
I said no it's called shonky so
imbalance nurse is a is another tenet
that runs through the show and I
couldn't get this this is Nikki design
files tower garden if any of you have
been in Umbria and but we were able to
get series of maquettes for Nikki works
so we've got Sphinx and a gorilla and a
little camel and Nicky's Nicky the sound
files work is something that you love or
hate I think and I've always loved it
and not understood why it wasn't more
thought about because it seems to me
very serious but it uses a lot of color
and wobbliness and you know these are
hand-painted things they're clunky
some of them are fiberglass and some of
them are plaster and been able to work
intimately with them you see the thought
process at work so the gorillas head is
just covered with silver foil that you'd
find on sweet wrappers and again there's
something about whatever's at hand
quickest this is called just fees of a
Swiss and on the reverse is mirrored and
it's placed here against a big
Hundertwasser curtain and what joins
Nikki and her new basses work together
is an interest
lopsidedness and an encouragement of
things that might Teeter and fall so it
joined them back to Tim's work again
this is a metal tree that on one side is
painted very brightly with one of her
nana figures one of these sort of
cumbersome women and on the back it's a
sort of memento mori and these are
things that aren't normally seen so I
wanted under Vasa to be in the show and
there's no hundred Vasa work in the UK
there's only some prints in the V&A he
didn't build any buildings here there's
no paintings in collections here there's
no models clearly British people didn't
like under Vasa or think he was
important so I wanted to write that and
I tried to borrow work from the
foundation and they told me in no
uncertain terms they wouldn't lend me
anything so then I begged and played up
my architectural credentials and then
they said we'll charge you lots of money
and then you can have them so I didn't
reply to their email so I had to think a
different way about how to do this we
went to Austria and photographed two
buildings the Hundertwasser house in
Vienna and oh yeah I should say 100 Vasa
thought a lot about want eNOS and he
wrote about it so this is from his molÃ©
deenis manifesto against rationalism in
architecture the apartment house tenant
must have the freedom to lean out of his
window and as far as his arms can reach
transform the exterior of his dwelling
space and he must be allowed to take a
long brush and as far as his arms can
reach paint everything pink so that from
far away from the street everyone can
see their lives a man who distinguishes
himself from his neighbors the pent-up
livestock he must also be allowed to cut
up the walls and make all kinds of
changes even if this disturbs the
architectural harmony of a so called
masterwork and he must be able to fill
his room with mud or children's
modelling clay now this is not a typical
architect he's willing to sort of set up
the stall and then you can intervene and
do what you want with it and I'm not
convinced about the individualization
element
that there's something about the the
curviness of it that seems very
convincing so he writes a lot about the
spiral and about shapes that are somehow
organic and they become motifs within
his architecture so he wanted to build
this project called rolling hills and
this is the model for it this is now in
the spa that's built as that project so
it's now called ragna bad blue mouth Rob
knows the spa brand bad blue Mao is the
place and we went there in the middle of
the night and got off the train in a
field and saw a volcano in the is a fake
volcano that goes off on the hour so
it's kind of Center Parcs with under
Vasa but it's immaculate and it's really
a series of buildings that are joined by
underground tunnels it's kind of a
spaceship embedded into the landscape
and there's a series of light wells that
make it feel very open and light the
whole time so each building is wonky you
have his signature motifs of things like
onion domes and grassed roofs and all
the floors are curved and sloping so
much so that you can't have room service
because they can't get trolleys to the
rooms and he theorized a lot about the
exact slope that a floor should have
because he didn't think floors should be
flat and we'll come back to that later
because that's a theme we're on time so
these these photographs that we took of
the buildings became curtains and this
was one of my gestures this is a kind of
multiplied authored work by me the
photographer Jonathan Bassett and
hundert Vasa he doesn't know we did it
because he's dead
and they become these sort of
translucent ways of breaking up the show
and so here you can also see some of the
font system the phrase a Muggeridge
designed that's the big feature of the
book
it's a shonky font that mutates as
you're reading it and over the top of
that hum to niki de san fel drawings one
of which has pieces cut away so you can
see through to the wall benedict drew is
an artist that takes the language of
sound and noise art and uses that but
also redeploys it within the visual
realm to make installations and he made
a new piece for the show called a dis
praxic techno that features wordy from
look and read I'm so glad I can
introduce him to the ia he's somebody
that if you were a British and born in
the late 70s you'll have been
traumatized by at school he taught you
how to read he's an orange flying body
something like a life vest that talks
and he has the voice of Brian Aldridge
from The Archers
these are references that are very
specific and this dyspraxia techno is
somehow about the trauma of language and
I've described Ben's work as being a
kind of cat noise-canceling machine for
culture so you've got these two brains a
left and a right hemisphere that
thousand burn with each other and
they're somehow trying to deal with the
 of television and of internet
culture and the propaganda of Tory
government and all these things so it's
a kind of world that you go into with
projection and object and sound and it's
very it's very loud and it's very ugly
and it's very and that's a positive and
it's very dark but some are very
cleansing because of that
so these are Dougie Fields paintings and
they're they have a weird pop art
they're hyper flat but they're not
really like anybody else's work they're
not typed they're all painted very
slowly with acrylic and there they have
these highly anachronistic motifs they
don't really change you can look at one
from the 70s this is 1976 and this is
1990 and not much has shifted in terms
of the handling and the imagery there
about redeploying motifs but they have
this very a guideline that is it's not
the sinuous line of Lichtenstein or the
the beauty of Alexander of Patrick
Caulfield it's something else and I
should have said this earlier but I
wanted to quote Judith halberstrom in
the queer art failure because that was
something they have formed a project
well Jack Judith whichever whichever
time the book was written this book
really if you haven't read it it's
thinking about how failure can be a
queer methodology and although that's
not at the heart of shonky it's it
dovetails with it and so they say we can
oh we can also recognize failure as a
way of refusing to acquiesce to dominant
logics of power and discipline as a form
of critique and so these idiosyncrasies
of these artists and architects are ways
of opening up new space new discursive
space and thus the tenacity of someone
like dougie to stick out this for so
long doing it in this very odd way seems
to me very exciting and full of
opportunity ok another figure that
doesn't appear the AI very often less
dog
[Applause]
[Music]
Absalon in exposing some
[Music]
yes ladies and gentlemen where would we
be without good music so one of the
things that underpins all of the work
and Julian Schnabel isn't in the show
but I would have liked him to have been
but I didn't actually try this is one of
his plate paintings and they do a
similar thing to the less dorsen in that
they this is a surface that disrupts how
you can draw and that becomes a that
becomes a physical theme within the show
but it also becomes a conceptual theme
within the show how do you trick
yourself out of your habits how do you
put strategically put things in the road
to trip you up and there's there is
architectural precedent for that and
it's our Okawa and Ginn's
and they they built certain projects
this is their destiny reversible destiny
lofts in Japan and their architecture
was designed or intended to extend your
life expectancy by forcing you out of
your habits and there's a kind of
anecdote that if you stay in the hotel
for 10 foot for the for the weekend it
will extend your life expectancy by 10
minutes which i think is not true but
it's a nice idea and the way they
thought they could stimulate you to your
immune system to become better through
architecture was to trick you out of
your spatial habits so you can see on
the floor it's a kind of rough
mountainous terrain we've included in
the exhibition their model for the
infected Arcade House which is really a
series of labyrinths curved labyrinths
that collage together to make a strange
house that none of us could live in
probably it also built on a series of
hills and the terrain is as much a part
of the space as the walls and one of the
projects they did build was called BIOS
Cleve house and this is built in the
Hamptons this is a drawing for it and
it's really an inverted mountain with a
series of rooms and you have to climb up
and down
to go to the kitchen and the toilet and
the bathroom and this tricks you out of
knowing how to walk and stand and what
is up and down and what is gravity and
that changes how you think about your
body and it changes your posture and all
of this accumulates to a lot of jargon
that they talk about so they talk about
landing sites which is really where does
your foot go when you walk if you're
walking on a flat floor you don't even
have to think about that but if you're
walking on a weird plastic Mountain you
possibly do have to think about that
they also talk about architectural body
by which they mean not only your body
but the space around it and what it can
touch in terms of perception and
interaction and they build an
architecture on that basis and what
they're really trying to do I think is
scramble the coordinates of what we know
and redeploy them in order to force us
to think beyond who we know we are and
that seems to be the light motif of
shonky which is how do you screw with
your brain in a fun way in a nice way in
a good and a stimulating and a
pleasurable way in order to get further
so this is another install shot showing
I mean these four things have never been
thought about together before
Hundertwasser
and our car engines I'm sure wouldn't
have liked each other and then a
customer von bounine painting with an
Andrew Logan Buster Fenella fielding
that's a kind of disco ball that casts
light around the room so I've touched on
this but the shonky book was a big part
of the project and designing a font
system that could be thought of as
shonky was a perfect challenge for
fraser Muggeridge and you'll see if you
look in the book it's not really a font
or a typeface as such it's really a
program in which multiple typefaces can
be loaded into a program and the
constraint set to hybridize those fonts
as you type which sounds mad and I
haven't done it I've just heard about it
I can't you know there's only so many
meetings I can have but the things that
it produced are not for the dyslexic
let's put it that way
and you'll see in the book there's
different types of kerning and
angularity and sinuous honest that
change and force you to have to
reposition how you read which seems to
be a very shonky reader so what are the
consequences of all this well there's
clearly some more research that needs to
go on into what this work where does
this word shonky come from what is the
derivation of it everybody in Hull when
I was there in Hull when I didn't talk
to twelve people which was that's good
you know that's real they all knew the
word shonky so somebody said it's an
East Coast thing but I'm not sure about
that
but that needs a bit more research but
also there's something going on in a lot
of these projects of which shonky is the
latest where architecture can take the
role of the curator or the artists can
use architecture to do what a curator
could do in a different way
that's not to say the curator is
redundant but there's another project
that can happen and I think that needs
some further work and one of those
projects that I would like to do next is
really to flesh out what is maximalism
and Roberto Matta would be one of those
people and by maximalism I don't just
mean the opposite of minimalism and
dougie fields is somebody that has
referred to maximalism as minimalism
with a plus plus plus but I actually
think it's more about how do you
contextualize things within one another
and be pragmatic visually what have you
put your thing in the middle of shinjuku
could it cope rather than putting it in
a white cube space where there's room to
consider it can your thing compete with
that environment and then it's important
that to remember that I'm not a curator
and that this work has informed what I'm
making back in the studio and so this is
a series of paintings that I'm making
for my project which I'm working with
Professor Greg towers who's here tonight
called capsid and this is gonna happen
in May in CGP in London
and then goes to home in Manchester and
this way of thinking about a maximalism
and a shonky nurse within painting is
really being enriched by thinking about
the hundred Vasa stuff particularly but
also certain types of VR that I'm
playing with so this is a this is a cat
of capsid which is a shell inside a
virus that holds DNA or RNA and I'm
playing with I don't know the pizza
tonight PK no but we've been working to
make some strange V ours yeah and that's
where that's shonky thanks for coming
[Applause]
very interesting talk this is all very
new to me I have to say so I hope my
question is not too candid my first
question is would you say that outsider
art is chunky some of it can be and why
some is not that one first so if you
don't mind yes there's not really though
there is no outsider an insider are I
don't I think those distinctions are a
bit old-fashioned somehow I'm not
convinced by them that because people
can be bought in and out of the Canon
but there's there's there's amateur and
there's professional because you can
only get paid for something or not you
know is a dove wolf Lee Hongki artist
yeah in a way but there's other there's
other hierarchies to unpack within that
that I'm not sure benefit that I think
it's a longer conversation okay that's a
cop-out but a little bit because maybe
the difference if I understand your
world between that side of art and
shrinky might be the intentionality
because my impression is that all the
work you and all the art of shown there
was an intention to use and to have all
these attributes whereas maybe outsider
art you know there's no such thinking
behind what's being made that's where
I'm not sure because I think there
probably is but I just think that it's
not shown in the same places or discuss
I mean it is increasingly those things
emerge that's for me
but could I put could I put our dog
fully in the show yes but it's a bit
like with the clay work it would have
taken the discussion somewhere else that
I don't I mean also I don't really look
at that work I don't need that work and
so part of this is about what gets me
off and that it's not that I don't you
know I some of those outsider artists
who interesting to me but others and I
was more interested to reposition
particularly Andrew Logan and dougie
fields yeah
did you a second part yes I do could you
give examples of shonky art in other
type of fatty stick expression like
cinema maybe or theater
I mean musical yeah it should an example
well in the book there's a piece of
shonky writing that Zooey Strachan and
Louise Welsh of contributed that really
uses the typewriter so it uses the
analog but it also uses the idea of the
unedited or the first draft as a way of
rethinking that I think in music a good
example would be the first take you know
on a Kate Bush album when she just keeps
the first take and uses that it's not
what what I'm not arguing for the shonky
exclusively what I'm arguing for is the
there has been maybe a predominance of
the slick and the fabricated and I'm
just asking for another conversation to
be had simultaneously thank you
if understood correctly shonky is always
in relation to popular esthetic
sometimes it's in contrast to it is is
chunky also changes throughout time
I mean if or is it always this kind of
self-aware colorful cage all right yeah
I don't think I think that's to do with
my taste you're seeing a particular it's
me that's done it I have I happen to opt
for the brightly colored pop thing
rather than do a minimal thing but you
could have I mean with the Richard
Wentworth bollard that's not you know
okay it's a blue wall but that's not so
it doesn't have to exist purely in that
realm no absolutely not
is it what is this is this to do with a
particular time period no I don't think
so either I think that you know if
you're an Egyptian you can build a
shonky pyramid but you it's better if
you don't because it's quite every but
there it's a sensibility it's a it's a
particular kind of critical engagement
with how you make things and when do you
leave them you know do you do you polish
the thing up or not you sometimes you
need to sometimes you don't and I think
just an awareness that you can have the
quick thing is a good reminder as are
different from camp the the self aware
cage of Susan Sontag it's not exclusive
camp would be would dovetail with it but
you know I don't think that with the our
karma and Ginn's for example there's
anything to do with camp or kitc there
may particularly the Angelo Gonzaga feel
it's sure that's that's there but I
don't think it's about it's not
necessarily about self awareness it can
be which is why the outside of art could
come in I'm thinking about and when I
make a painting for example I've been in
the studio today making something when
something it is more about being a
detective on on your actions so it's not
so self conscious that you premeditate
the thing it's more about the
willingness to step back and be an
observer in the process while it's
happening I don't know whether I'm
distinguishing it enough maybe it needs
more ironing out that can be your study
thank you so much on this was wonderful
I was going to actually bring up the
similar points and kind of the question
if if song Keys chunk is really ours or
if Sean he has indeed is always around
yeah I was going to bring the example of
the shonky kind of heroglyph wall which
I'm sure could be a could be and in that
case if if Sean kids always existed in
will and then but my follow-up question
would then be instead how do we take
care of Sean key and how do we sort of
and I would be curious to hear if we by
naming shonky put shonky in danger yeah
potentially we could be jeopardizing it
and what should we do to keep shonky
happy or do we eventually need to say
goodbye to Sean Sean key in the corner
no this is the danger of outing it you
know it could just cancel it could kill
it and certainly it's probably killed it
for me
because I've given it over and had to
clarify a bit I mean we've got
archivists in the audience how do you
preserve the shonky I mean there's those
Picasso sculptures that are falling
apart
you know there's but you open boxes of
Schnabel plate paintings in from it have
come across the ocean and there's bits
of plate in the bottom what do you do in
that situation I think it's that maybe
there's an issue about heritage culture
or how do you preserve things or do you
or don't you do you just remake them
with is to do with production values I
think in the sense I'm trying to relate
it to what I do so you know I'm making
these paintings on canvas on the wall
they're not stretched on frames if I
tread on them and get foot print on it
I'll keep it it's part of it somebody
else might a different strategy might I
mean if it's really the thing up
I'll paint over it but it's about a
pragmatism so how do you preserve that
you have to make people sensitive to it
as an option you have to have it in the
discussion and you have to it mustn't
just fear that we all start making
chunky things it can't just become the
trend that we all go to shonky it's got
to be about a left-brain right-brain
thing I've you when is it appropriate to
do the shonky thing and when is it not
when do you need to really resolve the
thing and this sir and maybe going
between the two is a healthy way of
thinking so don't know whether that
answers it but there's your you're right
I don't there's somebody else needs to
do a study on the history of shonky yeah
what was a Victorian trunking
that was my next question
and shonky be history would LS Lowry be
shonky to you he is pretty strong he's
very Xiang yeah yeah and they're really
ugly I when they saw a bunch of them in
sulfur at the Museum there and yeah and
he's he's playing with outsider art in
another way yeah he can be in the next
the bigger survey yeah yeah I just
wanted to pick up on the the the
business of appropriateness and this
business of taking care of shonky and
knowing when it's the moment and when it
isn't and in reference particularly to
the work you're doing with Greg who you
pointed out earlier which is an
extraordinary and because all of this
work is about collaboration and
positioning people together or not
together and how you do that and when
it's the right moment to do it and when
it's not and that's a difficult thing
and that collaboration seems to me the
most extraordinary and almost impossible
collaboration maybe I could you just say
a little bit more about that because I
think it is refers to this business of
when it's chunkies really useful so in
there it's appropriate or not well I
think um one of the one of the things in
the show and all the documentation is
available online it's really a gazaam
comes work it's a bits one piece of work
where I use 14 people's authorship to
make a single piece and if you sliced a
cross-section through the museum you
would get a big painting probably
something that looked like a David's
alley painting but with video and other
things inside it and that's an art
that's an artist's way of curating a
show rather than a curators way of
curating a show because I'm using that
blue wall as a canvas to organize some
things spatially that doesn't that isn't
polite you know it it's it's about
somebody getting a bit too close to you
on the bus by putting that painting too
close to that one and forcing those
collaborations to happen and being and
this is where it returns to hospitality
using my social skills to negotiate
those relationships in a way that
somebody else couldn't so to
have Louise Fishman in the room and be
having that conversation is a way of
triggering triggering it and encouraging
it and working it through together and
it is all about collaboration in the to
go back to white why bother doing this
in the first place you know you're not
alone you're not just doing something in
the room whether you're not I mean in
architecture culture it's more and in
science it's more familiar to be working
with other people
the artists are trained to think that
they do things on their own which as
soon as you leave art school you can't I
mean you couldn't the art school but you
thought you were going to go sit in a
room on your own and then you didn't and
the sooner you can work out how to knit
so it's all about negotiating thresholds
and when to push and pull and when to
have the argument and not and that's the
kind of unwritten story of doing that
show those tensions high really grateful
to you for introducing this word chunky
I'm gonna be using it a lot from now on
a couple of kind of phrases questions
come to mind first of all if in in most
styles if it's a I don't know if you
count it as a style there's kind of good
bad mediocre so you know if you could
talk about it softly bad good chunky bad
chunky and then chunky shonky what would
shanthi shanthi shanthi is not shoddy
so there's a thing that's so crap that
you just put it in the bin but then
shonky is elegant it's exquisite you
know you you admire the thing because of
its precision it's not precision as in I
vacuum form this thing and it's slick
it's precision as in oh my god what a
brilliant solution to the problem and
that could be a craft solution it could
be a conceptual solution but you know
you get a hunch off an object when you
interact with your aura surface you can
read it and you can tell whether it's
genuine or not and you can read the
shonky nasaan there and that's a human
response to a thing
so is there bad that I don't know what
the hierarchy is we'd have to get yeah
that's needs some more work yeah are you
gonna be on the team I'd be honored tee
[Applause]
