okay hi everyone and thank you for
coming this evening to the second
lecture in our ax X 100 lecture series
in this centenary year where we're
celebrating a hundred years of women at
the AAA I'm Manny J Verghese and the
head of lectures in the public program
curator and I'm also a member of the a
xx 100 steering committee and for those
of you who don't know the a xx 100
project aims not only celebrate the
contribution of a women over the last
hundred years but it also serves as a
catalyst for a wider discussion about
women in architecture and the project
has been a multimedia project of
exhibitions lectures workshops walking
tours publications and a website and it
culminates this term with three strands
an exhibition across the hall in the
gallery and up the stairs a book Acco
edited by Lynn Walker and Elizabeth
darling and a conference that was just
held on the second to the 4th of
November so but moving to tonight's
event we delighted to have Japanese
architect Kimiko anoying here with us
tonight to talk about her ongoing
research in a talk titled little spaces
and several trials personally this is
also very exciting for me because when I
first joined the AAA as a third-year
student I went on a unit trip with
intersex which was taught at the time by
Jonathon doors who's also here tonight
and we visited Kumiko's office and she
talked to us about her work and her
fascination at the time with visual and
perceptual effects which was what we
were studying and we visited her do
store and pure father projects that she
designed and I found the whole
experience so inspiring I jumped at the
chance to invite her back to talk to the
students and friends of the a a tonight
I also want to take a moment to thank a
plus you magazine who have collaborated
with us and made it possible for us to
bring Kimiko here tonight and last
academic year we brought the we worked
with them to bring go Hasegawa here and
it's a great collaboration that we hope
will continue going forward so to
briefly introduce Kimiko a noise she was
born in Osaka and studied at the Tokyo
University of Arts but before traveling
to the United States to do a master's at
the Yale
school of architecture she worked at
janaki and associates from 1996 before
establishing her own office the office
of Kimiko enoy in 2000 she now teaches
at the Yokohama Graduate School of
Architecture and her prolific list of
projects also include one of the A plus
u offices in Tokyo Aoyama house as well
as several projects for Dior and across
different typologies including housing
education and public space she's
currently working on a community
development project in Miyazaki and a
campus development project for Kyoto
City University of Arts with other
architects so tonight's lecture will
focus on this research project called
little space and there's some
publications on the table here that we
encourage you to come and have a closer
look at after the lecture so without any
further ado please join me in welcoming
committee I know it's the AAA for the
kind introduction I'm very happy to have
this opportunity to present my work
today
and my name is Kimiko nuit now I have my
own office to do my practice and teach
at Yokohama Graduate School of
Architecture
while GSA which belongs to the Yokohama
National University and City Masson and
this is also from Astana also teaches at
GSA and before I start the presentation
let me introduce my position among
Japanese architects this illustrates my
original and selfish four quadrant
matrix horizontal axis is a shows the
tendency of design conservative and
progressive the vertical axis shows an
another tendency of design individualism
and Anonymous the big master Sanne is in
the first quadrant the expression is
very progressive and I think their way
of creation
a personal and individual another master
Toyo Ito is also in the same quadrant
however the Toyo Ito is in mild position
since recently Toyo Ito repeats the
comments that shows his doubt about
individual expression so Fujimoto is in
the first and more extreme Jang Hana I
believe another about the name of
Fujimoto you can see the word
je yes this is junior ishigami and he is
much more extreme than Fujimoto and he
almost in out-of-range architect
graduated from Tokyo Tech University one
of the most important architecture
school in Japan occupied separatory its
own dedicated position they are partial
of CBR criticality makes them to
position in unique point then where is
my position I personally think that I
occupies around here that I am an
architect who has a little doubt whether
the project personal expression is
needed however I doubt I don't want my
design it would be conservative hence I
am in the second quadrant the second
quadrant is rather difficult to
understand honestly speaking I think the
architect in this quadrant are not well
known outside Japan I think mr. Toyama a
former principal of Y GSA is in this
quadrant
people and walks of this quadrant lack
of chewiness so today you have to be
patient to hear my brother quiet
presentation are you ready so over the
past 10 years many active in Japan have
shown an interest in the bottom-up
design in Japan the community
development with students participation
was brought out in 1970s that was the
opposition fighters season who pursue
the democracy they opposed the top-down
urban planning that assigned the highest
priority to the economy and the politics
this shows the famous example of such
bottom-up committee development called
Hana Giri Park done by the group of
housewives in cetera Awad in Tokyo they
changed a normal public park where there
are lots of prohibited methods to the
place where the children can't do
anything there are examples of those in
Japan however they had little to do with
the architectural design then around
2000 some young architects came to be
influenced by the kind of bottom-up
community development in Japan it is
often said that the poor entire
activities became generalized during the
disaster relief activity with a great
hanshin-awaji earthquake in 1995 the
generation who experienced the volunteer
activities when they were college
student or high school student showed
the changes in attitude towards society
she came to be strongly interested in
the way the new way of designing that
would change the society beta as a
result the interest elected to the
existing bottom-up movement and they
operate it in different way from what
had been done before they try to
generalize grassroots activities that
used to be engaged only by some students
with strong awareness a lot of
Architects project architectural project
and community development project have
been born since then especially after
the Great East Japan Earthquake in 9
2011 the bottom-up design has came to be
the real culture beyond that temporary
trend I dug this cultural change and I
myself sometimes engage in such
bottom-up design projects that make
students participate at the same time I
am frustrated by the situation where the
bottom-up project are judged only by the
processes architecture exists as if it
were the tools for the sake of the most
democratic way of design instead I am
interested in how such bottom-up design
produces the architectural dryness and
charm having with his interest I started
research what people expect from our
environment in 2014 the subject of the
investigation are not the scenes where
the people just enjoy the space as
consumers but the scenes where people
were on telly approach to the space to
obtain their own
- I organized a research team with my
student from my former University Tokyo
University OD hearts and thoroughly
research and correct the various example
of scenes that shows the interplay of
people and environment student and me
and my assistants from my office total
ten of us had been working on this for
almost seven months taking pictures the
result of this research was published as
a book titled little spaces this is a
book shown on the screen and presses we
researched well everywhere in Japan
including sthiti locals city suburb and
countryside he ended up with a total of
eighteen thousand pictures of examples
they were defined into two thousand
examples for publishing making 150
groups an odd kind of examples were
gathered this is an example from a small
fishing boat the purity space of this
fishermen's Union has been changed as
the living room where the fishermen
would gather after their morning
sessions this is a gathering place for
mmm
someone happened to place a tent on the
top at a couple with a tight embankment
I am sure it feels nice here where the
wind blows through the choose the place
wherever they like out of their
surroundings and turning them into where
they likes to stay we have many examples
of those kinds of gathering space for
neighbors fulfilment of everyday life
good
whether you have such places to
communicate we can still find such
places for little communities was in
rural areas and also in the city
those places are useful usually handmade
by various things the neighbors brings
in so the interior components are
usually unorganized they are far from
sophistication this is an examples of
marketplaces marketplaces treasure-house
of spots where people were on terry
approach to the space to obtain their
own comfortableness in order to support
with the marketplace activities all
sports of the environments are
thoroughly customized those kind of
bottom-up activities acted by normal
people are just great then one strong
question occurs to me how the activity
of planning and design can accept the
bottom-up activities by people in Japan
there have been a great discussion about
the design methodology that broadly
accepted bottom-up requirement from
users for example some studies by Krista
Christopher Alexander has claimed that
the project conducted only by bottom-up
process is effective he practiced real
project that demanded people's
participation in every processes this
photo shows his trial done in Japan
those were great trials however it was
became clear that the project couldn't
reach the richness the mature
environment normally hub
despite that the procedures were very
detailed the problem seems to lie in the
fact that he expected the process only
before the completion too much
in order to overcome that what Alexander
down and to reach to the new design
methodology I made a hypothesis top-down
design the idea is required to the
project the bottom-up recovery ideas
that make full use of the top-down idea
must be expected during planning
bottom-up ideas must be thought of
during after the completion however such
top-down ideas are not for the Seraph
assertion as an architect
instead I expect not that the top down
ideas suffocate bottom-up desire but the
top-down idea triggers the bottom-up
activities the one is natural and common
I take too seriously
I think that if two Israelites then
three is also realized the reason why I
came up with such a conclusion is
because I encountered the concept
disturbance in the field of ecology a
disturbance is a temporary change in
environmental conditions that cause it's
pronounced change in an ecosystem major
disturbance includes fires flooding
windstorm and so on since it prevents
the succession of forests towards the
climax it is said that it can produce
the biodiversity with in an ecosystem
the process through process salt as
demolitions rather relates to the
production
[Music]
influenced by such concept I consider
the top-down ideas that occur during
planning as one kind of disturbance then
I accept that the disturbance calls the
bottom-up recoveries some bottom-up
recoveries undertaken by planets during
when the project is in the planning
phase furthermore other bottom-up
recoveries undertaken by users during
when it is use of the completion as a
result I assume this process helped
about a variety and richness of the
architectural environment to occur I
will introduce some of my works based on
those salt now I would like to present
some of them by starting off with this
house that we designed it was rather
after we finished the research and so we
directly applied our achievement to
design this house and this is a house
for a family of four at the city centre
the site is at us part of central Tokyo
the red circle shows we had a fight 'yes
we are it was part of the housing
district with a grid prop pattern but
now a main road was newly constructed by
the Tokyo Metropolitan Government
all roads along side this road were
sliced diagonally the sight of my crier
the fight oh my crayons were also sliced
and it is now almost almost a since rise
over and furthermore since all the dots
were cut diagonally by this road the
sights alongside is rolled have a wide
variety in size
therefore the side of the buildings that
strongly lived to the sides of the land
have a wide variety in scale directively
tall condominiums and small detached
houses are mixed together this was the
situation of the surroundings typical
situation under Japanese urban planning
regulation we are the site and the shape
of the buildings is regulated only by
floor area ratio under such condition I
thought that the veera type house is not
adequate instead a kind of town house
must be needed to begin with I
straightforwardly designed a house with
Japanese town house vocabulary if it is
an effective factor from the Japanese
context bringing together the street and
the inside also we corrected me many
examples of them for little spaces
melisach wishing eaves is a good
starting point
however by simply putting on a bus for a
building would lead to the problems that
it bought as a architecture the reason
is because eaves
akhtar decoration what we should learn
from little spaces is how each specific
activities and space inseparable
inseparable
now wonderfully they would form a kind
of ecosystem we wanted to find out how
to integrate the activity space and the
surroundings so for this house M we gave
a try for the related repeated is
inclined and different angles for each
fraud this was a change of viewpoint I
through the form of architecture into
the project in top-down approach it has
a pretty old phone
let me explain one by one first I wanted
to use this form to handle the
relationship with surroundings which
would differ for each floor for the
first floor
the slope is looking just like an eel
this provides the slightly closed build
for the inside keeping some privacy from
the street while the showing the
familiar Phyllis throughout the street
becoming the passat by bayi as eaves
would do in general for the second floor
both shrubs are inclined openly to add a
street creating an open D atmosphere for
the living room both ends of the upper
and lower shrub we don't easily enter
thus sight enter the site from the
inside and the street is closed here
since the floor height is minimized so
the press is almost United with the
street for the third floor the two shops
are closed throughout the street so the
bedroom is grazed on this floor where
the privacy is
important and this is how we tried to
create a variety of different degrees of
privacy for a house by using the form of
shrubs floating in different directions
for each floor if you look at the brown
you may see that the tips is 3.1 meters
long at the most and it is only two
point six meter Long's on the third
floor the rules are very shallow and
most of the places are space is simply
enclosed
Antony Steve's what is what it's
establishes the concept of making a
house only with Yves is the thoroughness
over the house
you want to feel exactly enclosed even
when you are inside a room and all the
species are a re just like standing
under an e then if simply having 100 the
degree of privacy for the different
floor was the only aim it might not have
to do such a complex form however I feel
that this complicated form was
indispensable here since it was very
important to generate the ecosystem of
architecture and activity that I had
mentioned before here I had expectations
for such audit form to push forward that
act of designing for example those three
shrubs are eaves but they are also
acting as rows at the same time eaves
are useful but the slopes are awfully
troublesome for house many devices a
necessary to accept this form as a house
another day of wooden floor was built or
top of the shrub in order to obtain a
horizontal floor so we allowed some part
of the slab and then needs to show
acting as some kind of an ass floor or
since the floor is inclined the distance
away from the street defaults according
to where you are standing and so we
fixed a bench where the street approach
the closest in hope that you might start
a composition with people on the street
otherwise making the most of the
diagonal line at 8:00 it's over the
eaves it is rating by the inclined slobs
and trapezoid shape of the land a
collecting the rainwater nicely and
letting them flow and so on so many
adjustments were made in order to make
the most all the accumulated inclined
Slavs we were expecting ourselves as
designers to enjoy this process itself
to start with a thirties rather than to
directly apply the motif that we
collected from the little spaces we
expected little spaces to the naturally
emerges within this very project while
we were undergoing the process of
designing furthermore we did not expect
this process to take place sorry for the
designer that is it will not end when
the architecture is completed but we
hopefully go on and architecture will be
occasionally transformed by the client
so far the house is looking exciting
with a shoe
geometry mailbox and barriers and
decorations art by the client so the in
the beginning I defied I adopted a
little ordered architecture form called
as three inclined shrubs then it has
followed that this form generates the
unique creation that both the prana and
clients conceived various ideas it this
was the very small trial however it
suggests that the dynamic process how
bottom-up process and top-down process
candidates I will present on another
bigger project it is one of the disaster
the Kabaddi project for the Great East
Japan Earthquake what I was thinking
about how we might achieve the little
and libraries Dively spaces among this
project just like we did for the house M
[Music]
Stiga hama is a peninsula town and is 30
minutes away by car from the city centre
of Sendai one water biggest ste it is a
very beautiful place with a singing
peach and the pine trees stretch out the
traditional sightseeing spot Matsushima
is near the site this is a Keo a drawing
by Hiroshi gay a famous painter ahuyama
is portrayed it in his drawing the end
of Sahara was damaged by the tsunami
waves the coastline was broken and
brought part of the residential area and
rice fields was damaged by the tsunami
the center part of the peninsula where
the Junior High School's stood is a
small hill
and they have actually escaped from the
tsunami wave damages how about a junior
high school so was greatly damaged by
the shaking of the earthquake now then
in Japan there are many interesting
features for a school as a building type
firstly public schools are not used just
on schools after school hours
most students stay for the club
activities for sport music or art being
events open to the area such as
facilities festivals and the cultural
festival are held it is used as election
polling places and also serves an
important evacuation facilities at the
time of the disaster just school schools
are also functioning as a community
center for the local area probably for
this reason most of the schools are used
with surprisingly unglue of space
compared to other public facilities
small shed and bond gradually built and
planned among the school premises
premises and this is adding to this
familiar group for schools throughout in
Japan it may be recognized as a kind of
culture it was the sample of this Stiga
homogenous high school food
garden gardening and creating creating
cleaning were built here and there and
you can see that the activities of the
students was brought spread to the
optimist of the premises not limited
only to the inside all the buildings
I feel that more you have such implanted
devices the most abundant of abundant
the environment will become hence it
might sound too straightforward but we
made our proposal is all over the
place our purpose was not to regenerate
the landscapes over the hormones for
Moscow is me nyet but to follow the
whole concept of school wearing this
kind of culture to make the most of the
premises by casually I think shed still
to create a school was the main object
object so we had to consider how to
handle this those shed from the
architecture planning point of view our
idea was to really combine the two
motives of large frames and small
structure we wanted to we wanted the
very simple frame structure for the main
body likewise a similar simple frame is
added to the main body we call this
little space we call this a literal
space for this project and keep on
adding keep on going by planning the
space in this way the activity that was
formerly limited to the spaces made by
the frames we saw that they would spread
out abundantly Wow the space would
smoothly correspond to the different
skills of learning they are required the
thoughts they
according to the diversified education
the main body is made of the hollow
square shape connected to each other and
the structure itself was also allowed to
develop 3d the main small many small
places in brown for this model stuck to
the main structure this showed the
completed images of little spaces and
the main building and this illustrate
how some hollow scholarship are
connected the enlarging the frame pot in
debt each of the Hollow square shape
unit simply consists of cross rooms and
corridors we attached many little spaces
here to adjust the conceptual idea to
the reality we try to clarify the
purpose and numbers of literal spaces
for example we decided to press three
for each grade and then carefully the
purpose obviously also will correspond
to the detailed functions requested for
educational facilities such as
broadcasting room small store house and
student council room especially for
school design the module of the
classrooms we are in Japan the scale of
8 meter by 8 meter is the mainstream is
limiting the structural form over the
building entirely on the other hand
there are many programs not incompatible
with this classroom module and this is
letting down the purity
over the school planning with our method
we can easily attach those programs
without any restriction by modules so it
is simple and unconstrained
unconstrained and I arrived this idea to
design school let's look at the entire
picture the dead part shows the general
rooms such as classrooms on the other
hand like this in 30 numbers were little
spaces were scattered which are small
rooms and sheds for this project not
only places like sheds where the people
can go inside we are called literal
space
but places like those benches or
bookshelves the corridor at the Pulido
were all treated as literal spaces the
wind went on attaching them once we
started to design with an adding a deep
attitude we were gradually driven by
this motif motif to add anything that
would walk one after another in Japan
classrooms are made for a student a
standard class of 40 student in contrast
to such basic learning spaces the detail
space are used as a place to supplement
the diversity of learning and used for
small group studies and another study
kind of rooms for this wall place
two-sided are facing the corridor and
the space is more united to the Kali
dough compared to the formal place that
you saw in this way each box places a
brand to be unique in size and how the
arranged in order to provide more
varieties or different learning
environments we tried to surround it
rooms with many Shallon windows so that
they can be kept free open during the
night with us and during clean ups this
idea to connect the whole square shape
how to give several other advantages to
our designing the space given on the
whole was not abandoned since this was
the disaster recovery project and we
were only given a limited amount of
budget under such condition if we
designed the school normally the desert
would have been nomads and a useful
usual classroom standing next to the
corridor so we tried to create a small
allowance of spaces where people would
get together and also we brought
together each corridor at joining part
for different holo square shape with
generating a place with enough room this
is one of the places where the whole
square shape are joined together and
this crease is used for big student
meetings and this is a student council
room you also have a broadcasting room
other little spaces and another place
independently organized by student we
noticed noticed after the completion of
the building that students are utilizing
those little spaces during school hours
break times and after school and also
for the club activities
in this way we made a school by creating
the forms of adding on what is needed
onto the base body of a simple school
building as well as we made the
processes that combines top-down and
bottom-up approach a you may remember I
defer the tongue disturbance at the
beginning of this lecture I think the
main building with hollow square shape
was disturbance or top-down diagram for
this project and the little species
bottom of the elements that indicis was
a schematic diagram and I will present
an another disaster recovery project for
the Great East Japan Earthquake Tony is
kamesh in Kumasi city where the site
street is a compact fishing village over
the king small bay that tsunami attacked
this village and rung up to the blue
line the elementary school and the
children's halls was attacked by the
tsunami then the junior high school
escaped from that tsunami by a hair
brace however its luxury it destroyed by
the strong shake of the earthquake since
he altitude of the junior high school
property was the highest the
municipality and the local people
decided to rebuild all three programs in
the property the strongly damaged this
strongly advantage
thus surfaced site
that Cherie can avoid the next enemy
attack
so this lid area illustrate the site you
can see that the boss a fraud area and a
steep-sided
area since the flood area was used as a
temporary schools and the temporary
trains hall the only area good for the
construction was the remaining
steep-sided Hill the dead part it was
rated the construction on a steep hill
is difficult and expensive
furthermore the since the damage of the
Great East Japan Earthquake was so
enormous and widespread that each the
construction project must be carried out
is row budget so this difficult
situation made me to sink deeply but the
best solution is and this shows the
existing situation around the dead area
arrested in the formal image the
construction area created behind the
existing temporary schoolhouse the level
difference over the ground and Street
abode Street above was more than 25
meter pretty steep during in the first
phase
I tried to lay out buildings according
to the account or lines the reason was
because it was it seems to reduce the
cost
furthermore the group of buildings seems
to be adopted to the landscape around it
based on this contour alongside scheme
we tried to various variations after we
came up with a definite proposal that we
need
Municipality was received more detailed
budget information from the national
government the new budget the national
government indicated was very severe
before we got this information our
studies were based on the idea that the
building retained the sole Christian the
reason was because it minimizes the
construction cost in total however the
reality including political condition
was different since Japan is one of the
country that the civil engineering
industry is much much stronger than the
building industry the budget for the
civil engineering development was
abandoned despite this fact the budget
scale for the architectural project was
really small then the option that
required the civil engineering process
euro 30 in this figure was much
profitable for the political budgeting
despite that it costs more I was not
happy about this irrational fact however
I was in the position who must accept it
however of course I was afraid of doing
landfill preparation the reason is
because the landfill preparation with
civil engineering mana is always over
human scale especially in the disaster
area we witnessed the oval scale and
modifications and the construction of
gigantic she wards this photo article by
Freeman's photographer now yaja Takayama
showed the gigantic bill - cumbria that
Cali is a soil that is used
the enormous scale with a lantern
innovation walk-in de cuisine toccata
where the whole town was destroyed by
the tsunami however before the
modernization the land forming used to
be more small skilled disel estate the
landfill over the small local village in
date 1960s where it had not been
modernized it seems that minimized
ground modification made the human scale
praised too deep but a mighty such
little space tilted a small scale and
form modification generated it and human
environment considering these examples I
started the project again and despite
accepting the technology of modern civil
engineering I tried to make the round
form human as much as possible I try to
various variations
I studied both the round form and a
building layout at once I tried lots of
patterns surveying what kinda layout
fits to the landscape of village the
quality of space at the school for
children was also taken into
consideration
furthermore the approach Road for a big
dump trucks must be sold
we architect in Japan sometimes examine
the exaction scheme however we barely
undertake the exaction scheme of civil
engineering then I invited the civil
engineering consultant into our team how
would however the mana of sink
and drawing we were so different that it
was very difficult to communicate each
other and finally our design team
started to produce the physical model of
exaction scheme in order to understand
the mana on the form preparation Obama
months we continued to examine the
relationship between the land reform and
the layout of buildings
then we found that the more we do it the
more notice how it difficult this kind
of layout irritability in this image
with the tips of the site then we were
not able to plan the approach Road fault
attempt furthermore we try to avoid the
retaining wall produced by the modern
severe civil engineering with ecology
since it is always cold however we found
that we were not able to avoid it in
order to process the 25 meter high
finally we started examining the
parallel layout we also accept the
modern retaining wall of course we were
afraid that we were already end to what
the civil engineering technology he
commanded
we are also afraid that the parallel
pattern was very different in kind from
the layout pattern or village so being
patient to such various discomfort we
continue to examine the possibility the
in gradually we came to know the point
of contact between the landscape of the
blades and formalistic parada layout
without retaining wall
only in one direction as much as
possible in order to soften the existing
of them then the level difference of
another direction was processed with a
shallow slope of the embankment in doing
so we try to make the artificial don't
form to blend into the landscape around
it then we have come to the conclusion
that the parallel belt was not bothering
the even look like wrinkles in the
natural land form that is somehow
humorous when that kind of shimmy came
up the game is ours
in this way we gradually in table
interpreted the sibling engineering with
technology this shows final shape of the
land shape round form this shows the
layout of the schoolhouse each school
house was very simple the wooden
structure and hub durable roof there are
six buildings Rock retaining wall
Imperator layout all the circulations
such as corridor and the connecting
corridor were layout parallel to the
retaining wall furthermore the
circulations penetrate buildings connect
each other in doing so despite that the
buildings are separated the various
programs connected to each other and
form the networks all functions and this
shows the retaining wall and Charles
ropes of embankment
[Music]
and this showed the relationship between
the site and topology surrounding the
site it also showed the small way of the
this village behind the building the
building with green roof what the old
gymnasium that has recently demolished
[Music]
and this showed the cutting land level
there were set every four meter that is
the most efficient efficient distance
according to the civil engineering
decoration and this showed the finaland
form most part was cutting and some part
was feeling and then this shows the
layout of the schoolhouse
I set the level over the second floor of
each school house for Mita so that they
can connect each other for example the
second floor the broke three is on the
same level of the first pure of rock
fight there are the small gardens
between the buildings
the ceiling height of lower floor
Tomita determined by the land upon
preparation was daughter high for the
wooden schoolhouse compared to the lower
floor I set up limited ceilings height
for the upper floor in order to enhance
difference and this is Dido afro it is
spacious and bright and this is the
upper floor and compared to the rule of
law it is quite low that makes intimate
atmosphere the Tilted ceilings also
creates the different impression from
the lower floor all the buildings of
using two gardens and the rooms on the
second floor get a view to the sea in
short it will buildings is sandwiched by
two gardens therefore any part of the
buildings is bright and cozy especially
places overlooking the ocean view are
great children can enjoy both the sea
and the mountain addition to the woods
characters there are variety of networks
this shows the connection order not
adult addiction student and teachers can
freely wander from place to place when
it is sunny on the wrong with it wrong
mutational access there are several
connection connecting bridges and this
soda block 3 on the left side and broke
5 on the right side the connection
corridor and the gardens are also shown
in this photo in furthermore it shows
the retaining wall on the right side the
land filling surging into the gardens
and softening the foot of the retaining
wall is also shown all the material and
the technology is cheap and panel
however by means of combining those
materials and finding the nicer
relationship over those materials I
tried to produce nice and human
environment as much as possible and this
is the lowest-level prong it is on the
twenty-three point five meter above sea
level on this level there is a
children's hall and gymnasium and this
is the next level prong it is on the
twenty seven point five meter
sea level and this is on the salty 1.5
meter above sea level there are lots of
general classrooms on this level I
listen to it there is a teacher's office
[Music]
and this shows that general cross room
beside the cross room there is a buffer
area that can be used for any purpose
between the classrooms and the buffer
zone there is a cross partition that can
be widely open so that the cross room
can be extended this buffer zone is
gently separated from the circulation by
the lining of crumbs so there is a
corridor a buffer zone and a cross room
so three elements forms layout area of
space that has various possibilities
some teacher can make full use of it
unfortunately to say some cannot
compared to the adult who are frequently
held back by fixed ideas also length
very flexible they instantly know how to
use and enjoy the space they find where
they like some and they look very
comfortable
and this children he is a great baseball
player but he doesn't like to study like
place where many people pass by and this
is on the 35.5 above sea level on this
level there are general classroom
special classroom and library and
between classrooms we made common spaces
that provide the water facility storage
and close it for the cleaning equipment
this is on the 39.5 above sea level
since this floor is relatively quiet the
consulting rooms that needed privacy are
praised and this is a roof from the
crowd the exterior wall is on one thing
that we were really careful this shows
the area adjacent to the construction
site it showed the pretty big sea walls
and a gap of it the sea wall was broken
by the tsunami attack and the bottom
part of the village you see on the
center part of the photo was washed away
and this shows the village before the
Great East Japan Earthquake I happened
to find this photo and found that the
village was more colorful and more
vividly than now so we thought that the
village must take such variation of
color dark then we studied to research
the crew with a roof and wall of all
houses in the village then we integrated
them into several colors then we try to
apply those several colors onto the roof
and exterior wall of the school house
there are two goals the one is to add
brighter atmosphere to the village the
other is to blend the project into the
village the way to apply color was
little old one color is applied on the
walls dot in veeram enveloping one
garden for example the color surrounded
surrounding the garden cheeks was bright
beige the color surrounding the garden
file was
Piru pink no reason of the colored
research over the color told us that
lots of houses in this village have more
than two material and cars on the Royal
part over the image showed it the reason
is probably because the the maintain one
wall by one wall
according to the damage of the part and
how much they can pay for it we found it
was interesting then we tried to take
OPA such virtual culture as one kind of
bottom-up methodology in this drawing
examined how this project is blended
into the village when it looked from the
fisherman's ownership from the outside
of the project site you can see the
variety of colors they compared to the
impression of from the outside the
atmosphere of each garden has does sense
of unity we also try to the destination
or page station in proper way in the
disaster area of Great East Japan
Earthquake the confusion of the species
of vegetation is very weird the
confusion is the result of the rapid the
construction processes that demanded
enormous amount of transplantation
materials bringing into bringing from
far away so our choices were to restore
the vegetation using the young plants
germinated from the seeds taken near the
site and the young plants taken from
near the mountain the process of the
illustration will be strong however it
will
make the string strong green the
hexagonal cardboard boxes shown in this
photo is the containers of the young
plants we also carefully examined the
planting base there are four steps first
using the many boring data we searched
what kind of store item we can get on
the surface with a new round form two
drawings were overlaid one is the
architectural section and other is a
geotechnical data a second we made a
drawings showing the layout of the kind
of straighten sod we made a chart that
examined the combination of the angle of
the slope and a kind of stratum and each
frame is unique and demands respective
status of plants the enforce we made
another Brown showing the layout of
plants and grant covers and this shows
how the exterior wall was finished third
a auto with the prawns and the ground
cover followed the chart so therefore it
may seem to be odd when you see the
layout of the ground cover although it
seems to be odd I really like the
patterns the minimum number of trees
were planted in order to make the
minimum shadows until the young plants
grows out and for this project I did
only a few workshops with local people
and teachers and this is because they
are so tired of all of the situation
after the disaster
it was a very difficult time for them so
therefore the this project isn't said to
be an example of the kind of bottom-up
project supported by the simple
participatory process however it seems
reasonable for us to think that the wide
range of examination such as the adult
form preparation and the vegetation
distillation that beyond the normal
architecture design work were kind of
bottom-up processes that must be done
and the reason is because they give the
project the sense of richness and
variety then again I referred to the
disturbance I think the use of the civil
engineering technology was a very strong
with disturbance for this project and
that was a very strong for both the
process and the physical environment so
therefore we struggled to decouple it in
several bottom-up ways as much as I
conceive in this case the bottom-up wait
it should be the very architecture the
arrangement of the building the
arrangement of high height the
arrangement of soil and plants the color
etc and this is the last image I will
wrap up today's talk so today I
introduced three project all of the
project have both top-down elements and
bottom-up elements now according to the
project sides the phase of the
combination changes as far as the
experiences of those project is
concerned it is very important to unite
the top-down and bottom-up
organically
furthermore if the project arose an
architect to make the top-down our idea
the architect must must configure the
top known idea in such a way as to
activate the bottle
[Applause]
I just wanted to well while everyone
thinks of their question I just wanted
to start by asking one question which
was something you mentioned at the
beginning with the publication about how
your practice works together with your
students to develop this body of
research on little spaces and I wondered
if you could speak more about the
relationship that you're encouraging
between practice and education how
you're blurring the boundaries between
them or how they can your people working
in your practice can get involved with
what you're exploring with your students
in the university so this create your
practice is always you know having no
time and it is very difficult for stuff
to do kind of research so for me it was
very good chance got a really good
chance to do a detox with Julian because
thank you so much for your talk um I am
afraid I came a little bit late and I
wanted to ask Hill that a little bit
more about little spaces and looking at
one of the projects you showed if this
little spaces are a way of building in a
little bit of informality into the
program or what do I think you call them
buffer zones as well so I just wanted to
know a little bit more about that is the
the purpose of little spaces is there
are several purposes the one post was is
to make a kind of ambiguous space I mean
you know the always the school is that
usually the public school the function
is kind of fixed and also the rooms the
purpose room is fixed but recently in
Japan the educational system is kind of
changed drastically and
we need more ambiguous space to provide
a kind of more polarity or education
like like some some chemistry we
separate the classroom in half and some
you know some group the multi at the
past study and some group to do more
basic study or something like that so we
need to provide the more flexible
flexible kind of friction space to
adjust the adjust the building to the
system open your education I just wonder
what how are you utilizing this type of
diagram
I just wanted know the intention because
it's quite enjoyable
starting from diagrams explaining
position over contemporary architects
but in a way I think can be seen two
different ways one is you try to
construct some sort of unexpected
hierarchy a bit like diagram reminded me
of a Lewis Carroll mathematic sense of
me I don't know
so it's in a way how how are you do you
use this diagram to generate some ideas
or summarizing your pointable so I just
wonder how this diagrams could relate to
your design I'm sorry I made this
diagram for this lecture
so so it's not my tool to generate my
idea but sometimes of course it is very
useful for me - of course structure is
what I am doing kind of but I'm in under
course just I under consciously I think
these kind of things I hope I just
wanted to say thank you again so much
for coming all this way and giving us
such a great talk and although you made
these diagrams for this lecture I think
that first diagram where you show your
position in relationship to everyone
else should maybe be shared with the
architectural community in Japan yeah
the the first diagram the fulcrum
quadrant there is very popular I always
use that is already well known well it
was really wonderful to have you here
and to share all of this with us and we
hope you come back again very soon thank
you very much
[Applause]
