the growth of cities was actually a lack
of autonomy or potentially a fear of
autonomy from the governing bodies that
kind of control the city so I thought
that was an interesting point that he
brought up that hopefully we can pick up
in tonight's discussion so the format of
the evening is basically each of us
because will state their position in a
kind of short presentation and following
that we'll have a conversation about
kind of what this word on the screen
actually means and hopefully open it up
to all of you to ask some questions as
well to briefly introduce tonight's
speakers they have much more extensive
BIOS online but PA Vittorio and Maria
direct the city project PhD by design
and they also run diploma 14 and they
really kind of question how we can break
the divisions between theory and
practice and reclaim architecture as a
project and how it can both change our
discipline and also how we design cities
Nicholas sambhar she graduated from the
AAA earlier this year in June 2018 and
he currently works at forensic
architecture and his work sits between
architecture media and politics and he
uses speculation and allegory to form
essays in space across scales Marie
coolin is the founder and director of
Betts project which is a contemporary
art gallery based in London and her
curatorial aim is to present
architectural objects as works of art
and you'll see a selection of the
architects she's exhibited to date in
her presentation vera van gool graduated
from the AAA in 2014 and she's the
associate director of the new museums
idea city initiative she's organized
public programs exhibitions and
workshops for this initiative in awls
Athens Detroit New York Shanghai and
Toronto and she focuses on how art and
culture can shape cities and Theophilus
is director of the a design research
laboratory and he's the co-founder of
experimental architecture and design
practice minima forms and in both his
teaching and practice he speculates on
the future city and new ways to engage
occupy and inhabit it
so that's a kind of very speedy
introduction to our speakers but please
join me in welcoming them
[Applause]
so thank you manager actually for the
invitation and for the introduction so
great so we are territorial and Maria
and as mind she said Ashley we work in
the city architecture ph.d program so we
will be presenting just one position
that we both of us we share but we also
share I think actually with the
researchers actually who work with us in
the program and of course this word
autonomous or the word autonomy rather
has been incredibly important for us in
the past few years we are very
interested in actually what it means to
construct a form of autonomous practice
but we also feel that very often the
discussion on the on this idea of
autonomy becomes very vague when we
don't root it in the actual conditions
of our practice and particularly the
labor conditions of our practice in a
specific moment in time so what we
thought to do today before the
discussion was just to present one case
specifically the case of an artist
Albrecht Durer that that you see now
pictured in this slide that we feel is a
very interesting actually example of an
artist who debated in his own work very
clearly through visual but also text
evidence his own position towards this
idea of autonomy we also think it's
interesting actually to talk about him
because he was at the very beginning at
the birth almost we would say of the
discipline of art in fact
as a craft as a job at the beginning of
the modern era and so we feel that a lot
of the problems that he was facing and
he was debating in his artworks but also
in his texts are very much actually
still valid today and in a way to
retrace actually his own position means
actually to take a position ourselves
actually in the you know above the above
on this topic so I will let now actually
tell Vittorio take you on this very
short sorry can you go back just a
second on this very
shorten actually you know two minute
introduction why do really is important
for us and why we feel that actually his
way of discussing his autonomous or not
position is still very inspirational for
us today
yeah actually the reason why Marie and
myself become kind of obsessed by this
artist is because you don't actually
belong to a generation of artists that
realize there were very conscious that
the work was no longer based on craft
but on ideas and intellectual work and
this position was so clear Tudor that as
you can see from this famous
self-portraits which is actually if I'm
not wrong the very first artists
self-portrait that is signed by the
artist himself with these famous
actually logo that you see actually on
the on the left and you see that your is
so self-confident with his own position
that he portrayed himself as Christ he
almost has actually almost the blessing
hand and he really actually fashioned
himself as a dinner jig creator which is
actually the idea of the artist creator
that we know since then of course you'll
actually was not only an artist he was
an intrapreneur
first of all an intrapreneur of himself
so he wrote a lot and he almost
fashioned all his work in a very
autobiographical way but he also
reflected in a rather problematic way on
the status of the artist as an
autonomous figure and perhaps the most
telling image of this condition is this
famous picture melancholia which has
produced endless interpretations and you
might be familiar with the one by
Panofsky but actually what is really
interesting about this image is that is
almost a self-portrait of the artist
totally lost towards actually this
condition of autonomy is that he or she
has achieved and melancholy is exactly
this state of utter discomfort and
sadness of an artist who doesn't belong
to a community anymore but is actually
surrounded by this plenty
of tools but he or she doesn't know
actually how to use them next for us
actually Ural is also very important
because he brought a lot but also he
tried it invested a lot on pedagogy and
perhaps one of the is the elder of one
of the most interesting theories of art
and to a certain extent also
architecture on geometry you enter bass
under may assume the instructions on
measure and what is really interesting
about this book is that here durin
although he saw himself as a artist he
really wanted to teach artisans and
craftsmen about exactly the knowledge
that was making artists more important
than craftsmen the problem in that this
pedagogical projector failed because the
book was too difficult for craftsmen and
I would say that even today it would be
very difficult for a PhD students to
really understand the incredible wealth
of precision of this of this book and I
think that maybe last image this this
kind of failure is very much reflected
in this picture which is one of the last
illustrations of this book and actually
is called the monument to the vanquished
peasant the book actually by Durrell was
published in the mid twenties of the
sixteenth century at the time of a very
famous battle that just happened before
the Battle of Franken Hauser which is
actually a battle where the Lords of
taringa have defeated the peasants who
have tried to revolt against their Lords
and you would actually celebrates aside
somehow with the Lord's he celebrate his
victory he doesn't show actually the
winners he shows actually the losers the
peasants so it's a very ambiguous
actually monument that celebrates a low
a lost battle rather than a one battle
but he also shows actually the subject
that the rise of artists like dura and
architects as autonomous let's say
artists actually came to the expenses of
another class the lower class the class
of peasants and workers and for us this
is really a cautionary tale of how every
let's say our on it's a science idea of
autonomy is always in conflict with
class conditions that in a way and and
the conditions of production that
influence the work that we do and
therefore Marie and myself believe that
any discussion on autonomy should really
be discussed within the conditions of
production that produce our knowledge
but also our professional status and I
think this reflection at this point is
very important because if at the time of
Dura what was downgraded was manual
labor and and intellectual labor was on
the contrary on the rise today we live
in an era where intellectual labor
itself is being pro let arise it's being
actually downgraded and I think it's
interesting to reflect really on the
archaeology of this process by going
back to this very specific moment thank
you hi so I'd like to talk about my
position towards autonomy in relation to
identity and specifically mediated
identity but before that I just want to
briefly speak about sort of the work
that interests me because I just only
recently graduated a few months ago so
predominantly what I'll be referring to
is the thesis that I've been developing
in my education so I like writing essays
an architecture for me is an essay in
form similarly to how I see projects
like Pyrenees santa maria del plata in
my work i curate arguments and design
allegories that are sometimes buildings
and sometimes methodologies but
nonetheless aimed at questioning how we
use architecture as a comment to debate
but also to reveal different ways of how
we see and understand the world and my
work always tends to enjoy issues of
political ontology media and spectacle
and how these forces inform identity and
identity making architecture provides
for me an intersection for all these
issues and a mediator in itself and
studying these topics and when it comes
to autonomy an interesting starting
point I guess to my position would be
the word Norma's from after Mia in the
Greek definition that talks about which
means law but also not law in in our
judicial understanding of law or how to
govern the self after the law of a land
of a tribe or even the law in the laws
with which we used to sort of describe
objects or cities for me extend to this
idea of rules of applied rules rules of
a particular language rules that define
an object rows sort of in systems of
naming and indexing of categorizing in
other words the means by which we
determine the world around us and we
classify it the way in which we define
the edges of what belongs and what does
not belong so the question of where
you're from refers to a place and that
place for me is media mess on the the
in-between and by media I mean any
technology from architecture to language
that is used for communication and the
fact is to mediate one must always
succumb to a presentation whether in
word or ornament perception is
aesthetics and resources representation
as the moment of people allows itself to
be represented
it is no longer free it no longer exists
its information is discrimination and
who curates the space of information
determines the edges of identity so I
feature quite a few of my projects but
the one that you've been seeing up to
now is my fist my 50th thesis which is
titled Terra media and explorers
explores precisely these notion notions
of autonomy and identity and this is
done by treating media as a territory
and Terra media imagines imagines two
cities are utopia that's striving for
edge lessness on your left and the city
akin to what we what we understand with
spaces with seemingly fixed edges and
the characters in both scenarios engage
in a Socratic debate across the screens
the edge versus edgeless becomes the
foundational argument of communication
since for me without edges we cannot
communicate and without information we
cannot discriminate which is I guess
foundational for any sort of social
contract and interdependence II and in
this and following on this here we've
got an algorithm that I've trained to
read in real time the surfaces of the
city and this was a study on sovereignty
a particular term of autonomy attached
to the modern sort of understanding of
the state and I guess start a rather
naive or maybe a big ambitious question
was how sovereign is a building is
sovereignty something that can be
quantified is it something that the
degrees of power essentially can form
at psychological spectrum and this also
becomes interesting in when we talk
about sort of how we relinquish own
autonomy to an automaton or to other
sort of media and it opens the issue of
autonomy and identity in its
contemporary technological dimension and
so to conclude this territory of media
that I enjoy investigating talks about
identity as as as constructed from
fragments that they give meaning that
define edges and all borders the lines
and symbols on a map the fretwork of
walls and the fence is on a ground and
often the complex and measurements by
which we organize our lives are all
explanations of identity we construct
borders literally and figuratively to
fortify our sense of who we are and who
we might become and we are always we
always find ourselves living on an edge
always becoming always in between in me
DRS it is a question of who determines
these edges and who and on what scale
individual city or state has the power
over drawing these borders that make the
link between autonomy and identity
something that is bound to an
ever-shifting territory of of media
thank you
[Applause]
hello so I'm not an architect I didn't
study any architecture I've got control
pre art background so I've been trained
as an artist and for some reasons I
stopped being an artist and I came to
London and I studied business a business
and doing one course one teacher was
speaking about what is the niche and my
English was really bad and I'm not
really good at business neither well at
at that moment and in French anisha's is
a hurt fault dog and I really liked this
idea I was wow I need to find my niche
and because for me it was a little kind
of a little space a little house where
you feel comfortable where you can just
be nice with yourself and to stuff and I
really liked also the idea of supporting
artists of helping them to show their
work and to understand their work a bit
better and and to explain to work to the
others so but I didn't want to add
another art gallery to the London scene
because there were too many so I decided
to do a key tech chure and I was coming
to the a video of fun because my friend
I'll ban was studying here and I found
that architects and students were doing
amazing things here very creative so I
say okay let's do something so I started
to do this this little gallery has a
pop-up gallery and the first exhibition
I did was to go to Dubai and to exhibit
office/guest and gears and David and
Savannah with some photographs of past
Benson it was a very nice exhibition but
nobody came except the creator of the
puppet
which was quite cool and then I had this
kind of temporal space where I've been
exhibiting Pia Vittorio and Peter
Buckley and and this little gallery I
was just doing exhibitions and I found
that it was really nice to do that and I
had really good replies from the public
and it was like oh people are starving
for exhibitions like that so it took me
two years to fund a space and I don't
know if we put the window shop yeah this
one so I haven't done that much so the
shelters are still really rusty is not
automatic and you got the space on the
ground floor of 30 square meters and
there's a basement space of 30 square
meters too and then because I'm not an
architect and I didn't study
architecture the problem was where I can
find architects and and I found
atomically online so I went to to meet
him and he said yeah okay so I did the
first exhibition with Peter Buckley and
it was kind of a success and then I met
javi toyou and we did kind of the same
exhibition with a pink wall and the pipe
in the middle of Soho and it was really
nice and so each time I'm I'm kind of
choosing some some works from architects
some works that I can relate to my art
world I think so
so for me they're about architecture but
they also really artworks and oh and
that's why or so so that's studio Mumbai
and that's we can't see the greedy
really well but that's kind of little
little window grid that he's been
finding in Mumbai and you got graphite
goggle which is very phallic and really
heavy and that's an imaginary city by
Ostia Mumbai so it's a panel of
cows with some little object which
reminds him of the city and that Shack
on the lotsa a French architect from
Bordeaux who died in 2002 and he's never
been really well known in France we say
he's a confidential architect which mean
is really good but a bit scandalous so
we don't really speak about him but this
project it's it's one of the plans for
the juicy Opaka the Shuster University
project it was a competition but finally
nothing has been done but it's been
doing beautiful plans and yeah just
beautiful dance I mean I can't tell
about that but it's going to take a
while but to come back to the autonomy I
really wanted to do this kind of it's
this kind of gallery because I found
that it could be the space where I could
be creative in a certain way where I
could be myself where I could show
exactly what I want because it's also a
private gallery so it's not publicly
funded and I do what I want
I've got some rules I've got some
constraints but I'm totally autonomous
except if I don't sell the work because
I found the gallery by setting artworks
so that the thing but maybe we can speak
about that a bit later
[Applause]
hi everybody my name is Fiona from home
I'm a graduate of day a I graduated in
2014 of diploma 10 and then I left
architecture and it was kind of kind of
to do with the struggle that I've been
having with autonomy um go to next night
in a way I don't believe in autonomy I
believe more so in Frankenstein and kind
of different autonomy that also get her
shape me recently I was asked to make a
presentation of my work which I thought
was ridiculous and I started off by just
dragging a bunch of screenshots of
basically everything that I've done from
exhibitions to writing to videos to
table designs to somewhat architectural
projects and realize that none of those
individual projects represented me but
the kind of lure that it lets you all
together was more so an image that I
could identify it in and I kind of see
the city that way as something that is
inherently anything and everything but
autonomous it's a web of structures of
clubs of power of people of
relationships of securities of finance
and I guess we as citizens are some of
the only agents of autonomy in our way
to have an ideology and our ability to
enter these webs but that does not
depend on who we are it really depends
on our capacity to negotiate to break
and enter and to disrupt these different
systems that are there could you go so
when I got invited for this talk that
was basically saying to to view the city
as a curatorial project
I got terribly excited because it's a
very problematic exercise to declare the
city as a curatorial
space cities are dark they're unfair
they're harsh or Stern and like the
build embodiment of policy structures
they are basically installed to serve
those that are in charge and not
necessarily those that are trying to
make their living or make an autonomy in
the city so in one way it is great to
see the city as a curatorial project
because it assigns a certain type of
responsibility to who that is I don't
know yet but I guess a lot of my work is
trying to figure that out I work at the
new Museum where I'm the associate
director of idear City which is
basically a project that really is in
yeah initiated to see if we could
perhaps have the exercise of viewing the
city as a curatorial project we don't do
kind of standard exhibitions with
contemporary artists but we like to view
the city as dark work itself and trying
to abstract what different agents but
are those are designers architects or
community activists make that space
liveable and could potentially make that
space nicer or responsive to needs today
so this is the kind of snippet of the
facade it's a Sanna building built in
2007 which was just before the economic
crisis hit New York City which basically
made our program very responsive to
everything and anything that happened in
the u.s. afterwards and you can go to
the next one what's been great about
idea cities that we run very responsive
so we've held residency programs in
cities like Detroit Athens and ro which
is very problematic because you as a
museum come in and basically say hey
there's some cool organizations and want
to work with you have some interesting
topics like older refugee crisis let's
make an art program out of it but
inherently if we don't do that who else
will that's not an argument but it is to
say that we often view the city from a
perspective that is from academia or
it's from architectural practice but
it's not necessarily from what is
shaping the city community centers
neighborhood centers social housing etc
and with idear city we've been able to
build a framework that invites anybody
that we feel cares about the city in and
come and present that work to an
interdisciplinary group of people what
we do with idea city often is take what
we cannot do in a museum outside of its
walls into public space this is a drone
shot an illegal drone shot because you
need to file for permits to get a drone
to shoot anything in New York these days
of any way of idear city New York which
was a big massive public program in
which ever took part as well when she
was still helming storefront in which we
invited over a hundred speakers to
respond to the question what actions
makes make the city to you and those
changed from what are their design
features to 3d prints to security
systems to community public art
installations this is a shot of
gathering what we try to do is play very
much with the traditional form of a
lecture is that having a mic is that
sitting in a roundtable discussion or is
that without a mic and what we noticed
is that actually this the set up without
a mic in which everybody could speak
without hierarchy without one assigned
speaker was the most popular and was the
most interesting one of the other
elements that's crucial about idea
cities that we really tried to say that
the cities not made by architects so one
of my proudest maybe not the best place
here to say it is but one of my proudest
achievements is that I've run many
programs without architects that's not
to say that architects aren't to be
valued for what they do in the city but
it's to say that the power that
architects have is shared by a lot of
other people here we are in this photo
in RL which is an old railway station
that was transformed into an cultural
hub what we do is often take buildings
that aren't necessarily yet designed as
art spaces and situate ourselves in
there to kind of show how easy it is to
transform vacant railway stations
hospitals music schools and transform
them into spaces of gathering and
thought one of the artworks that
and artists that I feel very much
resonates with autonomy with my work
with my interests is actually not an
architect it's Jonah come fro who's a
filmmaker and this is a shot of his
Hemsworth riot films which is made in
the late 80s as a response to the riots
that were happening in 85 and what he
did was take medium of art video in this
particular instance and allow that as a
platform for other people and other
voices that aren't necessarily empowered
to reimagine and rewrite what has
happened today and I feel in that sense
if you could go to the next slide it
comes up to a lot of the work that I do
currently I'm working on kind of
curatorial Commission for an exhibition
in New York that takes the same premise
art as a public space in this case again
video in which we can imagine video as a
site for commerce as a site for politics
as a site for individual identity
expression etc and if you can go through
next one what's been terribly exciting
is when I got this kind of Commission
they asked me to come up with an
exhibition project and rather than me
renting one commercial gallery and
having ten screens I realized that this
is more interesting if it could operate
part as a kind of citywide network that
activates all sites in lower Manhattan
that have helped shape video culture to
what it is today
this is a steal of Chicago kobato's Soho
so rain-damaged film which basically
covers the damage that was done by
Huracan to her and her husband noon June
Park video archive in a way and what's
amazing is take my architectural
interests of my interest in cities but
also allow other art mediums to kind of
navigate that and then built an
exhibition that's not in one space but
it's across five to ten different
locations in New York and in that way
the format of viewing the curatorial
which normally is entering a museum is
transformed into kind of a city route
where you can walk into different spaces
that you normally never come you have to
go up two staircases down into basements
and
that way the public space that you are
that you're accessible to is transformed
into that of an event into that of a
situation which brings it back to I
guess my interest in the curatorial and
the city can you hear me I don't like a
phone challenged a lot of times so for
me autonomous and autonomy is a word
that somehow symptomatic of a lot of the
things that we pursue in the practice
but from a perspective of the word that
I would say is more around the subject
of agency I think if you give agency to
something in a sense you're giving a
certain capacity to things themselves to
actually participate in the world so I'm
gonna read just a really quick statement
and then I think we'll just go through
the slides but a statement is somehow
articulated by using a man named Hans
whole lines kind of provocation to
architecture so on 68 Austrian radical
architect console line proclaimed alice
east architect or everything is
architecture published originally as a
manifesto that appeared in the journal
bow it was a provocation I reflected a
heightened awareness of the limitations
of traditional definitions of
architecture in favor of an
understanding of design as an
experimental vehicle for the
construction of new forms of
communication beyond building oline
stated a true architecture of our time
will have to redefine itself and expand
its means many areas outside of the
realm of architecture will enter as
architecture and architects will have to
enter new fields all our architects
everything is architecture architecture
on an expanded field of experimentation
resonates with great magnitude
as we live in an age where science
fiction has become factor contemporary
ages as radical as ever with change
latency and uncertainty being the new
norm the ones comfortable and understood
historical models of the past have
proven limited in their capacity to
engage and address the complexities of
what we could call the contemporary
condition as we live in ever-evolving
information rich environments the
question is not why but how can
architecture participate can I have a
first slide okay so let's just say that
that's a statement from my side speaking
from the ghost of whole line and at the
same time if we look at this idea of the
city if we look at the idea of agency
and autonomy the nature of what we speak
about is always beyond building it's
beyond infrastructure it's beyond
representation it's something that
shared its time-dependent
it's a medium that actually manifests
itself over time and has a process of
becoming Frank Lloyd Wright made a
provocation which was an experiment in
his own right you called it broadacre
City but if you look at the image of
broadacre City you'll see flying
vehicles it wasn't just a plan in terms
of an idea of how a city should be
organized but all aspects fell into the
scenario of actually how one would have
mobility models how an idea of this
thing could happen he provoked this idea
when he published a book in 1932 called
a disappearing city and at the same time
he used a four square mile kind of grids
that he was sort of problematizing up
until his death until 1959 the city as a
project and I think this is something
that we share the idea of what is this
new space of production was all parts I
think of trying to think about things in
a much more ecological sense of how
things interrelate with other things and
Frank Lloyd Wright who you know
one could say is a bit of a master was
actually really
problematize with that kind of question
itself the Nexus slide I'm going to make
the argument also that technology plays
a very important role in that and the
idea of speculation and experimentation
is absolutely fundamental to that so I
always use a slide
anybody who's heard me before I
apologize but it's not like I'm a
Nicholas Negroponte even with you know
no other references but for me honestly
it's a very important moment in time
one's ideas of certain technologies were
coming into the field of architecture
and problematizing actually what the
role of architecture was he finished at
MIT two years later he set up a lab the
lab was basically at looking at CAD
systems and CAD tools he called it the
architecture machine group and then for
10 years operated within that's the
world of artificial intelligence the
world of robotics all of these things
that were germinating within MIT were
also part of this world and what was the
architecture machine group after a
ten-year period of sustained
experimentation and trying to discover
possibilities and potential and
speculation became something called the
Media Lab architecture said the
questions that problematize a certain
aspect of technology regardless of what
motivated that that set up a certain
kind of fundamental thesis that were
shared and collective and that was part
of a communication revolution that we
witnessed and the architecture I would
make that argument played a very vital
and important role because in a certain
sense our unorthodoxy approach to
actually working on these problems
actually was something that was very
powerful if the next slide if we look at
today it's a video so if you play it may
be cool we also have to think beyond
ourselves so when I speak about agency
its we can speak about human to human
interaction we can speak about human and
machine interaction and we could speak
about machine
interacting with other machines this is
part of a world where everything
actually has a certain agency a certain
kind of way of understanding the world
and it connects back I think to certain
things that resonate with me which is
that we're all observers of an in the
world it's a kind of radical
constructivist approach towards some of
this thinking that's neural neural
network II stuff I should be a video -
I'm gonna close with just the project
that came to us as a speculation so I
have a small office with my brother it's
more like I wouldn't call it a business
either it's like a me and my brother
coming together to do stuff with some
friends we call it minimal forms and we
were asked by Nesta which is a part of
the innovation department for the UK to
speak about the future of machines the
future of machines as far as we were
concerned was really about speculating
on the idea of the city about
architecture and urbanism and mobility
and to think about how those things
interrelate the reason for that is we
were part of a group of people speaking
about the future of democracy the future
of money the future of everything future
for us is very much about the present
it's like you know McLuhan sense if
you're interested in the future look
towards the day because people live in
the past or the future of the future as
a present what we were trying to look at
is like what would happen if we sort of
reject the idea of planning and reject
the idea of blueprints and reject the
idea of a master plan and sort of
speculate about what it would be like if
we could create an augmenting system or
that the city that we know here like
London or a city like Detroit that's a
shrinking infrastructure had an adaptive
model that could sort of participate we
just speculated on the fact that that
should be mobile we speculated on the
fact that organization should be
something that was real-time and that's
something that had the capacity to learn
and adapt and evolve with us the idea of
the house the idea the collective was
something that would emerge through our
daily interactions
this wasn't a reactive system this was a
system like a lot of the systems that
are in our
world that are trying to understand us
but instead of to try to understand us
to sell us different stuff from Amazon
or whatever to try to use that there's a
strategy of actually how we could occupy
and how we could move about the city
looking at a lot of the models that are
already going to be deployed in cities
like London like autonomous vehicles and
so forth these kind of technologies if
they're not somehow problematized and if
they're not explored within the space of
what the city actually is and to be
honest with you the consequences of that
is that habits just like all of the
machine learning algorithms that are
running today are basically going to
fossilize what we know as the model of
actually learning of how we should live
in the future
I'm very much interested of using
architecture as a very subversive
technology partly because architecture
is so slow partly because it makes so
many demands that it's shared and
collective partly because anybody who's
in the business of ever trying to
realize anything will understand that
the social and the political are very
much embodied in absolutely every step
of the way and that the cultural aspect
of all of that stuff I think is a power
of what actually unites rooms like this
regardless of whatever we want to say
whatever camp we are if we like grids or
we like blobs or we like whatever there
is a necessity I think for people to
sort of also understand the technology
is not something outside of us it's very
human it's not something that we put
back in the box it's actually that's out
there in the world and we have to engage
with that sometimes that means actually
literally moving beyond architecture in
terms of the traditional sense of
building looking at a moment in time
like potentially like negroponte e and
then sort of looking that especially for
the young people in the audience with
new eyes to sort of understand actually
how you can sort of contribute and
participate I'm very much interested in
participatory models I also think that
agency from me is what gives autonomy to
things and I think the future of all of
the stuff is that we're gonna be living
with this one way or the other
and so the challenge I guess from my
side to people is just participate and
to do that you actually have to really
engage and to engage that means you
actually have to try to understand
before we have these kind of opinions
about these subjects the reason for that
is the same people that create these
subjects are also the same people that
are also very fearful of it because they
somehow reinforce habit and artificial
intelligence and machine learning is not
something new this has been going on
since the time of Nicola Ponte it's a
science that died and now all of a
sudden has emerge and everything is a I
and I think realistically speaking for
anybody that's invested in any of these
things I mean my definition of
architecture is that it's spatial it's
practice is its medium its time-based
its evolving these things I think we may
all share in different ways we may have
different ways of speaking about it but
I think it's something that is important
to sort of talk about so anyway thank
you
[Applause]
thank you all for a very diverse array
of positions on a word that we kind of
chose because it means everything in
nothing so I think it was really
interesting to hear all the different
positions but I wanted to pick up on
something that very you mentioned about
how it's sometimes problematic to kind
of jump into a situation and I guess the
brief of how we interpret autonomous
system view the city is the curatorial
project that it's sometimes hard to just
dive into a situation and and start to
curate something as vast and complex as
the city but you also said if we don't
do it who will and I think that's
interesting with the group of people we
have around the table that whether you
see yourself as an architect an artist a
curator what's your role in kind of
bringing together these different forces
or providing platforms and I think this
applies to everyone
providing platforms to change the city
to to to actually fight against these
conditions of class and production that
are limiting maybe how certain people
have access to shaping the city or how
do we control like the media and
identity of the city I think each of you
have a different position on that but I
guess there's a way to bring all of you
in conversation with each other to speak
about where you see your role in the
curatorial project of the city so I
think what has been exciting about the
role that I have which is not to have
the responsibility of an architect but
being able to shape the responsibilities
at large for architects for designers
for artists for policy makers
strategists etc one of the key things
that I think is crucial to understanding
the city is to not sit in a room just
with architects and it's really not
because I don't like architects I love
architects my brain is an architect but
it's because I think we have a tendency
to select things as if they're bricks as
if they're tiles as if they're something
that we could arrays or delete in a
model or a week and backspace in a
document and that's not the city the
cities everything else so when I say
that
problematic to come in as a museum and
as you said we've done programs all over
the world literally in every part except
pretty much quite ironically Africa
because we can't get funding for it
strange thing we're like we would love
to go anywhere but it's very hard to get
there right it inherently carries the
problem of what the museum as an agency
is it brings forward this yeah this
conversation about authenticity and
players so what we try to do is shift
the conversation from the city as a
designed project or something that
somebody can actually even be an
architect on but take it as a condition
that is now and then we as a museum have
our own building that is static but
everything else we can change we can
change our exhibitions we can change our
staff we can change our wallpapers and
we can change who we're working with so
when we go into these cities one of the
key things that we actually identify
it's part of a kind of learning curve
that I've been undergoing is everybody
that disagrees or doesn't want to work
with us it's quite likely the person
that we want to work with so this
ability to choose a line or a color or
wool or a reference it's completely out
of your own is taken away and that is a
very unique experience that it's very
different in architecture school but it
comes back to the purpose of selecting
and it comes back to a conversation
about obviously intellect and
intelligence but also about morality and
I think that is a lot what is missing
autonomy without morality is very little
in my in my opinion and I think that is
the same for us as a museum we
understand that we're not the building
sector were not completely dependent on
public fund me we have funny we have a
lot of land trophy that supports our
projects for not architects we're not
designers we're basically nobody except
ability to create situations and
experiences and that is to say that we
are also in such a privileged position
to do so in New York that some of that
privilege privilege of being a cultural
icon in one week
and bring people to the table that
normally would not sit in the table one
of the key things and one of the
projects is actually most architectural
on what I'm proud of is a project we did
in Detroit which was my first residency
program is very complicated city and
what you have had there is quite simply
put policy people speaking to policy
people are architects speaking to
architects and activists speaking to
activists nobody was willing to sit
around the same table but also knowing
you as a museum come in as a neutral
agent you have the ability to build
those bridges that aren't necessarily in
place this is not an academic exercise
is not the most interesting essay but it
is a really great project about
collaborations that just don't happen
after school that don't happen when
you're stuck in your own discipline and
in that way to see to use the curatorial
gaze to look at the city as I think a
very interesting exercise but the word
curatorial on its own I think should be
the word that's been invested under
investigation today because I think that
is very complex complex word because it
inherently describes a certain type of
choice but I don't think everything is a
choice you use it just now to say that
you curate text or you curate sentences
or something and that is the way that
we're describing this word it's choosing
as a designing is it what is curating
and I think because we are an
established museum we have the ability
to ask ourselves that question I on my
own have much limited autonomy to ask
that question and I think that is why
it's also an exercise of skill I think
it's interesting that we are all talking
about that from a different perspective
you've seized it does very well looping
back in to respond to that maybe a pivot
or an Maria because you started to talk
about I guess the point that you made
about autonomy without morality because
I think that was something new I think
there is something we probably both
share having also some things together
on projects I have to do with city
administrations and so and so forth and
I guess it's pretty obvious to all of us
that architecture is just about the
least autonomous form of practice
actually to
it's maybe a form of practice that has
the least or the least recognizable
value and that 99% of what we do is read
about compromising is about actually
negotiating and is about actually taking
in much more than in fact designing or
or imposing order and I think that all
of that is something that we that we
have to accept because that's the
reality but what I really liked actually
in the u.s. position is the fact
actually you still have faith that
architectural knowledge has something to
contribute to all of this now there is a
form of agency that we can still you
know recuperate and that's something
that I think we very much share we share
this kind of hope out of almost despair
of our experience in fact actually with
clients and particularly when these
clients are institutional clients is
almost worse than when they are in fact
actually private clients actually I
would say that it is worse in many cases
so the question is that probably for us
this world almost is always like this
kind of quest for a form of hope that we
can really recuperate this agency and
another thing that actually I think you
said is absolutely spot-on is this
question of understanding the ecology in
which we operate and and I think it's
fantastic the work that you guys do
actually with technology we don't quite
have the skills to do that what we try
to do is to look at the economic side of
things but I think that two things kind
of meeting you know trying to understand
what are these conditions that make us
in fact actually so not autonomous and I
just want to say one other thing I found
really incredibly meaningful and somehow
both heartbreaking but also interesting
when Murray explained actually how she
was looking for her niche and she said
my niche is going to actually make me
autonomous as much as I can make it work
within market conditions and I think
that is exactly I think it's a very good
observation because that's what we are
all looking for now how can we create
this niche within market conditions that
are not always in
or so so yeah I would say that yeah we
really I would agree we don't really
believe that autonomy as it needs to
exist but it's definitely a horizon
towards which we try to mean I have to
say that although I have a lot of
respect for curators because there are
workers like anyone else I'm a little
bit suspicious about the whole idea of
Korra torial as a kind of big widows now
not even practiced because as a practice
as a value but really as a kind of
condition a lot of people now use to
describe how our world works and the
reason for that is because it is exactly
this kind of a big wa t of artistic
practice and to a certain extent sorts
architectural practice that is also
often used by institutions to I would
say economically downgrade the work of
artists and architects because the more
actually anyone anything can be
architecture and anyone can be an artist
which is great of course and of course
it has a lot to do with also
democratization of something that until
recently was very elitist the flip side
of that is that artistic work and
architectural work doesn't have value
and and the skyrocketing precarity that
is a reality of our profession is also
the result of this kind of 60s 1960s
ideas that you know anything could be
art and architecture and I think now
this is a very institutionalized
statement and position very powerful
institutions are actually are really
using these ethos as a way to increase
actually precarity but also to increase
the validation of those institutions and
so for me the question of autonomy is
also a question of self validation
I mean how we can find strategies even
within those institutions that somehow
are not just in a kind of blind way
creating value for for the
but create value that can also be take
back and I think this is actually why
the curatorial it's a very interesting
battlefield I mean I'm not saying that
it's something we should reject but we
should question this kind of paradigm
because for me the corridor today in our
own profession is the real social
factory is the factory in which in fact
exploitation is often being it's funny
because I always had to refuse to have
the word creator but no one could call
me anything else because they could not
see there are not buildings therefore
what are you doing but it's interesting
that we are talking about kora toriel
with the word autonomous in the world
when the word autonomy somehow crashed
the art wall or the architecture world
was in the search of something that
stood in front or in relationship to
other disciplines that actually could be
identified as such and could actually
stand in moments of somehow inability to
articulate the values to articulate the
power something and to say you know this
is there is a particular idea that
actually needs to be respected that
needs to be and the student needs to be
valued and so the problem within that
root of autonomy is I can have a
singular argument that no one else could
understand that was actually taken for a
ride within architecture
left us in this place where we are right
now that is on the side of the road in
which no one understands in which that
the space of autonomy what actually that
would we do what is the value that we
bring and that actually did not only
happen in architecture I think it
happened in many other fields and that's
why the figure of the Creator that one
who actually articulates the tries to
make sense that tries to actually bring
people together from different
disciplines from different areas who
actually ultimately brings visibility to
the labor structures as a way to really
bring that artwork into another space is
something that I find it paradoxical and
the worst moment of my career career was
when actually I was invited to a
conference that was called creating the
curatorial and I wanted to really get
out of the room writers like like it's
totally unacceptable but so the question
here is to understand the symptom of the
usage of that word of like
creating a cheese we are creating a text
we are creating a word so because we do
need to understand the agency ultimately
and that I think is what was brought
like what is that what are the questions
that we are asking what is that that we
are trying to address the regardless of
that disciplinary label that we carry
and so for me then the question comes in
to ultimately what is that that that we
want to use that autonomy for and in
this case you play it very clearly let
us look specifically into questions of
labor right talk about agency but then
the question is of course trying to
understand how that entire new universe
that is merging in front of us with
algorithms and AI is actually making a
sitter a product of capital or actually
can make a product of life or a product
of engagement of some of the values that
we carry so the question here to me is
that how do we abandon that they have
autonomy and how to actually rise the
new questions because I think autonomy
in and of itself is ultimately as a
space of strength and a space of power
if you want and and I think idea city in
a certain way a project that I know
obviously very well was always about
what are the ideas right what are the
ideas that each one of those cities
wants to put forward and how does the
school of architecture like the AAA
tries to not be an autonomous
institution in itself but actually tries
to understand itself outside of its
boundaries and tries to start asking the
right question so maybe as a way of
shifting the conversation to the
audience I think it's time for you to
ask the questions and maybe to even make
your own little two minutes
articulations of autonomy so if I if I
may add a question thanks to all your
your presentations I mean I would like
to link the notion of authorship to the
question of autonomy and authorship not
necessarily a singular act of isolated
imposing my ideas not at all there is
collective or the shape that is critical
is doubtful authorship but authorship as
a sort of taking responsibility for
having ideas so ideas City ultimately I
think the idea
is related to the brain of individuals
and the individual as you are all
individuals are sort of related to the
power of your brain whether this relates
then to mechanisms and autonomous
mechanisms of machinery like artificial
intelligence and so on but ultimately
I'm questioning my role your role as
authors is authorship still a concept or
are we giving up authorship and Victoria
was speaking about the let's say
institutionalized
crisis of of the profession perhaps
delegating to to the curator but that
doesn't matter curator it may be a
different form of authorship but I'm
questioning the idea of authorship do we
still believe in that not as a heroic
role can be a very modest a very humble
way of making a contribution but do we
believe in authorship autonomy or not
well as much I enjoy of course like
anyone else in to be the author of my
own work I also have to say that if you
really study the history of architecture
there is nothing more damaging than the
whole idea of authorship I think that
for me architecture really started to go
downhill when this obsession with outer
shape which actually was clearly stated
by Elham Battista Alberti became
actually the main tool which in fact I
intellectual labor was elevated are the
expenses of craft of manual labor so of
course we all enjoy to be the Alpha and
as you said to take responsibility for
what we put forward the so there is
absolutely something rewarding in being
acknowledged as an author of something
but we know that in our profession out
ership in architecture is a pure
Apocrypha because we know that behind
the face of the architect and the name
of the architect through which a
building or a project isn't
there is an army of people who often
actually are really producing in fact
the architecture and precisely because
their authorship is not acknowledged we
have the labor consequences that we all
know are very problematic in our
profession so I think we have to be very
careful about other because it's
something that definitely satisfy our
ego and all of us have an ego of course
but historically speaking it's been a
tool not to really downgrade the agency
that actually produce architecture and
not just architecture if I may add and I
agree with you that the curatorial is
problematic in terms of institutions
100% and I believe that authorship is
very complicated to assign to a curator
the same in a way as its assigned to an
architect it's a branding exercise for
inherently a fancy term of a decorator
but we do live in the reality that is
today where auto-ship is like you said
it is kind of very much important to
have yourself in order to make a living
right so I think the curator role and
the curator as a word has basically
become part of a branding exercise to
help people show that they have an
individual take on it look if I work for
an institution I have no need to put my
name on anything it's a new museum a
dear City program and I waited I work I
really have no interest and who puts the
best ideas forward as long as the
program is great but when it comes to
something on myself I need to think
about what my own feasibility is and how
I fit into the structures and economic
systems etc and all of a sudden I have
to be like oh my god I do have
authorship because that is the system in
which we work we work so it's authorship
like how you said it's linked to
individuality and that is one of the key
issues that we are facing today I
believe how we deal with individuality
in terms of much larger processes I'm
very happy for the entire discipline of
curator to be reduced thrown off the
entire world as long as I do still keep
my job in a way right so that is the
complicated system
it's totally cool yeah I I think
sometimes these conversations they
become amazingly cyclical like and to
take Eva's point about asking questions
I think somehow we need to find
mechanisms to ask more appropriate
questions now that's not it's not me
being a bad boy it's me just sort of
asking if authorship like like was just
mentioned was something about
individuality could we construct
frameworks that allow for co-authorship
can we say that things could be
collectively written instead of
curatorial authored I mean I think we I
don't know I'm the more and more I get
into this world the less and less I
really believe in language I feel like
language has become a kind of crux in
which we feel like we understand each
other and actually when you see work and
I think that that's what's amazingly
powerful in any form of creative
practice is that somehow the narrative
that's attached to it is separated it's
useful sometimes that have that filter
but realistically its autonomous on its
own it's in the world of its own and it
has possibilities because of that and
the only reason I'm stating that is
because I think that everything that we
speak about is a paradox we want to have
individuality we want to be able to
participate and to go back to Maria's
point I mean I use technology but I
don't foreground it you may think that
not from my presentation but
realistically speaking that's the only
field that's the only thing that I can
speak of that is a framework that has a
possibility to be inclusive
if if we create frameworks to be
inclusive and I think those are the ways
that you can resist things and you can
deal with accelerated ideas and I mean
ideas by themselves are I used to work
with a guy who said
everybody has ideas who gives a
about ideas now not all of them are good
and to be honest with you not everybody
is committed to them and I think like
the things that we can benefit and I and
I obviously have a deep love affair with
history as well but for very different
things because I'm not looking to see if
I'm original I'm looking for friends
that can help me sort of think about
this kind of continuous experimentation
and for some of us because in a strange
way like I don't know maybe the students
EPP and Marie and Marie and myself as
people that are not practitioners in a
sense or we're very academic but
actually we all have worked with
planning commissions and I'm still
waiting for some day that this National
Park in Greece will maybe sometime
happen before I'm 80 years old but and
that's if I get there but these things
are just so much part of the practice I
just mean like language about what a
curators role is today is maybe not the
same in the 70s maybe it had a very
different kind of agenda to sort of
break certain orthodoxies the curator
today may have a different value what we
mean about curation at the scale of the
city is is much more about maintaining
certain forms of diversity which are
actually being problematized by a lot of
things partly technology for sure
capital we all want to have a job but
realistically it's not about us the
project of the city is not about us
individually our moment in time it's
about actually how we develop a
framework and that's why cities are
beautiful projects it's it they resist
anybody's individual idea time somehow
is a medium that actually is probably
the most beneficial thing for us to
discover and I just think like I only
mentioned that because I think like
everybody here in the audience as well
has to also feel a certain
responsibility to do that because
otherwise and we have committees and
committees take decisions and not people
it's this it's that we we somehow move
away from actually taking responsibility
but I think any of us would probably say
that we feel burdened with
responsibility for every action that we
do for every interaction with students
we're try
to nurture something and that's why I
think I don't know I have to be blindly
optimistic because to be honest with you
everything says other and if that's the
case and I should retire in Greece and
grill tomato plants and some watermelon
and call it a day and I say that with
like a sense of urgency right we're in a
place like the architectural Association
were any ideas open we were just talking
about going to schools prior to this in
the states where amazing infrastructures
of institutions brilliant people but the
level of conversation right now is not a
conversation it's kind of just you know
it's a shock it's terrible and so that's
we have to address one in the room
because I mean there's this word
autonomous and we have an author of who
has written extensively about autonomy
yes it's about who possesses the means
of production no and yes in the
presentation they show I mean I think
it's a tricking and that's why I want to
ask you a question
there's something of sadness of
desperation that architecture is not
capable of doing this know if you should
American Korea Maria said and I
completely subscribe for me real hope
comes only when you really try to be
very aware about the conditions in which
we produce architecture I think from is
even is more desperate to be simply to
live of illusions about on of me that
are grounded into into nothing but when
you actually realize the extent in which
you know what profession has been
historically producer then I think there
is real hope that counter-strategy or or
something that you know can be discussed
and can can be also achieve as a group
not as a single you know how four can be
advanced so we really feel that on the
contrary we were hoping or we would feel
that our pro the presentation was full
of optimism
also let me make one footnote if it
wasn't you know crystal clear I think
what purgatory was trying to do by
showing our delightful Albrecht Durer is
that essentially this is a world and
together with the world authorship
because the two kind of go hand-in-hand
indeed that has been put to the
foreground of the discussion by a bunch
of bourgeois white male in a specific
moment in a specific place and we are
anything but that so maybe the time has
come to do the same thing that those
guys actually did back then and try to
find a new framework maybe in your words
maybe there are no words still said
before I don't know what but I think
that kind of realizing the placing will
in the place in which we are and how we
got there and how a specific class got
there and how specific guys in a
specific moment in time and in a
specific culture actually got us there
is quite crucial because front for the
point from the point of view of a woman
for instance for me this word makes no
sense I mean there's no way we can be
autonomous even in so many different
ways so what is the world then that
defines this if there is a world what is
the practice that defines it I think
that this is is the question that's why
actually when we discussed actually
bringing in this case study we both
agreed because we were like okay it's
just so interesting to see how
historically situated actually this
world is and how maybe doesn't really
describe what we're looking for anymore
so it's interesting
dural actually was a very successful
artist one of the most successful not
only in terms of his work which is
incredibly amazing but he made a lot of
money he was very rich and he had a
beautiful life he travelled a lot and
still actually he was assured that
basically the success he achieve and
which was not only his success but the
success of of a class an emerging class
of bourgeois artists was really grounded
into something he was confident with and
I think that that that really shows that
from the very beginning you know our own
profession is grounded on very unstable
and fragile structures and I think that
to remind ourself that doesn't mean that
we just fall in despair but
we become much more aware and find
actually this room for for autonomy but
to pick up on what Maria said and what I
said about language in general I think
we do tend to become quite obsessed with
with words and sometimes yes they're
very context-specific they're very
historically specific but also they also
subscribe to certain systems of
understanding like understanding of what
is an individual to choose an autonomous
individual is a very sort of one could
say Western sort of understanding of the
importance of the author or the
individual in a lot of other cultures it
could be interpreted differently or if
we take even that level further to sort
of a political understanding of not only
autonomy but let's say sovereignty like
some in our understanding of like what
constitutes an autonomous individual and
in many sort of systems the idea of
agency only only depends on whether or
not you're able to have that agency
whether like Aaron would say about
citizenship whether you have the right
to have rights and if there's no I guess
maybe maybe the question is an issue of
control and it becomes then a paradox of
like do we want control as authors over
work do we want control over ideas or or
are these are we within systems
themselves that like distort the way
that we understand control like I was
speaking about this topic with a friend
from New Zealand the other day and we
were saying like his idea of like him as
an autonomous or more specifically as a
as a sovereign individual as a New
Zealand that is very different to an
Americans idea of individuality and
sovereignty based on sort of the
system's
the political systems in which
constitute what is what defines autonomy
where the property is important
to even have a starting point when it
comes to having agency or and I guess
what's interesting with that I find
interesting with with where we are now
technologically is that digitally
everyone seems to feel like they have a
level of agency because everyone is able
to see each other in a certain sense but
but and then this issue of curation as
well everyone keeps talking about how
you self curate on various platforms but
it does that really mean
autonomy it is that something we we want
or is that and I yet another construct
that at the end of the day we're all
sort of participating in a totally like
collective system that just values the
individual as a social construct rather
than a reality well who scripts the
algorithm is the real curator yeah
exactly I mean on that point as well
like for me this paradox of authorship
authorship comes into this issue of bias
and when we talk about like these
autonomy as well in in in in tandem with
objectivity like the fact that these
technologies or or even the autonomous
person they also exists in my
understanding pretty ridiculous because
everything is yes you make money to set
up a business etc etc but to some extent
those things could be debated like
whether they're negative whether they're
positive but I don't think it like I
think sometimes we obsess on this on
this dream of like self determined
individuals when we've always been sort
of very collective and it's more like
maybe we brought about it's just
rethinking the way we react in systems
and the way that we we implement agency
that could change our understanding and
maybe change these words stop obsessing
about thank you Richard wolf could I
just thank Riku long for your generosity
of letting us into your gallery a few
nights ago to look at the work of Denis
Scott Brown and those beautiful drawings
and my question to you Marie is do you
feel it is only when an architect draws
that they are autonomous why are you
obsessed by drawings um I mean I love
sculptures but drawings are easy to
shape there is you to transport the easy
to display on a wall and they're more
easy to sell than a video actually so
especially if they are bad architecture
but I found also that and also the curve
is more so drawings
I mean it's noisy touch it with when I
did the exhibition with eundel filter I
mean I still have this wooden element in
the basement and I don't know what to do
with them so I'm not using the basement
anymore but what I like with drawings
well with the drawings that that I show
that so the one from by PIV Touhou or
the ones by Philip and Florian for
example it's like they are they are
showing what they think about
architecture
they are showing their reflections
through this medium of drawing with that
drawing architecture actually something
like that and I really like this kind of
this kind of where we are out of the
frame and this it's we are between art
and architecture and I'd like to be in
this kind of gap with those artworks and
and our so I like that people are a bit
lost because sometimes they think is too
artistic so they don't understand and
sometime is too architectural so they
don't understand neither depends where
they they are so so what I really like
this kind of gap accident where we are
working and I don't fit that up in
creator I'm making exhibition I mean if
you go in the art world you never hear
that's much this word like that it's
like architects are using this word at
the end of each sentence like I will say
 you know at the end of each
sentence it's it's really strange in the
art you got characters they are doing
exhibitions and they are thinking about
how to do exhibitions and how to show
the work of an artist or a group of an
artist or a reflection or movement but
that's it
so but it is a protected title yeah it's
it's not anybody that gets that title
like when you work in a museum
there's sorry when you work in a museum
you start as assistant curator then
three years and you become its associate
later et cetera so it is it is I mean
there's so much colloquialism within
that term and I think that is kind of
funny because I don't believe in a
hierarchy of the curatorial but it is in
art world like people salute you when
you have the title curator versus
project managers but in all fairness
project managers are often for doing the
curatorial work than the curator yeah
but maybe that's why I deal with
independent creators but I was you are
raising I think a really interesting
point for me that that somehow brings
together Murray's experience and and
mine in that actually I have a small
publishing business and and I think both
in our case is a we really try to be in
a way autonomous from institutions when
I started and such the project that I
discussed actually also with Murray from
the very beginning the big question was
like should you find funding from
institutions and everybody told me
you're never going to be able to make
books if you don't have grants and you
know big institutions actually behind
you and then my answer was exactly
Murray's no I mean as long as actually
we have a product that somehow
encounters an issue you can find a way
to do it yourself but then of course all
the families you know conundrums start
now I mean you are only as autonomous as
the market allows you to be autonomous
and so on and so forth so I don't have
an answer for that but I have to say
that this in a way is attempt to try to
be independent if not autonomous I say
independent from institutions is really
difficult in some cases because of
course you have to find other ways to
make things work but at least for me
until now has been very very important I
always refuse people who can who came
even already with grants that told me
you know I have this X amount of money
make me a book that's that's not what I
want to do I want to have a much more in
a way simple and direct relationship
with the people who buy books I mean if
they don't buy them that may be the year
you know what I mean because they don't
encounter Andy in the summer so that's
why I have huge respect actually for
what Marie does in terms of actually
really on purpose being a commercial
gallery can I ask one question um if we
start with your new definition of
architecture from Hans Holland when she
was just referring that are today
everything could be architecture
everything is just regarded as
architecture and the same time of the
same period more or less a little bit
later
Manfred rotifer he was just referring to
architecture is that referring to
architecture that is not relevant
anymore to the capitalist mode of
production etc so my question and
observation more or less is what
architecture brings to the table
especially to the people who design all
these kind of machines and algorithms
meaning that in the end why do we need
architects to deal with this if not
because so far we are not talking so
much about the architecture as
containing corporeal space anymore so
I'm inverting am I'm just doing that
what you are doing the negative and I'm
asking you why do we need architects in
your own kind of discourse why the
discipline is still relevant and not
just a stratagem of evasion let's say of
talking about architecture can I ask a
question just could you just tell me
where you're from
you have agency so I will respect that
and I'll answer anyway realistically
speaking I think architecture is very
important because I see architecture as
something that is fundamentally a
spatial and I think my definition of
architecture is not one that is somehow
privileged because I'm a registered
architect because I'm not it's not
because I'm a resident artist in
Somerset house because it doesn't really
matter but it is because fundamentally I
think we've collapsed everything into
this world where we speak about things
as everything one of the things about
toe line is that the provocation was
provocation the provocation was a in a
moment in time when it was set up as a
way to have a very social and cultural
critique about the status of what
constituted architecture and I think as
a conceptual project I think that can
manifest in many different mediums and
one of the things that I bring that back
is not
because I'm like a hippie lover of the
sixties and seventies is because I feel
like those same provocations today are
actually very meaningful when he says in
some sense architecture will have to go
beyond its own discipline and discipline
will have to absorb other things I think
it's fundamentally about acknowledging
what makes this moment in time ours so
that we can participate in that because
realistically speaking even in terms of
practice maybe because I'm older than
you I think at least more great here
when I was studying art or my brother
was studying art in architecture and all
of this kind of stuff everybody wanted
to get beyond the screen everybody
wanted to move away from these things we
were beyond the image but everything has
now been collapsed we don't speak about
space we don't speak about actually the
the idea of bringing things together and
I think architecture as an environment
or as a definition of thinking of it as
an environment enables this and through
that I think we speak about time and we
think about agency and we think about
that stuff beyond the kind of humanistic
approach I don't really believe that
algorithms are dictating our world I
think we are not really sort of
responding to the idea that these things
are obviously ever-evolving
it's not about robots it's not about
these things actually I wanted to talk
about paradox because there was a guy
who his name is Warren chalk he's
another one of those characters and he
brought an article in 75 here and it was
titled robots and trees and if you don't
mind me reading this it's literally like
less than two sentences we must
construct a living paradox the
experience of what it is without naming
it brings about the freedom of what it
is and I think that that kind of
plurality of thinking about things in a
much more diverse and speculative way I
think space kind of enables that as a
medium and beyond that to be honest with
you if you're reading spirit labyrinth
or if you
reading an issue of bail I could care
less what I think is really important is
this kind of ecology of ideas I think
have a place and then I think technology
allows us to make that place meaningful
and bring that back into the world of
architecture
if Negroponte 'is world was leaving
architecture like a lot of those guys
were like a lot of the radical
architects the Utopia guys they left the
practice of architecture to be more
ephemeral to be this or to be super
corporate and lead their radical ideas
on the table
I think we've witnessed that world and I
think actually architecture the space of
the city urban is a mobility
infrastructure these are all part of our
practice and I think with the
densification of cities and what's going
on an amount of stuff that didn't build
probably in the last thirty years
probably eclipses everything that's been
built before so how do we sort of cope
with that and how do we do that in a
meaningful way and I think architecture
is fundamental and everything that we do
and it's me
if you just go towards this extreme
plurality where the second root of the
word autonomous is law which is a
collective contract and if everyone in
this room right now declares autonomy
there is no law so how do we even like
communicate with this kind of plurality
how does one architect talk to one
another I mean this I mean like are we
playing like total extremes like we're
gonna move into their jungle of complete
animalistic survival because that also
had laws too the reason I'm saying that
is like if we really believe that with
all of the things that we have we are
actually constructing better ways of
understanding if what we're talking
about is knowledge not just about going
to school and getting degrees and
specializations then we should be able
to kind of conceptualize frameworks that
allows for diversity without normalizing
everything it's not about optimizing the
world so that it can be faster cheaper
bla bla bla we have to sort of invent I
think new terms of reference and I think
that's motivated by actually actually
having a shared kind of understanding of
the world that you're operating in
because fundamentally you have to
respond to that but I also think with a
certain degree of optimism and a certain
degree of responsibility I mean you
shape a bit of the world that you
influence on a daily basis now it's not
about you do whatever you want and I'm
not sure that the legal world is the
world that I would always look to
because it seems to me especially with
institutions and everything else you
know we're in a world of liability and
it's about like not taking any risk why
don't we shift the conversation and say
that actually if we continue this way we
have the most risk you want to talk
about environmental issues an ecology
you want to talk about social
responsibility you want to talk about
the nature of public space any
conversation I think is more than
appropriate
I just basically think like unless you
accept the world as something that's so
positive and great that's the way it is
you should actually try to give yourself
some responsibility to actively
aged at and I think why not architecture
participate not dictate but be an active
participant in this world
now I think that mm-hmm I mean it's an
interesting discussion perhaps something
that we don't acknowledge is that there
is a profound antithesis between the
concept of autonomy and the concept of
architecture I mean the word are care
from which actually architecture comes
from means actually command it means
actually something that rule and
actually you know I don't agree with
this I mean of course here we should
have have duties but I don't agree that
the word normos means law I mean this is
really actually the way the Romans
translated the Greek word No Mas No Mas
is not law in the sense of law it's
actually an idea of orientation an idea
of order that a community actually give
to itself in order to settle or to
inhabit a territory in that sense
normos is always collective this
actually for me where the modern art is
this and how much SAP the whole the
whole thing because the idea of autonomy
within the modern idea of artistic
practice is by definition individual and
this actually y-you know we through the
example of doula we had question this
this is a body of this problem that from
that moment on autonomy becomes simply a
professional liberal if you want
aspiration and I think that for me for
us for me and Maria the question of
autonomy is to go back to really the
idea of normals and the idea of creating
actually the conditions in which a
community or a class or in a collective
subject can you know define an idea of
space and then actually well perhaps
this antithesis between architecture and
autonomy would be not an antithesis but
perhaps something that you know has a
possibility to find a common ground
perhaps on that point I wanted to come
back to something that that you said
earlier about the weak foundations of
architecture and a question is if that
is something you
Niq and productive is something we
should cherish or if it's a fundamental
problem that we need to fix in order to
survive as a profession because teaching
in a place like this one often asks
oneself so if you teach architects to
teach architects to teach architects and
we create these sort of bubbles where
where it's confusing where we're meant
to lead if you take the other
professions that don't have this weak
foundations like medicine or so with
when you talk about medicine again
within medicine obviously the aim is for
it to reach outside in architecture
there is this confusion around where all
of this has meant to lead if it's meant
to leave two buildings that people use
often the people that we teach here that
end up doing a lot of buildings they
don't come back here
in fact so the question is is this a
fundamental problem that we should work
to it fixing or not I think I think it's
a very good point and on one hand of
course you know thanks God you know
architecture is not this kind of
monolithic discipline that you know
architects starting from their innocence
will really try to pretend to systemize
so I think the idea that this this
project a certain extent failed an
architecture had to open up itself in a
more self reflexive way and also seen a
more exposing its problems and its
limits I think it's certainly something
we should cherish and not try to to fix
at the same time you know if we look
this issue from a professional point of
view we also know that you know there is
an erosion of the profession as a you
know something that has a relevance
within society and often actually the
argument is exactly the the weak status
of the disability that you know doesn't
have any more big narratives that used
to have in the past so for me actually
it's really a question that we can only
approach the electrically on one hand we
have to acknowledge that to you know to
say everything is architecture and
therefore you know opening it too much
the discussion in very vague terms might
actually backfired from a professional
point
to view at the same time I think yes we
should on the contrary open up the fact
that our discipline from the very moment
it was theorized as a discipline has
fundamental limitations and fundamental
structural problems I mean also to make
a very very concrete example of
practices that in the last few years
we've been looking at that we thought
were interesting were those cases of
collectives of arti the architects and
builders for instance who try to come
together breaching this divide that has
been somehow been artificially created
five or six centuries ago that's not to
say that whatever was before that or any
kind of non-western pre-modern practice
was necessarily good but that's just to
say that maybe we have other ways to
reorganize actually this division of
labor that has made such a theme as
autonomy fundamental for us today
because maybe we can displace the the
question on another level and there have
been in the past few years quite a few
experiments quite small for the moment
of collectives that try to then re
manage these the practice of building at
different levels and in different ways
and we think that those experiments are
actually really quite interesting and of
course within that quite a big role can
be played and I think that's also an
interesting question by technology you
are probably all aware of the world work
of Mario carpel who of course believes
that then we can proactively use
technology exactly to bridge that gap
that has been artificially created what
he calls actually the undertand paradigm
so there are possibilities I think that
there are also some very very concrete
possibilities that's why again actually
the example of Marie's gallery for me is
so it's so it's such an inspiration
because it really means that even within
the conditions that we have out there we
are not going to change capitalism
anytime soon we might not even want to
do that to be honest but we can we can
in a way reformulate the way in which
actually we practice
and maybe the most immediate case that
comes to our mind is really the case of
these collectives that try to go you
know from the managing and the owning
the ownership of land to the design
passing through the whole phase of
building as soon as a forced to try to
rethink actually well the division of
labor that has been created artificially
so for instance I mean dogmas worked in
the past few years with collectives of
artists for instance and you know there
are quite a few actually start building
practice is also here in London it's all
quite small but I think you know we have
to look at those examples that actually
are and different disciplines I think
that's for me the key issue here that we
take as a starting point architecture
it's actually the slowest of many of the
disciplines that we work in one of the
funny side projects to keep me working
autonomous somewhat is actually probably
the largest project I'll ever do because
it's a code five years ago I wouldn't be
comfortable saying this at the AAA but
times have changed and it's a a vintage
coat that I found that a friend of mine
who works as a distributor really liked
he was at a point where he had built a
network that he wanted to build his own
brand and he asked me can I use that
coat that you found it wasn't a coat
that you could sell or easily wear I
just randomly found it at a notic store
so we collaborated with a group of
people so what that means is no designer
no investor no actual hierarchy and
started building this brand that we
present it and within nine months is now
sold worldwide so if you take this as an
example it's it's a really interesting
exercise because you work independently
not from within the structure but none
of us have experience in doing any of it
so we just kind of went under on to go
with it and it's brought a lot of these
desires for autonomy back but it is much
faster discipline and a much wider
discipline and it's much more about
people and than anything else and I
think that is something that I find a
little bit problematic about this
conversation it's very theory heavy and
it's very kind of linking at history I'm
happy that you bring up recent recent
examples but I think what you're not
talking about is shop architects it's
like the largest architecture company in
New York that owns
to sites that they're building and
developing and makes a profit of it so
there's a lot more happening outside of
academia that I think we should look at
to re to really understand where we
stand now and I think also as students
where are you sending now IQs this
autonomy make it your own because
otherwise it's not gonna it's not really
gonna go anywhere
um I think actually we have kind of run
out of time if we have one more question
I agree with all this and the whole idea
of all becoming intrapreneurial but at
the same time if we bring it back to the
scale of academia the scale of the
institution I think it's very important
to pause the question what are the
problems we need to address now as a
collective collective here because still
we are part of a school we work as a
collective here so I'm just I'm I'm
trying to understand how all these
questions which are being posed in terms
of practice or practices outside how
this can actually start fitting back and
you form to a great extent what we do as
a community as an institutional
community because it's easier to talk
about the scale of the individual and
what can we do maybe maybe the answer is
not there maybe the answer is more here
the position service was created as a
way to try to break those niches that I
think not that I encountered but talking
to each one of the community members of
this institution and I was given I
wanted to know what is that that we
stand for I wanted to know what is that
each one of the postgraduate programs
stand for and and want to address so
that in fact this idea of autonomy is
one that somehow has been produced and
reproduced to an extent that I think is
detrimental sometimes to some of the
strength that we carry but again I think
it has to do with the vocoder in
terminology what is that that we mean by
and what is that that we actually want
to do with it
the way in which these tables or the
stocks have been organized and the way
in which the themes have been brought is
to try to take some provocative
positions and and see and try to
articulate them and try to pull them
through and so to see what is that that
we say when we are using them right what
is that that we actually stand for and I
think it's it was very deliberate to
actually try to bring a Victorian Maria
together with you because if one tries
to figure out what is that that we mean
by autonomy in terms of aesthetics or in
terms of the city or in terms of form I
actually do think that ultimately both
of your agendas very clearly are trying
to understand what is the power of
architecture in as a code or as a form
of behavior as a form of agency or as a
historical accumulation of power
structure that actually can and should
be disentangled in order to produce new
forms of collectivity ultimately is that
what we are doing here the school but I
don't have the feeling that that's what
we all collectively agree that we are
doing sometimes we will try to position
ourselves against each other and so the
positions that we have within the school
are kind of detrimental to the agenda of
the school outside of itself so somehow
this is to me and an active of
positioning ourselves as a school that
ultimately believes that architecture as
a discipline that has the responsibility
and the privilege to articulate all
those different conversations that are
happening outside and try to contribute
to all the space that is more ethical
that has actually that is driven by by
things that I think we all would agree
is something that has to do by
redesigning algorithms and behaviors and
and really looking into power structures
and to understanding architecture not
only as built form but also a social
form and that sometimes from a small
gallery that tries to define and
redefine the space of capital production
whether capital reproduction to two
projects that can try to construct new
walls and understand that media is in
fact a medium by which architecture also
produces itself or as an act of Cora
toriel articulation of ideas and people
run the world that ultimately Louvre
lose their notions of authorship
I mean I am to run office
at some point that was called off his
ass in which technology was unable to
enable that kind of moment of total
freedom to really produce those
architectures and those words that we
imagined but so my answer to you in
behalf of everyone is that we are not
alone in in that quest of trying to find
the agency of architecture I think each
one of us within the school is doing and
and this position series that manager
has organized the thing is trying to
have that that conversation so I want to
thank the speakers I think we have a bar
that is ultimately the space where
ultimate autonomy can be gained beyond
that beyond that I don't want to finish
with that note I I want to invite
everyone for Thursday where all the
academic staff but also everyone within
the school community is invited to
discuss what is the project the
pedagogical project that is a school is
producing and I do think that this talk
and this conversation today can easily
fit in into that per Vittorio is going
to give us an introduction and I look
very much forward to have you be in
these rooms
many times it's ok it's ok it's ok it's
like I don't Friday we are no and I want
to thank you all of you thanks thanks to
the speakers
[Applause]
