hello everyone welcome to the first
lecture of the a action lunchtime
lecture series I mean most of the people
here know that a action is a student at
project committed to bringing about the
necessary pedagogical and cultural shift
in architectural education in order to
effectively work towards climate justice
as a collective across the upcoming
weeks and months we will host a series
of lectures and seminars throughout the
school calling attention to the
complexities of the current crisis these
Wednesday lunchtime lectures will be
addressing different topics within the
realm of the climate crisis
presentations such as today by Xavier
followed by discussions will provoke
reflection as to how we should respond
to a changing global climate fva
and an architectural practice in general
that I'm sitting here with Javier he's
as you all know the program head of ETS
he started the a a since 1978 as well as
other schools in the UK and abroad and
she's also a practicing architect and
his interests are innovation and
invention in the process of the
architectural project reticulated
unfolding structures and reinforced
ceramics ETS is a course that positions
itself at the core of revising
architectural pedagogy in the face of
the changing climate at the a a his
presentation will focus on what we as
architects should do from now on the
time for action has come all of us
living on this earth must contribute as
best as we can to looking after it but
as architects and designers engineers
and facilitators our contribution is a
very direct one for our contribution to
be positive and decisive there has to be
a radical and profound change in the way
we approach design we are no better than
our forefathers it's clear that up to
now we've been designing in a manner
that has often been irresponsible from
now on is about drawing a line up to now
we've done it this way from now on we're
going to design in a radically different
way therefore it's about the knowledge
and the discernment needed to get it
right this time however better knowledge
of
materials is not enough even to fit in
with the ways of nature is good but not
good enough we are nature we're the most
rational part of nature and the radical
change that is needed from now comes
from this awareness so the talk from now
on is a talk that will provide us with a
new perspective so over to you thank you
very much we always thought would thank
you but I think this time is a bit serve
as different because it is true I've
been teaching since 1978 but I was here
a student before that two wonderful
years in the promise school and and so
I've seen lots and lots of students
movements and initiatives and that sort
of thing but this time I think any
action is different and that's why I
think that I'm totally happy to be here
talking I have thought of doing that and
that's how I came about that told manage
and she told me well a action is you
said done so here we are so the let's
put a bit of context and do these things
so you've summarized exactly what I'm
gonna be covering now so to put the this
talk in in in context I think that you
have two radical approaches one is make
yourself heard you know shouting
demonstrating than doing that sort of
thing and then the other one is that's
the skills we've got us designers and
architects some facilitators are very
very important to put this thing right
so yes we have the idea of the talk is
up to now we've done it this way and I
suppose you say that we've got it wrong
now we're going to do it in a different
way so in a way one way is shouting the
other one is about knowledge we need so
acquire during this period that we're
here in order to be able to give a
positive answer posit come to
conservation to this to this problem
right
so um the kind of so the second context
is this kind of knowledge what kind of
knowledge is that we're looking for well
I think it's quite important to to
realize that we are out there in the
field therefore we have a very broad
knowledge to identify what the problems
are and then a very specific knowledge
because we're what we need to do is to
be discerning and that is a very
difficult quality to achieve and that's
what our training should be about if it
is not it's something that we have to
make out individually so at the moment
for example in the office I'm looking at
what you might call the typical 1960s
building that we are going to refurbish
and we're going to be working on it and
it's amazing but you know you wouldn't
think it possible but the roof the
covering you know they must America felt
that is gone is sitting directly on top
of the roof slab there's no insulation
the walls are cavity required but not
nothing in the cavities empty cavity
right so yes well how did they get it
wrong you know had this wrong anyway
well this is something that is they were
not and we are not better than them but
we tend to get quite distracted with the
things that are going on and the things
that interests us a lot and we fall into
the or we can't fall into the mistake of
forgetting some things that are
essential right so that is the context
of what I'm going to be talking but I
like to also said the context in within
which we live
I don't second embraceable I see I see
it already that we are going to turn her
into a world of checklists you know I
don't have anything against checklist
but when I
into an aeroplane and the door of the
cabin is open and the pilot and co-pilot
are actually checking something I'm
going through a checklist it gives me a
very good feeling but this is different
you know I think that what we have here
is that the lack of leadership means
that countries and particularly this one
is actually being pushed from behind a
lot from the front okay and therefore
everybody's covering the back side and
therefore everybody is actually making
sure that I don't get caught or you
don't get into trouble and then you know
after the war in build system of the of
the but most of the civil service is a
checklist and this is gonna be the thing
the world in which you're going to be
moving on right and I think that's if
they're not leaders then you and I have
to look to be leaders right what is
happen is it's worse it's just that we
live in a world which is very much this
kind of thing of rubber stamping things
right at the moment there's already a
move which makes our discerning more
difficult of actually calling things
sustainable is as simple as that you
remove one you put the other and you do
the exactly same thing you've done
before so I think that what I'd like to
do to discuss today is on one hand what
kind of knowledge we need that discern
because the Sermon is I think is the
knowledge of the leader okay looks of
situations and chooses this way that way
because of and then this is what we need
we need to have a whole knowledge of the
broader spectrum and the very specific
one because this is what we're designing
okay so I've called this from now on
because we're not gonna put it right by
just simply doing what we're doing
before and it's a background I'm good to
borrow something is philosophically this
is going to get me into trouble within
am amongst others but is nice he's gonna
laugh
but basically what some what I'm looking
at is that we have been designing from
time immemorial you know on this
business of matter and forms and from
Aristotle onwards you know we see the
world around us as matter and form and
we have been transforming and in fact
designing has been a lot of attea
transforming changing the form so we can
actually make a plough a table stool a
bed a column that's Russ all sorts of
things you know but just we are actually
changing the phone so what I would like
to do today is to is to move on from
that and really look at what happens if
we look at our activity not just as a
transformation but as a trance
materialization that is to say in our
mind this has always been done from time
immemorial you know as they in this
material right is this the best material
is this the in fact in Spanish we have
the word Adonia which is very difficult
to translate into English and I don't
know if you have those of you who are
bilingual if you have a word for it I'm
looking for it is this sort of the
perfect Adonia is is the perfect choice
you know it's the most suitable of you
know very very strong to the word so
what I'm going to do now is to try and
explain this material is its transmit
realization with something that happened
to me so there was a friend of mine who
had been forever
choosing rimless spectacles like this I
knew very well why
you know he was just not prepared to
take a design decision what is what I
need in my face you know
so perhaps Isabelle is bad enough as it
is and just let's just do something
invisible all right until the day came
when someone actually offered him the
possibility are having a wooden frame
right and then he said well this is
fantastic as overjoyed what was
happening he was is relinquishing the
job of making a design decision and
leaving it to the material to tell them
to tell him how this should be right and
so he was very happy about it and he
showed me lately the spectacles and I
have to say they were a wonderful piece
of work but I notice in him is that not
only had a blinker son but the his
spectacles have changed from being a
prosthetic something needed to make him
see well into a facial ornament a jewel
sinner
so these affected girls for this person
that actually and the way was looking
after and keeping them clean and all
that is very different from the previous
set of spectacles right when he handed
him over to me by the way I don't know
whether you know these spectacles 1656
and 50s around more or less I don't know
that possibly you know kind of that hold
on thing I don't know whether they were
made of wood or not how doesn't know
where they were doing at that time but
anyway when I got those I never thought
of putting him on but I started looking
at them as a piece of artwork with
certainly craftsmanship and certainly a
piece of design
so mostly we are made of wood and metal
and what has happened here is of course
the client wants this kind of wood
because he or she likes this kind of
work immediately the craftsman says
right well that's no good but if I
combine it with all the woods then I
make it strong enough so most of it you
can see the peril on what I'm saying
here so sure enough this is a type of
glulam a type of CLT you know he's just
putting together different kinds of
woods you know to achieve the result
where the word couldn't work couldn't go
beyond and do the job he's friends in
the work in fact and you can see there
in the bridge there's a funny line there
that goes from inside outside is
complete there and that is gold-plated
silver in this case they did alloys but
basically he's putting their
reinforcement wood couldn't do this it
would break here therefore he's got to
strengthen with something but that's
just a straightforward strengthening of
it what happens in other parts like the
hinge of a of the whatever they call
these same sides it's a different thing
altogether and the more I looked at it
the more I realized that this was a real
transfer realization the sense that the
metal was taking the shape of the woman
he was actually befriending the word in
actually going there and behaving as the
other half of this joint so you would
have expected there a timber join the
classical trim joint and there's where
the wood is actually remaining as it is
but this other companion is actually the
one that others so there was a real
trance materialization there so what I
want to do and I think that this example
sort of
I don't know excuses me to actually talk
about this idea that up to now we have
actually done things in a particular way
it's time to actually on one hand check
you know the ideal use of that and
really get on with designing in the
appropriate material with that comes in
so I mean in this country our
forefathers made a real intent into
firsts because they were using elm trees
as fibers to bring water to the various
to the various towns and cities yeah so
right that's what they had but in other
countries in France for example this
particular time they weren't doing that
they were already using vitrified clay
and the joints were very very advanced
something that it was more or less the
joint until we came to head sleep and
that sort of joint compression joint
that's what we're using in this country
and the rest of Europe
so what's that was that the right choice
should we have been looking for other
materials within doing this very
necessary infrastructure of actually
bringing water to when Oxford depleted
most of a nearby forest surveillance it
just you know so is that the right
action so with this I'd like to go very
briefly through some materials not to
speak about this so this is never gonna
be a TS lecture what is going to be is
in one way we can look up things in it
if in this different manner yeah so as
to be able to design I hope more
rationally and more responsible okay so
I've taken this example because this is
where the engineer had towards the
architect a very very interesting lesson
we've all had this desire of I mean this
is another version of Farnsworth all
right it's just opening the whole thing
the only thing is in here it's so
supported by this run T beam from one
end to the other and you can see this
structurally works very well because the
stiffness of one is actually have been
help for the other so rationally it
works extremely well and you can see
that well there's that tendency of
getting it all beautifully clean and
beautifully perfect right we all feel
alive wrong and you know the concept
couldn't be clearer structurally
speaking you can use the two supports in
the middle to get that big beam from one
end to the other and that's it ah yes
and go home right and well it's
attractive is that Alright
well the engineer I taught him a lesson
because you can see here that is
actually reduced into water roughly 300
millimeters and how many of you will
have heard and destructors legend said
you got 25 cover for the reinforcement
so that the reinforcement doesn't get
wet doesn't oxidize doesn't rust and
doesn't split right so 300 plus the
reinforcement so you get two lines of
reinforcement and only perfect you can
have three reinforcement bars and that
you find a nice cage and that perfect
but this is where the engineers said to
the architect said look I'll give you
what you want but in a more responsible
way and only by a degree right the
important this you can see how it works
very very very well you know as the two
things are actually marching each other
but I dare say that the Farnsworth has
got of comparative but it has ownership
of everything else around so you can
change that night you can do anything
you want in your house without being of
the scene of the looked here the moment
the next brought is is built what's it
gonna do so I think the neighbors all
right one of these days
the next person goes and gets gonna
change everything this reminds me of
I'll talk to you later
I don't know if this is true I have seen
it in somebody's feet PhD thesis but
apparently adult Floss had a letter from
a client say roughly all our friends are
actually demolishing the houses I'm
building new ones because their houses
are out of date and out of fashion
whereas house is still as good as it was
at the beginning and we love it and we
don't want to change so here's you know
I think what we paid you last time but
unfortunately 25 years depreciation is
Center cetera it's believed that Nora
had this this letter in his possession
and I don't know what it is now but
obviously one way of looking at at
sustainability's - the things very very
well so you don't but this one of things
that is true very very clearly this will
be dismantled the interesting thing
about the instruction I'll leave it now
is that they're all standard sections
and except with it with a very top rim
they're all bolted so it's going to be
very very easy to reuse this structure
somewhere else
therefore I mean the material isn't you
know that I thing is also a comment on
demolition do we demolish do we not and
I think that we have to be very clear
now and understand what we're looking at
as a demolition all right so with this
then I propose that for now on we're
going to be questioning the material and
then really we really got to do the
drawing board very often because we're
not going to do it the way it's been
done so far so we have to look at it in
a totally different way so the train of
thought more or less is to see step on
the procure procurement of the materials
so
it's very easy to think you know well I
bought this carrots you know have ribs a
thing but someone obviously has washed
them some of us cut them something so
the whole process of bringing the food
to the table it's not very different
from bringing the materials to decide
even to installation and whether is
actually done is it you or elsewhere
off-site there's a lot of work to bring
those things that we really need to know
the process we really need to know the
pros and cons of the extraction and the
effects on it I remember a dip form
project who was looking at sugarcane and
he was taking from su came to your Sugar
Bowl in London right and looking at that
time it was Tate & Lyle very interesting
very very interesting study I think the
proper of the school of architecture
because he was saying this cane is very
its brittle is it can be damaged very
badly from this to the first the first
stage of the refinement yeah so from
extraction to refinery they were very
very large lorries taking these things
there his first criticism was wait a
minute why wasn't that very simple first
refinement done on-site because then
what happens is that the local people
will benefit from that
so the procurement is something which is
extremely important from from from
extraction to to installation right this
is what I meant before that we acquire
the special knowledge which helps to be
discerning why do I not want this
material all right well because I know
what it takes to bring it here the
second second step the most suitable
beyond difficulty with this word Adonia
but I think it's quite important and
it's a question of who knowing the stage
of or if you want the state of the art
in each field so what's happening today
in regarding
Electrical storage right very very
important I mean it's not just making my
building self-sufficient in terms of
electricity so I can actually do the
inside and do it
but storage is extremely important
what's the state of the art in there
what's happening there all the same
thing with concrete the same thing with
any bother material that we're looking
at what is the state of the art and in
step three is really launching in this
alternative thinking there's alternative
it really is not simply transposing one
for the other
you know you get ridiculous things you
got to Port Marion and in the harbor
you've got a concrete chips they're more
you know it's not that it's not a
tractor simple transposing of one
material with the other no it's actually
getting your dried so this is what I
think this is the real leads that we can
take an industry all right very very
often in the last 60 years architects
actually in choosing from the shells
this is absolutely not acceptable yeah
Oh one of those in green and one of
those in red and then you put them in
here and is that architecture no we got
a certain subject that's action to a
rational way of looking is this the best
material for this is this the best use
so step three is really embarking in
this journey of let's call it transfer
serialization you know which is long
enough to get it wrong so you know
perhaps uh lately
the third thing including the necessity
for that and I think we have in there in
the GS team an ETS team someone who's
actually had the guts to confront the
largest or owner or the owner of the
largest amount of square footage in
London in the city alone and he said
you're ruinin wrong yeah
fortunately the guy didn't react very
badly and I said well let's talk about
it and then they've been talking about
it how they can actually make the same
profit and yet get the the right the
right end sometimes is a question of
vino I needed you merits because I
bought myself a car which is too big for
it you know and sometimes it's just one
thing leads to another
we've really got to be discerning enough
to say enough is enough that is a idea
okay so from here we know it would be
good to go quickly through a few
materials so that we actually have a
different chip in our head here so if
you take we've seen concrete there
well concrete looks yeah it's sometimes
it's not the right thing
here I'll have to say most most
contractors small medium and big look at
contracted concrete that's the easy way
out
you asked them to do this and it when
they say living with us to me it says
haha what are they gonna do I think
that's very very often you go back the
whole thing is full of concrete and off
you go and this you know it's not the
way to go I do we really need need to be
discerning but concrete also I think the
color is important to actually get the
structure above talking of about
countries so if we were to steal for
example I think that's I think that what
we have we need here is the emergence of
a new aesthetics that is to say we have
to see that in the past there'll be
moments
see it's beautiful to see a history of
art and history of architecture in this
respect you know that the aesthetics
come from an understanding of what we're
actually doing holistically right and I
think we've got to move into a new
settings I like this very much
you know discovery Reds were all very
nice and I think that you know we've all
gone there to see them in the flesh
and you know they're a bit of a monument
but we mustn't forget what they are
bottom right yeah a chunk of steel there
was it necessary right so I think this
new your settings is to learn how to
make something which is beautiful
and doesn't have to be so special so
then it's off not used to me but anybody
else why because this is extremely
extremely expensive in terms of of
energy in terms of costs in terms of
everything so don't just demolish the
pyramids but don't make new ones okay
there is it more or less that the
message here the bottom right I heard a
comment I don't say I hope it's not
right but I heard a comment that these
words the words are going wrong how
we're not used so imagine yeah I hope
it's not right as I said it's not
correct so we need with wood there is an
awful lot we've talked about with the
spectacle there is wood love's certain
companions it has his love mate it has
its way of helping water to go where
wood cannot go that's you know the
message here so if you're thinking of of
words not everything we've gotten in in
galaxy and we've got a saying you know
knock us over for a door cocktail of
Apollo yeah sort of in the house of a
has blacksmith this very fine they
wouldn't know if I either wooden I've
doesn't work so basically what we have
to do here is that words to know what
very well in in what it can offer the
best users of it and its limitations and
then find soul mates that actually come
and help wooden tray well
play is very my favourite in many ways
particularly when you actually start
reinforcing the ceramics and it becomes
a very very very interesting combination
of composite but I would say sometimes
is exactly the wrong thing I remember
with alejandro la SOTA in here in London
when I invited to speak in this room and
he was leaning over in the very special
building I was he wanted to see and so I
took him that he says how can he didn't
want an answer but he said Javier was it
all necessary knowing his work you know
there's lots of things are not necessary
I think of all the things that
Victoria's written for me the most
beautiful one is is that little booklet
you know that which i think is read it
but it's the one that says less is
enough and I think there's a very
beautiful way of actually saying yeah
what is appropriate or not ceramic tiles
I mean if we are putting a floor for I
don't know a tank showroom or a lorry
filled room I understand that it would
actually want the federal tile but to
know that you put it in your bathroom a
time that has to be killed at a thousand
degrees centigrade so that nothing
breaks it so I don't know what you're
gonna have in your bathroom that could
break it so there is a level there but a
thousand degree centigrades to produce
ceramics is something that I've
questioned right stone well I think Sona
says if something that were just
absolutely fantastic but please think of
reusing stone yeah I mean this is what
has been done in history forgotten about
it but look at the Colosseum right where
is that stone so I think the glass is my
comment on discernment is very very
important
I think that architects don't have in
the lifespan a moment when they have an
infatuation with class they fall in love
with glass they do things in class that
really Alejandra less others is worse
all this necessary and I think we have
to be sensible on that also we have to
send that if we're looking for the new
aesthetics we are not gonna miss that's
impressive meeting of the glass the
glass which we've all done it
you know at least I've done it you know
you know is this necessary is this the
best way to actually articulate that the
thoughts say the ambitions there you go
remember that I defined in our listen T
as we defined architectural design as a
materialization of an idea okay so there
are many many ways in which you can do
that but certainly let's beware with
with glass of this infatuation that can
come because it's a wonderful product
discernment discernment there's eight
horses for courses there's a glass for
each it use yeah and you know having a
client is a gospel true the client fish
and I want bulletproof glass in the in
the windows of my house and so I you
know this way this way no no no in both
directions it was very funny in both
directions outside-in and inside-out but
plastics I think for now on means that
we need to stand firm we need to know
without discernment we are not going to
help anybody but knowing the source of
this plastic and dad and what is the
problem
annoying alternatives is what we need to
have here and I think that's the bottom
line of this I would make it very sure
because I think we need to hurry up we
can help very many good causes in
plastic
and we can take the bodies to bankrupt
and support the goodies because there
are many many plastics are very very
well thought-out and very responsible
and many others are not composites well
I think that your tears three and tears
five is mostly about it but anyway we'll
leave it or that I think that we have to
start from me this thinking is to start
from a schedule or performance schedule
and then see how I can achieve that
lights I think light is my my passion I
think that you're right in my
specialities are the ones that you've
mentioned that in my CV but in my fifth
year in the tears I fell in love with it
with lights and I think like this it was
a building material and you can actually
tell what is natural light or not and
sometimes is a question making a hole in
the fabric and then bring the light in
and you could I have seen that right six
floors then you can bring the line send
it to light six flows to the
sub-basement okay but one thing that we
should be very very aware we are this
country guilty of what you see on the
screen okay the black villain
eliminations that we are so proud of
this we've salt on the rest of the world
and very many of these are not simply
not necessary but there are occasions
now do we not need to be blowing candles
as we do in our birthday all day long no
so there's a moment for each day using
so if human it is something wonderful
fantastic that is this the way we have
to live because you know when you want
to look at the Stars you can't because
there's so much light around you so I
think the light is something that is a
building material but I think I'd like
to suggest that we love from nature you
know as far as light is concerned you
know what happens in daylight what
happens of outside daylight and so on
now briefly going to I think I think you
could skip all this can die
[Music]
well right yes let's keep that and it's
got directly to water because I think
that water is a building material as
well all right and it has the
fascinations and all that but it's
beautiful to see that I live in London
when lord I learned people like that and
I started to say that that the water
that we see in the rivers in the seas
and so on is not in our water in the
sense that up to then scientists have
actually thought that with the amount of
hydrogen and the amount of oxygen that
we got here we'll never run out or
whatever but the isotopes of hydrogen
and oxygen that we have on earth are not
those of the isotopes as you see and in
the sea etc so what's happening here is
a result stage meteorites are mostly on
ice right at some stage that water came
from there but the earth is so
beautifully balanced in the sense that
is warm enough it has a hot center
ikuo is warm enough is have enough to
have a very powerful gravitational force
so water could not come out and he
starts going and this is the beauty of
water we're going to understand that
it's not that it's formulas know is that
it has his own path of least resistance
and he goes and that is what actually
happens water so this is gone we're
going to come back to that but I do
remember very very well
the man behind this hydroelectric things
will happen to be a great uncle of mine
and as a nine year old and this one was
open I was their Haena
and I heard this you say well we are
supplying electricity to the northwest
of Spain to the north of Spain I'm so
parts of the South of France and I said
wow he's my hero
all right it's fantastic look what
they're doing it huh and the place is
really impressive you know when you're
down there and this thing's it's a
barrel vault in both directions you know
this is really strong and but now I
don't think that's the right idea I
think that locally you can actually
produce electricity locally let the self
in France have a little on the north of
the West and then each one of the why
because the reality is that you're
actually doing things nature's got to
cover this thing's we know that in 20
years time you won't see any of this but
it will be there right and there are
silos of concrete that you're doing
nothing they're in the wrong place yeah
so you can actually use it the very wall
of the silo by the way so but it's a
different way of thinking right so but
this is the reality okay that we now
have very much improved generators that
don't need that potential height yeah so
what do we do with that chunk of water
this is something that I think we have
to be aware of because to get on the
right-hand side those green things and
that's been dry for a long time and
that's not bothered the hydroelectric
plant but we have to be there to
actually recover that so we need to know
which this is perhaps is a good point
too to talk about something else which
is where we can agree that we could
start winding up which is our
relationship with with nature right I
think you said very well there that my
view is that
to work with there's not enough that we
have to be aware that we are nature we
are the rational part of nature and
there was just give you an example
there's a very distinct video I saw of
this number of mammals and marsupials in
Australia that were very dangerous
tension to come to the limit because
they there is a toad which got very
poisonous skin right and they were just
trying to eat it dead you know one
afternoon so this guy's came along and
interpreter to extract a some of the
venom but it'll meets a piece of meat
and then captures you know pairs of this
marsupials and his mammals and one
reptile as well and then they they gave
that tweet and of course the worst thing
as a parrot and you know but there were
the dose was minimal and they survived
it the next generation and the be three
times a year the next generation when
they came anywhere near the toggle they
just ran like anything and in that way
they managed to establish things we are
the Russian eponymous so we know
infrastructure you know construction in
everything we tackle there is an aspect
which we say how does nature work
because we are part of that nature and
this is very important when we try to
put things right
so yes the firm that has left you know
in middle Africa a eschar 62 kilometers
long and 12 meters wide is reportedly
now don't bust
I can't imagine after having done it a
stratagem able to go bus is very
difficult but anyway this left at there
so you and I have to know what to do in
in circumcision like that and in our own
projects so just as an example with this
we can start we finish now
we were very proud in this country of
this ship GOP's you know most of them
the landmarks were done there you know
and it really is a fantastic industry ok
but then we see that this is where they
all end up ok my point is this is that
this is a century right but it doesn't
look and does it so this is just not
acceptable like my dictionary because
they are being killed you know that lots
and lots of fatalities these people are
actually hanging from a rope and cutting
bit of steel and then the whole thing is
coming down these guys are running but
you know the other ones who survived now
if the tools for assembly are the same
tools us this is something
why couldn't we actually instead of
closing these shipyards why couldn't
actually start doing this here in a safe
manner and then I'm sure that if you
disassemble a ship in there you will
have enough material for the next ship
so out of those three you could - could
actually be disassembling things and
salvaging things and the others could
actually be building all this so I I
really you know question some of these
decisions now it's not a question of
just saying it is a question of knowing
because it you have to
operate from a from a position of
knowledge so just to recap a bit I'm in
a bit like a football team right
some of you I mean this is my urgencies
that I won't be here until 2015 but you
will right now some of you will be the
striker so you will be the ones who are
actually thinking of that solution that
actually does revolutionize in his own
way many of the things you know that
happy marriage of the new material or
the old material with a new form I said
to such and some of us will maybe be no
the rest midfielders doing a lot of work
defense in a good line they're safe
their hands and the goalkeeper all these
things I think all of us will have to
have this this idea here it's between
year one and year and year five
I think it would be very good if we
actually consider that this yes I have
to be looking for a breakthrough and
then I would say please make that
breakthrough very beautiful because if
it is beautiful people will buy it if
it's something that is difficult to live
with I'm contemporary of Sue Ross Oh
ruff now well she had to get up at 3
o'clock in the morning in her fur house
and to light the fire so as to be you
know what she called balanced well I
think that no one is gonna buy that kind
of alternative here yes we are actually
we say we have the medicine I'm
convinced that we do have a state
technology but the medicine goes with a
certain diet and with this is what we
have to be clear you know there's it's
change of life that we actually ought to
change our style of life that we are
proposing so I think we'll leave it up
that's a way ok thank you very much
thank you very much
[Music]
very interested in
I'm gonna choke you on that is it
working I am yeah I'm gonna choke in
that because at the moment my my answer
is all of you here is that that book has
to be written properly by you okay
because this is precisely the core of my
my talk that we have to find that
information okay
there's a shortcut I can actually point
out a few things later on but if the the
chip has got to change here then I have
to find the alternative if my office is
very funny because if I want to find
something in the Internet
I don't do it myself I have somebody
else my sister wrote told me that her
children had told her that no mom this
is for you that that is for us you know
the actual command for the television
was very simple on/off volume
you know the other one was very
complicated easy each one of us is the
generation you have to to have this Y
and this is not a compound is that when
you're looking for something you're
refining your search yeah
you're actually starting to be
discerning so straightaway you press all
you press in which is you press all
again and then you start to see that
none of this is of any interest right so
that's that's the sort of research but
yes later on I'll tell you where yeah
thank you very head clearing very nice I
like the way you started very much and
when you talked about architects and
others actually going through a
trackless stands and giving the
impression and in fact actually going
you know approaching issues from behind
and always either way catching up with
things I mean my view is that it has had
a very particular effect on architecture
which people usually call sustainable
architecture or green architecture and I
mean it is pathetic clay and most other
ways very unsatisfactory I think this is
one of the reason why schools of
architecture understandably have a
rather little time for those fundamental
issues which is how we as architect
might actually you know relate to the
natural world in the responsible fashion
as you put it and you know how one might
actually get to that bigger picture
which you have into that and how you
know architects might actually be both
interested and knowledgeable about the
natural world and I think we are we are
only at the beginning of the recession
people still operate the rather
knee-jerk level for instance craft and
architects well quite good architects
have that frame but you know now they
are in the process of changing the
materials they use and getting everybody
to learn about how to work with stick
verses that they don't use concrete now
I would describe this as a knee-jerk
reaction because
has really thought had some lungs and I
think at the end convincingly about the
relationship between says his big
picture what it means to build with
timber which is actually usually CLT
yeah I wonder whether you have yourself
suggestions about how one might get is a
bigger picture yeah very much I think
that yes attempts to be sustainable
inverted commas that you refer to that
they their target was to be sustainable
full stop at whatever cost as it were
and I think that most of them will
accept that you know that's what they
were doing and without actually trying
to make it beautiful we have a big
tradition of ornaments and ornament etc
etc etc right but I think that's this is
what I was saying that it's not the
previous generations where worse they
were no we are not better than them
thought so we now are aware and
therefore we have to make it beautiful
and this is what I was saying rather
than the end please make it beautiful
because then we saw the problem if it is
not beautiful we may not have smaller
from I think that this is happening and
I can say that we're only halfway
through the year but I can see that the
quarter number of probably the majority
of the ETS five projects are going on
that are very very aware of this and I
think they're going to be beautiful as
well as being rational and unresponsible
so I think that we have stands which I
think yeah and we have that they the
answers even well I was gonna say even
in the a especially in the a a yeah you
have to wade through opinions of
everybody including your dignity of your
unit masters and all the others yeah
include your mighty minute but I think
that ultimately each student is very
much aware that they are sitting on the
driving
and thank you thank you for that but I'm
going to do this so I think that I'm
seeing already you know a very clear
conscience that this is what we got to
do and that no less
first and ever before for beautiful
answers and solutions
I wish the school did more architecture
that is where I because I think that
this is ultimately the litmus test is in
what we build and I think that that's
what I would like to see more of it but
anyway I don't know answers your
question so hi
okay go ahead
hi thank you very much you lecture I was
just wondering when you were talking
about light it was a little bit
you cut it a little bit so you talked
about maybe asking first question being
do we really have to live this way where
everything I know I'm not sure if I
understood correctly like did you mean
when everything's constantly lit up or
what are some of the things they
sometimes say you have about three three
headings here we're honest yes
do we need to live this our lives this
way yeah because you know there are
situations in which we are just simply
spend drifts you know you're putting
things this room but it's not as bad as
they as they horrible that I can
challenge the whole of you that at any
one Center two or three more lamps in
the light it wouldn't this Sun Goes Down
hitting directly to your retina it is
very very awkward room but all
throughout so that's one side but no
light is indeed a building material okay
and it's contributes to our well-being
as much as any other material but much
much more and I think that light never
shall changes you you've tried to bring
light into her room and pay attention to
how you're bringing it and so on so
forth and it always the result is always
much more beautiful so and then the
third one is that we tend to replicate
what we see in daylight at night and I
think that has to be questioned as well
because to replicate you're never going
to do it to start with but to replicate
daylight artificially is a non-starter
for me yeah it's night so we look at it
differently
and therefore we don't have to reach the
the lumens and that that's that natural
light gives us so I think that's that's
part of any it's very interesting book
on sleep you know it tells you that user
taught from turn the lights on if you
want to go back to bed for all the
people this is quite important do we
have to break that night to go to the
loo it's very important variance use a
toad because when you go to bed it takes
five minutes to get back to sleep if you
have too much light the body thinks that
it's daytime I don't know if it's true
but anyway was a nice idea but
definitely as designers sometimes we try
to emulate you know the natural light
and I think is a non-starter Tina
anymore aren't you hungry
designers
to something
having to rely on
nothing
more so let me
and change this I think
yeah I think there are three things to
consider when is problem solving
innovation and invention three very very
different things they're mixed together
in some ways and sometimes we think that
we're inventing something were just
simply problem-solving innovations doing
the same thing but in a better way which
is what we should do anyway
it's the kind of bottom line so very
nervous if the answer is no no that fool
should be doing either that's that is
the bottom line
invention is you know you have to look
at it I think that there is a great lack
of three-dimensional training in all
schools yes in this country I can tell
the schools log on to their telescopes
and this affects our inventiveness
because we're not able to even think
similar things eventually that's in that
respect so I think that invention is
seeing what nobody else has seen up to
now and in that usually a physical
phenomena and so on actually bring him
out you know this new way of doing
things that has never been done before
but at least we should be innovative in
the sense that if we're going to be
doing resolving the same problem in the
same direction he should be you know as
never before
all right the cap is not more than ten
seconds thank you thank you thank you
