it's really a huge pleasure of mine to
welcome Rania goshen from MIT to begin
this afternoon session and unfortunately
we will not be joined by Angela lui as
the second member of this conversation
she fell in and couldn't come very
kindly stepped into the into the breech
of the last moment thank you very much
I'm gonna do what I did earlier this
morning introduce both speakers to start
so that we can just seamlessly move
between their presentations for those of
you who weren't here this morning the
format is Rania does a lengthier
presentation on her work to which James
responds with a slightly shorter
presentation and then we open it up to
discussion between them and to the floor
so that's the format of the afternoon
and I will keep quite close timekeeping
we have an hour and a half for this
session I think that okay Rania is an
associate professor of architecture and
urbanism at MIT School of Architecture
and planning and she's a founding
partner with Al Hadid jasiri
of the practice design earth her work
integrates geography and design in a
methodology that brings together spatial
history geographic representation
projective design and material public
assemblies she is co-author of a number
of books including geographies of trash
to Kozma Graham's and most recently geo
stories another architecture for the
environment and Rania which is where I
first got to know her was a founding
editor of the amazing journal new
geographies which has come out of
Harvard since 2009 I think and she was
she edited the second edition of new
geographies called landscapes
energy her practice work with al-hadi as
design earth has been exhibited in solo
and group exhibitions including the
Venice architecture Biennale twice the
CEO Biennale the oscillatory in our lay
and many other galleries and museums and
the practices recipient of many prizes
including the architecture league the
architectural league young architects
prize and the architects newspaper best
of design awards in architectural
representation so it's really a great
pleasure to welcome you here
[Applause]
James weskit who's decided to take a
seat in the front row is a writer and
editor he worked with REM koolhaas and
amo and was co-editor of a book that we
all admire very much project apparent
Japan published in 2011 and of the new
2500 page no less elements of
architecture which has just been
published in a new edition by tation he
is author also author of when marina
abramovic dies a biography and his
writing on art architecture and culture
has appeared in The Guardian the New
York Times yawn and salon amongst other
places he taught a seminar in the
Anthropocene at tu Delft and continues
to research and write on landscape and
ecology while working in London as a
development executive for film and TV
projects thank you for joining us
[Applause]
so thank you Lindsay for the invite
James for the intellectual generosity
which started as a private conversation
can now be shared with people who care
about similar issues and also a a
landscape urbanism for for the
hospitality that old for being the third
leg in this tripod it's a pleasure to be
here today so tonight I hope tonight on
my yesterdays time this afternoon I'd
like to think with you through the
agency of the architectural project in
shaping a planetary imagination at the
moment when Earth's systems are
presented in crisis stories matter for
the earth the conditions of the current
environmental crisis have relied on
narratives of industrial modernity about
the world as resource about nature as
external about progress as an escape
from nature's determinations and limits
and about technology as a quasi
autonomous prime mover in this worldview
the earth is a commodity in economic
discourse the transformation of the
earth differentiates between resources
and by-product environmental costs such
as pollution Public Health the
degradation of shared Commons into what
we often call externalities this thing
that is compressed in the thin line
between the extractive polar land form
and the Manhattan skyline a series of
infrastructures that otherwise go
unrepresented in the world view from oil
companies and other similar corporations
environmentalists have brought to our
attention that there is not an outside
in which the unwanted consequences of
our actions can disappear from you from
the view in an epoch with environmental
risk and consequences that are fast at a
planetary scale but a toxically while
such threats are serious we remain
little mobilised in part maybe because
of the poverty of the environmental
imagination the environmental crisis
might not only be a crisis of the
physical environment of Earth systems
but also a crisis
the cultural one of the systems of
representation through which society
relates to both technology and the
environment and we can discuss the
several barriers that might impede the
ability to actually think and feel the
impacts of such systems systemic nature
technocratic expertise scalar
abstraction etc but how do we tell these
stories these other stories if the
present predicament of climate change
things from an economic mythology then
we might need to learn to tell other
stories in which externalities are
integral rather than incidental to
narratives of the earth climate change
demands transformations in the way we
tell such stories with externalities the
land fills the mind pits the oil rigs at
the center of the narrative for this
Frankenstein sent bruno latour reminds
us could serve as a parable for
political ecology for when dr.
frankenstein meets his creation on a
glacier in the alps the monster claims
that it was not born a monster at all
but that it became destructive only
after being left alone abandoned in the
laboratory by his horrified creator the
moment hit which to lysed similarly with
our fascination with technology were
very enamored with them till the moment
that their dish commission become
obsolete and then our response is to
abandon them and move to the next best
thing the next best promise and the next
technological fix so designers flips
such manhattan ism or such narratives of
the Promethean technology on its head to
render visible the inequalities and
tensions between the promises of
technological systems and the actual
distribution of Geographic externalities
if extract of capital is an act of
Geographic violence that abstract space
for exchange value then the geographic
imagination which engages both
environment and history as aesthetic
practices might be a radical response to
such servitude
it's the artifacts that render sensible
or make sense of the earth and it can
encapsulate that which scientific
rationalization alone has failed to
communicate so how can we convert into
image and narrative the disasters that
are slow-moving and long in the making
perhaps speculative narrative and its
persistent engagement with technological
question
in relation to the planet including
those created by broadening risk
scenarios can open up our stories to
real anthros diversity and urgent
troubles as Donna Haraway reminds us the
purpose of such fabulous is not to
predict the future let alone to fix it
but to raise questions on present
relations between humans and the world
they inhabit what could be some
disciplinary tools for such a static
engagement design earth for grounds the
drawing as an argument about the world a
drawing that is at once descriptive
synthetic critical and always
speculative in particular the section
drawing which counteracts an abstract
earth of aerial mapping diagrammatic
flows in a distant disembodied worldview
this includes drawing on earlier
precedents from biological sciences or
geological sciences it's just the scene
with a particular interest in a split
view that shows the domains both both
above and below the surface of the water
or the ground in this case the section
projects a vertical territory that
invites us to reimagine the relations of
the different forces and the sciences of
the earth it also draws to gathers
matters of the environment and in
various populations using visual agency
to synthesize such into a singular
drawing these are some of the broad
strokes of the conceptual introduction
to the book another architecture for the
environment geo stories is a manifesto
for such an environmental imagination
that renders sensible the issues of
climate change and through geographic
fiction invites readers to relate to the
complexity of Earth's system the series
of fourteen architectural project
becomes a medium to synthesize such
knowledge on technological externalities
or some of them such as oil extraction
deep-sea mining ocean acidification
water shortage air pollution space
debris and a host of other social or
ecological issues the book is organized
into three sections terrarium aquarium
and planetarium each of which revised
revisits such devices of wonders which
are material media that mediates our
knowledge of the environment to
reassemble public surround
presentations of the of the earth so we
propose an approach to design with
externalities that draws on the
geographic imagination to make legible
the territories of technological systems
and foreground them as possible elements
of design and urbanism
today I'll share three stories from the
14 and the book the three stories engage
what what we refer to as the global
comments with all the kind of challenges
and limits of that term but global
Commons does include the Earth's shared
natural resources spaces such as high oh
she's the atmosphere outer space and
Antarctica and the history of the kind
of legalized the legal texts that
regulate such environment have an
interesting interrelations between them
from oceans to Antarctica and then outer
space the key challenge of the global
Commons is both a political one so how
do we design for government two
structures in an area of separate
nation-states who gets to regulate for
the planet and implement and both
aesthetic how do we represent this this
globe so beyond the extreme geographies
of global Commons that they serve to
bring forth questions of representation
the both the political and the aesthetic
of representation of what world one
wants to assemble under which values and
with what entities she wants to live
with so the first one the Pacific
Aquarium
among the many early handbooks an
aquarium care is ocean gardens which
admonishes readers and I quote to
appreciate nature the mind requires a
special education without which the eye
and the ear perceive but little of the
miracles passing before them they add
the wonders of the ocean floor do not
reveal themselves to vulgar eyes born
out of the desire to represent the
inaccessible expansive and mysterious
sea the Aquarium gave a new aesthetic to
the idea of evidence marrying
speculation and fantasy with scientific
and technological knowledge production
to create what is referred to as a
submarine chamber of wonders Humphrey
school to educate the eye is timely
to remember at this moment when humans
are uttering the ocean environments are
a precedented scales oceans are the
biggest resource for life on earth while
being simultaneously a large dumping
grounds for many land-based activities a
large and reported anthropogenic carbon
sink with issues of acidification and
warm up etc etc we often remain more
attentive to the cousin threat of
sea-level rise as some of the most
urgent challenges facing coastal cities
because this is where the urban as lives
all while the volume of the ocean often
remains outside of such concern the
ocean is a classic example of the global
Commons the law of the sea a maritime
law both domestic and international
regulations have covered relations
between nations with respect to
navigation and life rights mineral
rights and jurisdiction over coastal
water
however these bodies do little to
protect the deep volume of oceans from
industrial activities so the law of the
sea or the common heritage as part of
the common heritage of humanity has has
organized the seabed so that it's it's
what lies beyond the domain of national
jurisdiction yet in this particular case
at least the site of the Clarion
Clipperton zone in the Pacific Ocean
which is an area approximately the size
of Europe that has some of the world's
largest deposits of seabed rare earth
minerals it's been over the last since
2001 which what was referred to as the
area which is how the the United Nations
conventions of the law of the sea refers
to the clearing capital zone since 2001
twelve exploration licenses for minerals
have been granted on the sea sea sea
deep seabed paradoxically or maybe not
at the same time nine areas of
particular environmental interests
that's how they're called each roughly
400 kilometers by 400 kilometers were
designated where extraction and marine
minerals is prohibited with plans to
protect biodiversity ecosystem functions
and sustainability of resources mind you
this is what you see in the dotted line
kind of adjacent to extraction without
bothering the rich of the depth of the
valley where the easiest part
extraction can happen so you're allowed
to have your cake and eat it too
and so the conceptual diagram of Pacific
aquarium proposes to consolidate these
environmental areas and rather than
placing them adjacent to economic
extraction actually overlaying them so
that that each design fiction navigates
the conflictual interest of economy and
ecology into the same scenario it's a
hypothetical scenario so it's a grid
with nine module each of which embodies
these contradictory concerns within the
same territory to reckon with the depth
and uncertainties of environmental and
technological futures they depict
three-dimensional sections of the ocean
with these split views that I started
the presentation with so I'll share with
you a few episodes from from the Pacific
aquarium project one is on the knowledge
of its production the production of its
knowledge because the ocean seabed
remains largely unknown beyond 90%
unmapped unmeasured and most of the
existing mappings are produced by
agencies and corporations that hold the
prospecting interest in the seabed no
surprise so the speculation is that
these high security and intelligence
records are housed in a sequence of
bolts deep into the earth crust so the
icon of sequency secrecy hides in the
map its roof land form mimics the
cartographic resolution of the
trigonometric production of the of the
deep-sea can very take on the map
territory relationship for the territory
to hide on the map the second one
reckons with the tensions between the
International seabed Authority which
mandates the conversation of the flora
and fauna and the CCC mining areas so
the ISA the International seabed
Authority proposes a project to suspend
cables from a grid of superficial floats
so it acts as a terraforming
infrastructure that really kate's these
linear transects of the substrate
samples to incubate a been technical
system that will be grafted onto the
depleted seabed one's mining is
completed project is called Hanging
Gardens which similar to its Babylonian
namesake it's contested whether
it's a real or a poetic construct third
drawing is the sharply toothed comp like
suction machines that churn and rip the
ocean floor into sediment slurry so that
act of mining produces particularly an
unfavorable condition of the seabed
catchment dome caps such mining
activities on the ocean floor to contain
a localized sediment plume polluted
water is separated from the surrounding
water transported into a series of
inverted water towers for treatment and
gradually released back into the ocean
after purification so kind of a reversed
relationship of architecture environment
and the large-scale intervention I won't
go into the details of all of the other
venues of all of the other vignettes we
can go back to them for the sake of time
this one on is on the cyborg fish colony
which is actually apparently a real
project in an MIT lab to produce forms
robotic forms of life that can take on
the job of cleaning the environment and
actually produce kind of some form of
the legacy out of the aft of the
collected waste they say it's not very
dissimilar to caviar so there's promise
and that how do we think of ocean
acidification and the role of iron
concentration of the water in this and
the scheme or this this one which is I
think it's interesting because of how it
reveals our contradictions with respect
to value in ecological system so where
we're concerned that coral reefs sea
turtle and fish are dying off the
jellyfish are doing pretty well
they actually blooming so the medusa
maze is a jellyfish husbandry for an
emerging cosmetic industry it's also
adam nacio at best yes which is the
Anthropocene arena where you can pet the
beasts here gelatinous gelatinous not
lions but you can put them against the
plankton and the sea turtles and what
becomes a luminescent aquarium and the
last two one is on the museum of the
low-lying coastal countries of the small
island states where you sample their
landscape in a what's their territories
are submerged
and ensure them continue with presence
and acclaim to nationhood the large
landfills in respect to their world
large presence of plastics and the ocean
bed and then I'll end with the
Parliament of refugees which contains
within the same envelope different
things and species of the Anthropocene
that are displaced such as sea turtles
CEO carbon dioxide molecules scallops
bleached Carol's drowning wetlands algae
Homo sapiens new or Finch etc so the
Parliament is organized around a hollow
pillar that connects it to the center of
the earth through the submerged volcano
and it's an invitation to rethink of the
question of governing the lobe the the
ocean one that lacks a formal
representation on who's represented in
the parliament again both a political
and an aesthetic representation through
which we can think of this immense green
house with the species that have very
different demands for survival so the
aquarium is interesting in part because
it reconciles a cognitive and an
affective dissonance between what feels
like a minut individual concern and the
agency and context of such systemic
earth systems it also has a few things
that we're interested in as a
representational project one it's a
three dimensional territory so it's not
a map its sectional inherently the
vertical element is always present also
the aquarium is populated often with
different species so it's encounters the
image of the sea as a territory of
emptiness
you know the infamous Lewis Carroll
ocean chart where we just see the
coordinates of space this is a space
which is inherently inhabited it's also
always now so rather than vastly
accelerated aesthetics of what the
contemporary Anthropocene does kind of a
rapid rapid Beat's to exponential curves
or satellites flyover imageries these
artifacts respond to what might one
would what Rob Nixon has referred to as
a form of slow violence with a form of a
slow media because it's immersive it
slows down thought it grounds you in the
immediacy of the present you're actually
looking at one representation but
static lists and the most is one that
invites the viewer to do more of the
work in coming up with conclusions and
invitations for action
that said the aquarium is inevitably
also there because it's a model of the
world that capitalizes on its distance
from what we refer to as the real
through its transparent yet clearly
defined boundary conditions it's allowed
to house monsters modern-day NOAA as
well as scientists and jellyfish on
stage so it's it has the uncanny ability
to draw on multiple even competing
visual and textual logic which is you'll
soon discover through the other two
projects maybe it's very central to this
work it's a device that disturbs that
stratas and possibly delight us in new
ways of thinking and feeling the scales
of the ocean and we can go back to the
significance of Enchantment as a
political project particularly for the
left the aquarium holds vividly also a
tension between the panorama the big
picture and the details it's always a
slice of the ocean it's never the
totality but it tries to embody that
relationship of scales from the micro to
the macro without miss LD fitting neatly
into one another we'll switch to the
second project of oil and ice which
speaks to the intertwined pattern of
climate change and energy intensive
desalination industries by recovering a
historical episodes to hold an iceberg
from Antarctica to the Arabian Gulf the
project departs from an observation by
Saudi prince Mohammad al Faisal that an
iceberg project is a better Enterprise
than oil in the mid 70s
so in 1976 probably at the time when the
oil prices were low so we're after the
crisis for sure he was responding to the
growth of desalination plants in a dry
region with high water demands it's a
large-scale manipulation of
environmental processes around which he
asked why simply allow the billions of
litres of fresh and pure water that make
up icebergs to be diluted in oceans
the Antarctic Treaty and related
agreements collectively called the
Antarctic Treaty system regulate
international relations with respect to
Antarctica earth only continent without
a native human population the treaty
entering into force in 1961 and
currently having 50 signatory nations
set aside Antarctica as a scientific
Preserve establishing a freedom of
scientific investigation and banning
military activity on that continent
climate change has put Antarctica on the
global map as melting ice threatens to
raise sea levels this Dymaxion map water
slaves positions the underworld of
Antarctica at the center of the map of
the world the the continent which holds
75% of the earth freshwater is
represented in relation to volumes of
desalinated water and various regions of
the world noting in particular large
volume is in the Gulf corporation
countries by 2030 the fresh water
storage and shortage in the Gulf is
projected to reach crisis levels so
Antarctica annually calls across
approximately 93 percent of the world's
total iceberg mass those that are large
larger than 12 by 12 miles are detected
and tracked by satellite you might have
seen on the NASA website a couple of
days ago a perfectly tabular iceberg
image these are the the most lucrative
actually for us to track for many
reasons
so icebergs are restless they are
legally free for taking without the
interference from national or
international regulatory bodies you find
it you can keep it a large tabular
iceberg which best resists rolling the
ping and the draw of the circumpolar
current is actually captured and towed
to the Arabian Peninsula at the coast
considerably less than that of fresh
water from desalination plants
Antarctica is also the largest and
oldest ice mass on the planet with
around 4.5 kilometers thickness the icy
archive of natural history holds the
best data on the global carbon cycle and
the earth climatic history in the form
of tiny samples of the atmosphere that
originated as air space between
snowflakes ice cores are also the
testing fields of bioprospecting
industries which the
cover and commercialize new products
based on biological resources some are
the potential resource some of these
potential resources include
extremophiles which are the little
spheres that you see traveling in the
ocean which are novel life-forms capable
of withstanding extreme cold DT and
salinity article seven of the Madrid
Protocol is silent on whether it's pre
habitually her three home or mining and
Antarctica covers living as well as
nonliving mineral resources meanwhile
until the protocol is clearer cosmetics
company is already advertising a non
Turkish in collage an alternative as the
website explains if unpacked is seen is
so resilient so powerful that it can
survive the extreme conditions of
Antarctica just imagine what it could do
for your skin after a hundred days at
sea the iceberg approaches the strait of
hormuz dam sliced off the shores of
hormann and carried across the strait
it's controlled ice melt feeds water
towers some of which are miniatures of
regional structures the Burj Khalifa and
the Great Mosque of Samarra architecture
seeks to contain world whose
transformations exceed all attempts to
contain it in 2048 the antarctic
treaties ban on capital development and
resource extraction will be renegotiated
under the pressures of international
squabbling over resources and the 21st
century the future of Antarctica hinge
on a planetary imagination and political
contracts such as the 2015 Paris
agreement on climate change on June 1st
2017
US President Trump announced that the US
would cease all participation in the
Paris agreement according to article 28
of the Paris agreement the earliest
possible withdrawal date by the u.s. is
november 4 2020
four years after the agreement came into
effect and one day after the 2020 u.s.
presidential action election on the
political and the aesthetic and their
interconnectedness so if such treaties
are not put into effect the melting of
antarctica promises to be a spectacular
vanishing act or the world's ears tuned
into a cold seltzer sound a high-pitched
hissing squealing popping and creaking
with stress cosmo rama Kuzma rama charts
a third global common after space and in
3g of stories that speculate on the
expansion of u.s. empire and private
industry interest into what is currently
referred to as the province of all
mankind and the ways the speculative
effort will impact life on Spaceship
Earth today the three vignettes mining
the sky planetary arc and Pacific
symmetry here they're vertically
organized each and a series of three
drawings they render visible important
matters which are an orphan unaccounted
for and technological triumph ilysm and
the frontier narratives of the Space Age
extra planetary geographies have become
a matter of crucial legal and political
interest with nascent private space
initiative speculating and off source
extractive industries for water mostly
platinum group metals and other resource
riches and in this province so what is
often referred to as the new Space Age
aside from daunting logistics of how do
we actually go about doing that
and why the largest earthbound obstacle
to space mining is the 1967 Outer Space
Treaty which mindful of Cold War
animosity had decreed that no celestial
body is subject to national
appropriation by claim of sovereignty by
means of occupation or by any other
means such universal legal geography has
been recently violated by national
commercial space legislation by a few
states but including the u.s. Space Act
of 2015 that allows you as citizens to
engage in the commercial exploration and
exploitation of space resources again if
you find that it's yours
such franchising of outer space is
expected to drive the nascent u space
entrepreneurial movement companies with
names like planetary resources plan to
extract billions of dollars worth of ore
from near-earth
ice asteroids and this is where mining
the spot the sky speculates on the
geographies of the 2015 US Space Act
literally you space is an acronym for
spurring private aerospace
competitiveness and entrepreneurship Act
sometimes you wonder like do they really
need to find the extra word to make the
acronym work in this case that's what
the Space Act is and this is the drawing
of the architecture of this new
space-age which makes visible the
intertwined and conflicting interests
between the Oval Office and generally
the political sphere the United Nations
and the series of documents the market
space and the space industry and private
investors in relation to representations
of science of the cosmos should I put it
back ok I have a minute I'll the
captured asteroids Ida spun and towed to
a mining depot at the earth-moon l1
Lagrangian it's a position where the
combined gravitational puts pulls from
the two celestial objects constitute a
stable equilibrium point so no need for
an engineer to just stand there by the
gravitational pull between the earth and
the moon and you can imagine why this is
a compelling point to be in terms of
engineering Robel robotic arms process
the asteroid they either hollow out the
space resource collecting the trail of
debris and the fabricated cave or they
mined the surface to carve out the face
of the gods of the new space age and
this cosmic rushmore movement the
mission partnership between NASA and the
US Air Force maintains security of rarer
storage at Lagrange point the extraction
stations will constitute the first
artificial constellation visible to
human eye from Earth the term
constellation itself refers to a
recognizable pattern of stars whose
appearance is associated with
mythological characters or creatures or
earthbound animals the capital Racine
civilization creates as well its own
pattern and the sky based on the myths
and gods that are important to them
second and the serious planetary arc
it's planet Earth is in the midst of the
sixth mass extinction of plants and
animals with as many as thirty to fifty
percent of all species possibly having
to award extinction by mid-century such
species March into the Empire State for
the multi species arc to embark and the
anthropogenic arc includes as well what
we refer to as the sacrificial animals
that were launched into space on
scientific experiments to test the
survivability of space flight for the
human body like a for example one of the
first animals in space had died within
hours from overheating it survived and
was never expected to begin with on the
value of life-forms in February 2018 and
unmasked Tesla Roadster and its dummy
driver star man made headlines when the
car blasted off a blasting David Bowie's
Space Oddity from the speaker the
symbolism of the dashboard screen
displayed well don't panic in capital
letters it resonated with the
billionaires worries that the next
extinction and and his thoughts were
that humans need to get off earth and
become interplanetary with a series of
visions at least for ecological
colonization of other planets so the
cursors arc comes back and this cosmic
architect or for the multi species to
embark on their journey this planetary
arc or maybe it's a ship of fools it's a
place of refuge for scientists and
environmentalists after denialist have
dismissed global warming as nonsense and
the hoax and omitted the words climate
change altogether from government
websites and this microcosm of the ark
such travelers than two other fellow
traveler with remarkable care so that a
few thousand years later their
offsprings form a new creature made
entirely of the merger of all forms of
life on this spaceship and eventually
embarked back on a return trip to earth
the rest really earthbound over the next
decades thousands and that's the third
chapter in this
because Marama over the next decades
thousands of satellites will be launched
into space and eventually decommissioned
after 15 years of operation at more than
a thousand four hundred nautical miles
from the nearest point from the nearest
land point Nemo is already a cemetery
for deorbited spacecraft such as the
Soviet era Mir station you'll burn a TV
and other European Space Agency cargo
ships even there's a SpaceX rocket
already in there so the United States
designates point Nemo as the strategic
does trust territory of the space age
not a good acronym yet sttt yes a
building on the President of the Pacific
proving grounds in 1947 the u.s. secured
an agreement with the United Nations in
which by designating the islands of
Micronesia as the strategic trust
territory the u.s. conducted nuclear
testing in such sites between 1946 and
1962 all while the directive stated that
the US should promote the economic
advancement and self-sufficiency of the
inhabitants and to this end shall
protect the inhabitants against the loss
of their lands and resources quite
conflictual if you ask me but it made
sense I guess then dub the oceanic point
of inaccessibility point Nemo becomes
the land fill of the space age it's also
a large terraforming project where the
orbited spacecrafts are recycled into
bits of sovereignty to house climate
refugees from Pacific Islands such
low-lying coastal countries are
particularly vulnerable to sea level
rise and the loss of physical territory
implies that they no longer meet the UN
criteria for statehood the first
submerged pacific islands become a US
strategic territory not unlike the
Marshall Islands where the US while
continuing to be the large one of the
largest emitter is committed to bury its
space trash and promote the said
economic invest advancement and right to
self-determination of such planetary
refugees the installation each suspended
head is a Janice face of a 3d model of
an asteroid from NASA website and the
related Greek god whose names it carries
so really the scales come together and
the context of histories of the
environment the myth is a particularly
effective means for storytelling and
times the late Ursula Le Guin observed
that the metaphors of fiction are ways
of seeing reality for spaceships faster
than light and I quote the weird worlds
and alien beings the intolerable or
utopian society the dooms envisage the
glories imagined there the medium to
describe what in fact is going on what
people actually do and feel how people
relate to everything else in this vast
suck this belly of the universe
this unending story and of course the
centerpiece is a meteorite on loan from
the Harvard Museum of Natural History
myths connect and magnify the cultural
and political words they engage like
most stories they come to truth through
the imagination they describe or
explicate a here and now that is
difficult to tell them here in other
ways counter the story of industrial
capitalism with an even more fantastic
narrative machine that tells truth to
realism they ascribe agency where it's
hard to assign causality
so what mythology of the earth can
respond to the imagination in an age of
the environment the iconic Apollo
photographs the whole earth and an
Associated series of synthesized
satellite imagery staged a world that
was global and ecological a standalone
planet outside of us however we don't
live on a blue marble and know as far as
that famous image of the planet
symbolizes an objective holistic
impersonal earth made visible by
technological achievement from the 1966
Life magazine photo essay planet Earth
by dawn's early light the final
photograph of the series from the Gemini
10 shuttle shows a single trash bag
floating in space a bag which contained
objects that NASA intended to leave
behind before the missions return to
Earth as the editors of live observed
just as cities had become clogged with
animal with animal waste space trash
could eventually become the proper
concern of extraterrestrial street
cleaners so if we were to imagine a
retroactive history of the ecological
movement should this image rather than
the one of the blue marble view from
outside
become the icon image of this world view
then the urban Empire
is to care for an ethics of the
distribution of matters and to bring
these precise externalities and to
public consciousness an architecture has
historically embodied how humans
understand and see the cosmos may be the
example of the Pantheon and its gods a
different kind of period this is why
maybe drawings are also important
because of the other drawings and words
that they make possible much like
storytelling drawing is always an act of
redrawing borrowing misusing
communicating relaying appropriating
they matter for both a disciplinary and
a political future so what could be a
pantheon for the 21st century B this is
a provocation we put to ourselves with
this project a blue marble circus which
is at 1/10 miniature of the Pantheon it
renders visible the spherical
architecture of the cosmos inscribed
within it's actually a 3d construction
of a Nicosia drawing so the relation of
model to drawing is a bit disturbed in
this one but it peels off ribs to reveal
and stage a plastic blue marble in an
age of extensive environmental
transformation which is itself a camera
obscura room so when you pick an inside
you see projections of the environment
projected on the within of the sphere
has the importance of integrity or the
section if the present predicament of
climate change Springs from an economic
and representation and mythology and I'm
concluding then we learned need to learn
to tell other stories that as began
Bruno Latour putted relearn's like atlas
how to carry the world on its shoulders
both the world and all there is above it
climate change brings forth questions of
representation of what world one wants
to assemble and with one entities what
what entities she wants to live the
earth has become once again as bruno
latour states an agent of our common geo
story so the importance of geo stories
should not be overlooked when imaginary
when thinking of alternative planetary
relationship after all environmentalism
is a foremost protest on behalf of
values an engagement with the world
beyond the tunnel vision of resources 'm
and it's something to think that such
attention to narrative myths and wonder
could make
scare thank you basically these are you
know we one of the first things we learn
is that representation is not advocacy
right and part of the the joy of your
drawings is that they're they're
fantastical and you kind of extrapolate
processes and systems to absurd degrees
like you know my my laughter when you
talked about recycling satellite trash
and somehow making territory for
refugees you know that was a supportive
like I was a supportive laughter that's
an amazing thing but I have an amazing
fantasy but I want to ask you like to
what extent so basically you're kind of
parodying technocratic solutions to
these kinds of things but to what extent
do you actually think that technocratic
solutions or systems might be part of
the part of the appropriate response to
the to the processes you're illustrating
maybe you don't even have to answer now
because it looks like it's working
on the screen okay it doesn't work yeah
I don't know I don't know what we're
gonna do it's thinking
Joe and tried to answer oh no here we go
okay so I just added this though at the
last minute just now when you talked
about blue marble the fact is when that
photo was taken the earth was apparently
upside down and NASA freaked out and
said you can't show people the world
like that we've got to turn it the other
way around so I just thought that was a
really funny example of how illustration
representation what you're talking about
obviously formulates out our perception
of the world and gets distorted from the
very beginning yeah so I just wanted to
start by showing a few maps of the u.s.
they're either newish modes of
representation or which make blatant
perhaps otherwise hidden processes and I
just passed over them quickly without
comment I just thought they were they
were cool and somehow appropriate for
today so this is all the paved areas of
America this is a land use map of the
u.s. though I think what comes out it
and what comes out today is that we
should question the paradigm we're
serving through terms like land use
which architects typically will
automatically like what's the land use
what's the land as if land is there to
be used as if we can project that onto
it and the amazing thing that this map
shows is how luxuriously we treat our
cattle and give them 40% of America's
land mass to be cultivated on this is a
map that shows how the wilderness can be
utilized and perceived as a sort of
subway system and therefore it's there
also for human enjoyment and and use and
the last map is an accumulation of the
dams in America since 1850s another map
that shows the landscape clogging up
with our geographical interventions but
what I really wanted to respond to in in
a tentative and kind of honest and open
way with Ronnie is this cool for store
which where she quotes bruno latour
in the beginning and where the title of
the book derives from the earth has
become once again an agent of our common
geo story the problem becomes for all of
us in philosophy science or literature
how do we tell such a story but I want
to suggest that or I want to ask is it
really about finding a new story or new
ways to tell stories or is it actually
about resisting the temptation to
develop new mythologies and I want to
suggest that we have a bit less
confidence as we approach that this is
an amazing quote from Merlin Donald
nothing illustrates the transition for a
mythic it's a theoretic culture better
than the agonizing process of
demythologize ation which is still going
on thousands of years after it began the
switch from a predominantly narrative
mode of thoughts were predominantly
analytic or theoretical mode apparently
requires a wrench in cultural
transformation so on I want to talk
about storytelling obviously stories can
go radically wrong despite the best of
intentions can we really be sure that if
we find a new story that it's gonna be
the right one and it's gonna be told in
the right way even if it is very
encouraging which these stories are
about you know showing a stitch together
world where externalities become
internal so starting with Eden which
frames the human mission as a
restoration project were cast into a
broken world that we essentially need to
fix to restore to the pristine state it
once was in so far so good maybe and it
was very stood for agriculture to be
mythologized as a curse from the
beginning there's a popular
understanding emerging now that that is
probably the case you've I know her
Ari's wildly popular book sapiens which
you see people reading on the tube on
the bus in airports and everywhere
declares and sort of makes public
finally the agriculture is history's
biggest fraud leading to more work more
disease more starvation more degradation
but more DNA a crucially maybe the
biggest myth that arose out of
this sort of predominance of agriculture
is that civilization sprung from
agriculture it didn't you know fairly
recent archeology tells us that
settlements and some of the biggest ones
survived without intensive agriculture
for up to four thousand years so
agriculture was not the beginning it was
not the beginning domestication was the
beginning of civilization as we know it
so but agriculture still has this place
in our minds as you know as part of the
creation myth but the judeo-christian
world misunderstood or deliberately
contorted the instruction or the
permission to take dominion over the
world
continuing with Genesis and the
declaration that nature is essentially
put there for people to serve them
clearly Dominion has been confused for
domination and its roots in a notion of
stewardship caring and protection have
been erased
so another story going awry growing out
the biblical idea of stewardship another
story we tell ourselves about the way
ecology works is the spaceship earth
idea a world of finite resources that
we're in charge of managing responsibly
and writing our own operating manual for
from this we can draw a line to the
Whole Earth Catalog and Stewart Brand
but I think we can actually go further
than that brand famously declared even
back then that we have the power of gods
it was an embrace of the Anthropocene
before there was a word for it but a
good version of it which I'll talk about
a bit more later spaceship earth and the
whole earth catalogue with their notions
of a closed system controlled by and
exploited by humans responsibly or
otherwise I want to ask are they in fact
using the same framework as their
apparent antithesis someone like Ayn
Rand another example of how stories go
awry underlying the notion of spaceship
vs. Earth is the idea of a neck of an
external mr. kn'l to it and a sense that
there is value to be exploited isn't
this basically the same framework as
rands where she describes the archetype
of the architect and his Promethean
calling as he stands naked on top of a
cliff looking at the granite to be cut
he thought are made into
he looks at a tree to be split and made
into rafters he looked at a streak of
rust on the stone and thought of iron
ore under the ground to be melted and to
emerge as girders against the sky these
rocks he thought are here for me waiting
for the drill the dynamite and my voice
waiting to be split ripped pounded
reborn waiting for the shape my hands
will give them like we would repudiate
this as architects but it it's basically
the same framework so from the beginning
Stuart brand embrace Tek not only was
the whole earth catalogue kind of a
proto internet he also started one of
the first internet communities but back
then it was kind of a bottom-up tech and
now he has a rather critical embrace of
top-down tech so something that began as
an emancipatory project an emancipatory
story actually coincides perfectly now
with the dominant culture and Stuart
brand is a member of the breakthrough
Institute which embraces a technocratic
gospel the belief that more invention
more technology can solve the ecological
crisis they authored I think is a very
dangerous manifesto eco modernist
manifesto which cools not just for a
good Anthropocene but a great one the
cornerstone of the manifesto is the
argument for decoupling nature from the
economy as if that was possible the Eco
moderns believe that human beings are
not destructive creatures and certainly
not sinful ones as some greens imply but
creative ingenious and basically
well-meaning if it is our destiny to
inherit earth and the arrival of the
Anthropocene is the fulfillment of that
destiny they say another product of the
breakthrough Institute is this book love
your monsters which says the key issue
sorry
environments has worn that degrading non
human nature's will undermine the basis
of human civilization but history has
shown the opposite the degradation of
non-human environments has made us rich
the solution to the unintended
consequences of modernity is and always
has been more modernity so this is you
can it's amazing you can get it from the
spaceship earth to there
their dream is for a world of the techno
sublime or we can exalt in human
creations with the same wonder as
natural ones they can inspire the same
feelings of war what they don't factor
in is Jevons paradox which exposes the
myth that greater technological
sophistication means more efficiency and
a reduction in our footprint the Jevens
paradoxes happens where despite an
increase in efficiency it doesn't sort
of create more space in which we kind of
relax and do nothing it creates more
space in which we do more and extract
more clive Hamilton writes how the
fossil fuel Lobby is beginning to
advocate geoengineering because it means
we are they can carry on business as
usual we can see an embryo a Lobby that
under unites fossil corporations opposed
to carbon reduction policies with
investors in geoengineering technologies
of the two could soon overlap we see
powerful forces of denial in the United
States and elsewhere shifting to support
and geoengineering and conservative
political leaders begin to see electoral
advantages the high priest of the
Prometheus cult and the free market
economists are naturally drawn to it
Hamilton analyzes a particular report
calling for solar radiation management
where the authors are paid for by
ExxonMobil and the American Enterprise
Institute the value of techno fixes is
they can solve a problem that would
otherwise require social change they
allow us to carry on business as usual
so yeah again that the techno sublime
the geoengineering solution is kind of
part of the same narrative as the
extractivist one so we're now we're in a
process of constantly overturning myths
stories and grand narratives but now
perhaps because of the reality of the
Jevons paradox we're now in the
Anthropocene or so we tell ourselves and
the story of the Anthropocene can be
pitched against it on the story that of
the Enlightenment where there's kind of
unlimited there's an unlimited dumping
ground for externalities and an
unlimited potential for growth but
perhaps it's not that these two visions
are in opposition to each other but it's
more like the final confrontation in a
movie where the villain meets the hero
for the first time and says we're not so
different you and I so the Anthropocene
kind of burst into public view in in
2011 and was declared very confidently
by the economists and and dozens of
other publications but we act as if
we're already officially in the
Anthropocene we're not the process of
geo stratigraphic designation is
appropriately glacial in its speed it's
a hundred in 76 years between the first
positing of the idea of the Holocene and
its final scientific acceptance so the
rush to kind of ratify the Anthropocene
before it's been properly investigated
by geologists is in itself an
Anthropocene a kind of impatience and
petulance almost and and another form of
arrogance in itself so we're gonna see
how the Anthropocene myth even before
it's established scientifically is kind
of even pounced upon by other bodies for
their for their own interests this is
the official to your geological
timescale and you'll notice that the
Anthropocene is absent from the top left
because it hasn't yet been verified and
approved by the AI UGS a new pot a new
epoch is validated and created by
inserting sometimes literally a golden
spike somewhere in the strata to mark
the moment in the rock where things
change radically between where you can
really identify two different layers and
two different time periods the
Anthropocene advocates have a huge
buffet of evidence that human activity
amounts to an almost total domination of
the planet and I'm not kind of denying
that but their problem in terms of
formalization on the geological
timescale is that the earth has only
just begun to digest this deadly feast
through the pedosphere that outermost
layer and into the lithosphere the crust
beneath it the challenge is to convince
geologists accustomed to digging much
further back in time that the evidence
accumulating now will be significant
stratigraphically speaking deep into the
future geologists are being asked to
become prophets
it's clear that the majority of our
maximum anthropogenic signatures are
coming in the future there are a lot
right now but many more are probably
coming much deeper into the future and
we can't tell how long what we're
depositing now is actually going to last
is it going to be is it going to be
there in millions of years we we can't
possibly know but now there's this sort
of like rush indianajones in the search
for the Golden Spike not only in geology
in archaeology we're almost in every
field everyone's trying to identify the
moment when the Anthropocene started and
sort of cast their hat into the ring I
was there in 2014 when the Anthropocene
working group made its case that the
Anthropocene began with with the first
nuclear bombs just after the war it was
a very subdued event for such a hot
literally an epoch-making announcement
so they submitted their report in 2016
finally to the kind of geology
geological governing body and who knows
how long it will be before they ratify
or otherwise who knows how long it will
be before it makes its way up through
this hierarchy and also who knows if
it's a good thing if it does make it to
the top because it's already been kind
of absorbed and digested by popular
culture and now you know there's this
version of a good Anthropocene it's like
okay if we can design the earth
inadvertently then we can also design it
deliberately as well and right let's get
going let's do it some more let's make a
fabulous Anthropocene so there are lots
of people in the grip of human adaptive
optimism belief in a good Anthropocene
means that we can consciously use our
power and our innate ingenuity to save
the planet if we can destroy in a global
scale then we can also repair and
redesign on a global scale one of the
main text of the a good Anthropocene
movement has a pseudo mystical or at
least a highly poetic spirit Diane
Ackerman has a disturbingly rosy view of
how we made the Anthropocene and what it
means and how we should be feeling good
about ourselves because of it
she writes I'm all for renaming our era
down focus
legitimate Golden Spike based on the
fossil record because it highlights the
enormity of our impact on the world
we are dream Smith's and wonder workers
what a marvel we've become a species
with planet-wide powers and breathtaking
gifts that's a feat to recognize and
celebrate it should fill us with pride
and astonishment the quote fills me with
astonishment so the so the Anthropocene
story gets rewritten something that was
supposed to be a dire warning gets
turned into a course of celebration and
validation of our powers of design and
imagination the message is don't worry
we can design our way out of this so the
yeah okay so out of the Anthropocene
kind of tendency in this technocratic
tendency is this tendency to quantify
ecology and quantify the planet maybe
that's the answer maybe that's the story
we should pursue
but in opposition to that people posit
the idea of intrinsic good in nature so
you can't it's not about quantifying the
rainforest we have to see it as an
intrinsic good and I want to talk tiny
bit about this one example from Ecuador
so ironically Ecuador is I think the
only country in the world that has
embedded into its constitution the idea
of the intrinsic value of nature a term
for Mother Earth from which life Springs
has the right to have its existence
integrally respected the violation of
these rights would constitute a crime of
ethnocide so even in Ecuador minutes
okay I can do it even here the story got
reversed another story goes awry nature
got quantified and they raised a capital
campaign asking the world to pay three
point six billion dollars in exchange
for keeping the oil in the ground
beneath the Yasuni reserve one of the
most biodiverse places on the planet I
guess three point six billion dollars
was either the the value that they
attach to the oil there or the costs of
the planet in terms of carbon dioxide
that would there would be released if
they extracted it at first it seemed to
be going well the world responded and
they thought they had the 300 million
dollars in the bank and another decade
to raise the rest
the oil in the ground but a year later
the campaign was count was cooled off
deemed an utter failure the model of
costing our untapped potential wasn't an
appealing one financially and the
president said the world has failed us
it was not charity that we sought from
the international community but
co-responsibility in the face of climate
change the biggest mistake is to
subordinate human rights to ostensible
natural rights and they said we're going
to use oil to get off of oil and the
first roads were duly carved into the
Yasuni reserve that same year so a
forest that they if we think of forests
as in terms of their use value like the
if we attach the metaphor the lungs of
the planet we're actually putting them
in service to us and then we can we
might quantifiably be able to show that
oh it makes more sense to cut them down
cover them and solar panels and rebuild
replant a forest somewhere else so it's
that kind of thinking and that kind of
danger that this quantifying tendency
leads us to so there's a potential or
imminent world where corporations in
ecologists unite to finish quantifying
resources and natural impacts in order
to trade on them to potentially save the
planet but this is technocratic future
is a profoundly disturbing one and as
Jonathan Franzen writes about a planet
optimized to manage and mitigate climate
change a technological solution that
forgets the intrinsic values of
landscape rather than conceiving it
mainly as a carbon sink it may be true
of course that where there's life
there's death and I did wonder if the
vision of a climate denatured planet
award of switchgrass fields and
eucalyptus plantations is secretly
appealing to humans because having so
much less life in it would have so much
less death so this vision of a denatured
technological eyes world actually
coincides with an extremist
preservationist like yo Wilson's half
earth campaign where 50% of the world
would be declared off-limits to
development and exploitation because 50%
is a good tipping point after which
nature can recover and take care of
itself but this vision of a pristine
world over there while we live in
extract over here
in this 50% on the one hand that's
that's super appealing but isn't it also
the same paradigm that got us into this
situation in the first place where we
thought of ourselves is divorced from
nature separate from the planet the
proposed alternative story what's
portrayed as the realist scenario is
scary to a messy integration of the wild
and the civilized as if they can
possibly live together as if mammals and
other creatures would have enough
territory to survive I honestly don't
know except that anything that's
presented as a choice between two
problematic stories is probably a false
choice thank you it was it was an
observation that you know your your
representation is obviously not advocacy
of some of the kind of nightmare
scenario is that you extrapolate to
absurd degrees but it was really a
question about kind of does does design
always have a tendency towards a
technocratic solution and where you how
you feel about that I guess
yeah let me put it another way it is the
very framework of start is the starting
point designed the right one by
definition kind of only offer
technocratic solutions implying or
requiring a form of mastery but there's
a few inventions that line the work
there's definitely intention to speak
back to technocratic imaginary that is
and maybe that's by virtue of where I am
at now I work at an Institute of
Technology where the motto is to create
a better world and to solve problems
these are kind of the two questions that
that we're asked to respond to on a
daily basis how is your work and it's
always situated this is disciplinary so
yes I am a designer and I operate within
the tools of the discipline then the
question becomes better for whom how do
you qualify that qualitative had you
quality yeah what's the quality that is
required and then maybe a some humbling
from the histories of technology which
beyond the catastrophic I think of when
things go super wrong Deepwater Horizon
allows us to accept a few thing one that
the history of Technology is necessarily
embedded in failures there's no bike
unless we had a few experiments in bikes
and there's a history of mainstreaming
that this part of that day electric
light bubble day at the current being
the kind of the epitome of that example
but technology is not story free stories
and their different formats their ways
of relating to a word they reclaim by a
scientist on why their lightbulb is
better than a lightbulb so I don't think
that kind of in the way that I perceive
it that they're exclusive of each other
what is exclusive of the relation
between I think the possible and the
probable between one possible narrative
of a future and then the probabilistic
calculus tech relation that is
determined and has a scenario planning
as a tool to kind of invite you to
imagine a very specific calculated
future with options and I don't think
we're in the business of scenario
planning either that's why we start from
a story that is I think at the heart of
industrial capitalism a fossil fuel
advertising campaign they're part of our
everyday word and in various formats
they're part of stories that continue to
live thousands of years later whatever
we think of them and they're part of
stories that are invented on a on a
daily basis so I don't know if we have
the option to withdraw from
representation I don't think that that's
an position that is possible or even one
that I would advocate for do we need to
put on more voices in the world well yes
we are asked to produce part of my job
is to produce new things in the world
and I'd like the things that I produce
to be things I care about and hopefully
things that might resonate with some
people when they hear it so yes to
produce new representation what tone do
they speak they're looking for a tone
they want a tone that is precise so all
of these stories depart from actual
observations conditions
episodes in the world and then they even
a few other references this is why I
think SF is the best ally so far not
only science fiction so that inherently
embodied tension between these two words
but what Donna Haraway it invites us to
think about in terms of string figures
speculative fabulous I'm still looking
for the kind of the precise as F but
that methodological openness allows for
people to breathe in possibilities
because I think they all depart from a
point that they're super tired of
critique as a project
why has critique ran out of steam
there's the kind of it's almost the
possibility to nurture things that are
emerging and allowing them to exist in
the word to exercise caution into what
we critique but inevitably to include a
propositional attribute of what other
words do you want to embody and maybe
partially this is why a harsh critique
on well I won't go there but this is why
I think we need to nourish where some of
the humanist Marxists where we're
leaning towards and allowing themselves
to to to engage Marxism that was not
just a critique of institutions or the
adversarial model but and I think there
is virtue and allowing tones to to
coexist
even if that destabilizes some even you
know hopefully there is discontent and
and friction and and that emerges out of
these stories if they all land and we're
all kind of not disturbed by the
plotline either their general approach
the specific narratives or plots then
kind of what we're doing is not very
useful because
there if they manage to embody such
different worldviews and bring them
together and then that doesn't people
don't respond with some level of
reservation this missile friction then I
don't think though the work is doing
what it wants to do because it it wants
to nurture disagreement as part of the
question but a disagreement that can
engage a conversation it's not kind of
an exclusive disagreement but hopefully
something through which you can start to
mediate disagreement so so yes what is
what is I would say beyond kind of the
project of critique and they're not
grand narratives either I mean they're
not but not they're not trying to
replace the fire of Prometheus with any
other singular narrative story of
salvation yet they don't have that and I
don't think they're looking for that but
they're they're looking for a few things
at the same time and I think this is why
I described the project wing looking for
ways to describe and that's probably a
very disciplinary response but after
their kind of mapping exhaustive decades
of 90s 2000 of documenting the world for
what it is they're asking the question
of where do you stand with a V that
world world and how do you start to
speak to that engagement with the world
rather than a description of the world
and these were some of the format that
that way of that that project of
representation took they're definitely
critical project because they depart
from a view on technology and the
environment that they in themselves they
have technology has the potential to fix
whatever the challenge are that we are
kind of we can we can count on that
premise they they they're critical in
that they hint to Ernest l necessity to
account for externalities which
maybe not the kind of the elephant of of
the little prince eating the this the
other way around the snake eating the
elephants not that the externalities
would become the form of the world but
that now they're they're economically
they remain unaccounted for so there's a
question of and visually and
representational II yeah I mean there's
a there's a respond to that so so I it's
will will we do alternative words
eventually become quite of a mainstream
yeah let's let's probably I mean that
the dichotomy or the set of binaries
between alternative and Mace mainstream
or success and failure I mean there are
voice out there in the world they don't
claim kind of a necessarily alternative
status if they become if they resonate
with more people for sure how I don't
know can I guarantee it won't go wrong
no but if I'm not an insurance on the
probability of the future and there's no
claim to that but there's definitely a
willingness to a vulnerable position of
accepting to put something out there
and allowing it to live because there's
already many things that are being out
put out there and there I'm forced to
live with so so and then if there's if
that doesn't happen if there's no risk
there's no gain
I guess that's something you you learn
so yeah may may they live may they be
hurt maybe for a while and then and then
we'll see I think it's time to open
questions to the floor yeah right
I just wanted to ask your opinion on the
European Union sustainable strategy
because they were like there was a
strategy by 2020 everything will be so
sustainable and you know the sources of
energy will go from the renewable
resources and and then somehow the
strategy changed and like most of the
these things were changed and then the
introducing you know discussion appeared
so I think these two things somehow
should be connected maybe you have any
opinion about that I mean that you know
yeah I will try to narrow that I mean
the the intra person and I think that
your presentation was somehow about that
so people separate themselves from the
earth and they start to think that they
are shaping the they are ruling the
earth and then before that there was an
opinion that the that we will somehow
adapt ourselves to the nature and then
we will try to extract the resources you
know carefully trying to to use the
renewable resources and then probably
there was a certain you know shift when
people understand that they they do
something but it doesn't change anything
and climate change is still ongoing and
sea level rises and everything and we
tried to change to sustainability but it
didn't really happen and then peoples
were started to to think Oh probably
this is
cuisine and maybe we don't need
sustainability anymore because we are
shaping the earth and maybe we can you
know the the rulers or try to explain
somehow the the things that are
happening so I think that's hugely
interesting I'm not sure you won't
necessarily want an answer to a question
maybe I have a quick day I know I think
there's a it's a it's a great
provocation I think in terms of you to
write the history of sustainability what
does what does the big buster of the
Anthropocene does what does it do to a
series of say national state regulations
or region and regulations that we're
looking to kind of curtail production
because I think what you're hinting is
that it's it's taken on such a rigor
that we've already embraced it and we're
thinking of adaptation as the paradigm
which kind of legitimizes that we can
continue doing what we're doing now and
just deal with the consequences rather
than kind of point back to the image
source evolution or the actors the
companies that are industrial capitalism
when well that's extractive industries
that are putting up I mean it's easy
when you see some of the charts of the
responsibilities in terms of the
question the responsibility lies in
there's a clearly identifiable set of
companies that are point to which I
think when you start to point to the
consumer and then strategies that evoke
11 of individual response start to dine
you the the question somehow that's
that's not to kind of deny the
effectiveness of you know changes of
behavior but I think that does not I
think maybe the only encouraging part of
the recent IPCC report is that I don't
know if this was part of it or my
interpretation I can't remember but it
it seems impossible to deny it for
corporations or even governments to make
the case now that it's too expensive to
deal with climate like in fact the
argument has shifted the other way like
very decisively that actually this is
the only way we continue the economy and
grow the economy is to address it to
mitigate it to adapt to it and to kind
of launch a bunch of new renewable
technologies so is that a like a very
kind of exciting and encouraging model
or is that another way of carrying on
business as usual I I don't know I mean
the problem is to photos so there's the
kind of unfortunate the approach
doesn't know the abort the possibility
opportunities that we will present that
the kind of a green capitalism version
that seems to come back that we can
there are possibilities to develop
opportunities to develop new
technologies new ways of going around
the plant John the Friedman kind of
article again let's have our our cake
and eat it too but that says we can have
the bad ecological condition and we can
still adopt growth and kind of an
economy we can have them we can deal
with them both and I think the challenge
becomes when you start to overlay them
together and think of but also what what
what gets lost in the obsessive focus on
climate changes is the the parallel
crisis of habitat degradation and you
know the imminent sixth extinction and
which could also be it could be made
worse by enacting their sort of
technocratic responses to climate change
we have questions how many more minutes
five okay so we have two questions at
the front and I saw a hand at the back
as well
we divide time with a sharp-edged and
placed on the first page a plane in the
form of a square black as a secret the
plane looks at us with darkness as if
hiding in itself new pages of the future
other things display were also for
example a series of victims and heroes
of the revolution by mayakovsky etcetera
so kind of giving human face to who was
the winner and the loser of of the of
the of the substantive change it was
going on and what would I would the
parallels that I'm seeing there and that
strike meals are today said we are at a
stage where a kind of revolution would
be needed right the kind of the scale of
social change or political change is
that the level of something quite
dramatic and dramatic as the Russian
Revolution was and this profusion of
this this insane explosion of creative
kind of social ambition and it's
spectacular failure and in some ways in
retrospect should maybe teach us
something about what are the ways that
we should be acting as kind of as people
who dabble in both theory and and in any
anesthetics and and what is the
strategic way to proceed forward because
I have so much sympathy with with your
thinking and and I also feel at the same
time guilty of of every time I feel like
I'm aestheticizing some kind of or or
rendering it towards the area of art or
aesthetics instead of maybe something
more surreptitious but more efficient
and and I guess the question of that
black square which is you know I had a
conversation with somebody about
forensic architecture is a part of the
Turner show now and he was thinking that
of all the works somehow it feels the
least potent because it's so explicit in
its ambition right and so if I just want
to put this on the table the idea of if
we want to change something there are
also ways to work below the threshold of
of
making visual making visible but that is
equally designed equal
and equally you know ambitious I would
like to respond to that when we get
there I guess this is a question for
Jane
this morning I was intrigued by the
presentations which range from the
poetic to the provocation all they were
all propositional in their own in their
own right and that got me thinking about
well how do we position ourselves in
terms of agency advocacy and activism
and I guess that's still mulling over in
my mind as we progress through the rest
of the afternoon's presentations and
discussions and then James introduced
what's his name Stewart Brand enter
stage right and how you know from Whole
Earth we get to Global Business Network
Peter Schwartz what's it was beautiful
wasn't it royal girls and royal
dutch/shell and their use and abuse of
scenario planning storytelling in order
to pursue in their own form advocacy
activism an agency through storytelling
and I guess it's not a clear question
yet but I guess it's a provocation for
all of us in terms of how we might
reappropriation alweather there are
purely aesthetic or whether they are I
guess
data based but what do we do with these
to reclaim that ground of agency
activism and indeed I guess advocacy to
make change not to just talk about it or
reveal it thank you I mean shall we take
responses to that and then we probably
have to close unless you'd like like a
shot okay I mean sure we have James
those two questions are
very beautiful and actually they kind of
answer each other like you know so are
so amazed and impressed by the the
graphics and the maps and everything in
the last panel but like there's almost
this is correct it's almost like a
pornography and in terms of like just
how bear they lay everything and it's
like it's shocking and always feels like
you you can't look at it but there's
also this there's almost this um
unclaimed or unintentionally using the
most sophisticated in complex software
and the most precise lines and
everything but at the same time no
responsibility is taken for what it all
adds up to what it means and I'm not
necessarily saying that that's what we
should be doing that we should be like
more explicit in standing by the
implications of these drawings but
actually like I more support what Namek
was saying that actually maybe the
change happens on a level before the
visual and before the representative
because as we know yeah
stories can only be twisted look I think
if I could say I mean what I what I
would like to say about Rania and el
hadees work is that what i find
absolutely extraordinary about it that
is accepted that the mode of practice is
drawing which makes the work inherently
authored I mean those are your drawings
I mean there's a subjectivity about that
work which distinguishes it so
remarkably from cartography or mapping
some of the work that we saw earlier
today and I think that for me that's
what's really transformative about it is
you're putting your
there is a very author very subjective
statement in order to engage in in in a
kind of storytelling mode with the
critical issues that you're trying to
address and to me it refers to something
you actually start your book off with
with with a reference to Robert Saks
book and I know that's been
extraordinary influential in your
development who says that the human
today is a geographical Leviathan a
reflexive being who transformed the
world and is itself transformed in
return so for me what your work is doing
is attempting not only to represent the
world but in doing so to transform
yourselves through your work and I mean
I would just like to hear your response
to that maybe because I spend a lot of
time with a three-year-old
but I've reminded on a daily basis of
how important stories are to the making
of to the making of subjectivities at
all ages actually and I cannot and I and
I'm I mean my pet project one day would
be to write a good children's book story
on similar issues but I I hear how
people are nervous and reluctant about
well as a disciplinary project narrative
in architecture what do we do with that
as in this age of we're kind of where
maybe frustrated with where culture the
presentations are taking physical space
we're like okay do we need more stories
but it's it's I mean it's everywhere
around us and we're producing these
narratives and a good revolution needs
many arms and many heads so a good
storyteller never hurts this never
claims to be the exclusive project or
the single authority on how to best
respond to climate change but it starts
from a
from an experience of walking down the
aisles of and you've probably worked
some of them if you visited an aquarium
or a Museum of Natural History recently
you cannot have still a 19th century
enlightenment presentation of the world
its colonial possessions and how they're
displayed and then at the end of your
journey usually there's like a very
dimly lit room very underwhelming in
terms of character and strategy which
usually says us and climate change or
the earth and the age of the
Anthropocene usually has like a table
with a white napkin at the end of it
some mailing list that you have to sign
off a brochure vertical in layout that
you know shows some polar bear or a man
thing and then the screens digitally
very digital kind of a series of screens
that either like are doomed a scenario
or the most advanced technological fix
or with what we can do with that and
I've often skipped these rooms because
I'm usually hungry by the end of the
visit
I mean it's usually the end you're
you're done and kind of a sense of
really wanting to take pictures of your
previous experience willing to suspend
disbelief for a while and with all the
kind of criticism I mean then all the
criticism of why that's not maybe the
most appropriate behavior but I'm I am
not listening anymore because I'm not
engaged and that might just be me but
I've noticed I mean you don't have as
many people stop there as the rest of
the year this place and when you google
the name of that place you don't have
photos from that room anyway so and it's
interesting that museums have realized
that they do not yet have a way of
curating narrating representing
addressing the questions more broadly of
environmental transformation what do we
call it as a different questions there
there definitely at the rate which is
accelerated
so there's a desire that somehow this is
a work that has its position well happy
first has its interest in a subject
matter which is clear has the desire to
engage design research but to deliver an
outcome that is also capable of speaking
to broader audiences although it remains
kind of a big project on the
architecture drawing and what you could
do with that but that it also allows
different voices to exist from within
each project so I mean there there are
conclusions that you can draw but there
are people who do different things with
this with these with these drawings
usually they have excited at least
students to take on some of these
questions as questions and their own
methods and interest but at least it's
been an interesting first taster for
people who otherwise I mean I know that
from the geographies of trash project
that would not have been interested in
this as a subject matter and I think if
we can get more people to think of this
question I'm willing to kind of be the
recruitment agency of says okay this is
this worthy of your time and attention
can we still talk about it in a way that
you feel is disciplinary relevant
advances your skills and that we can get
people to think of this question because
you know if you're just preaching to the
choir then there's probably an end to
that possibility but how do you how do
you get people interested in a project
and I would say it's it's beyond the
kind of desire of account of a call for
efficiency call for best management
practices equal it's it's also a cool
for well and and this is maybe where I
should have stopped but it doesn't
matter this is where I usually and it's
a it's a desire to engage the world in a
way that is beyond the materialist
quantification of the world with the
with the realization and the hope that
the construction of the world as a
as a series of Donder science from which
we are allowed to just withdraw from
that account and just keep it to
interpersonal accounts is not it's not
helping the cold so if you can get
people enchanted if there is for the
split of a second the possibilities of
imagining other contracts other values
reminding us of earlier projects which
we know some Google right but hey we
can't write the history which is a
history of success throughout and wars
have been launched in the name of
different reasons so so some so beyond
just the some of the logging beyond the
tree beyond the forest the forest of
what lives there what spirits do we
invite and and there welcome to the
story because I think if if we're not
capable of relating to each other and to
the world in a way which is beyond the
accumulation of value from singular kind
of commodities then there's not much
hope in this conversation and maybe
that's where the revolution comes back I
mean it's a revolution of values if
anything how sad you the world I think I
can try to end your thought your your
sentence it's about making externalities
internal but in terms of integrating
them into our psyche and that's I think
that's what your drawings are trying to
do at least for me and I just want to
add that the the room you were
describing in the museum the typical
museum in the Science Museum here that
room is sponsored by BP yeah and we
shall end on that note thank you very
much
[Applause]
let's continue because we still have a
the panel session and Neil and Stewart
session so let's let's move on so we're
just gonna do a short intro of the
second panel of the call for projects
and propositions we made this time we
had colonizers who is accredit also from
GSD Harbor and we have Patricia Roy who
is a graduate from here from BA from
diploma for we have Natalie Nemcova is a
graduate from the AEA landscape urbanism
program together with elena long Dean
and Leanne Moritz and we also have
Matthew Thomas Dharma from Marcia so I
let them make presentations it's the
same a way of doing 10 minutes I will
tell you two minutes when your thank you
okay well I will jump right in in the
interest of time I'd like to talk about
food distribution food production and
ultimately the idea and the concept of
food food self-reliance through the lens
really of the Hawaiian state and their
own food reliance and the idea of what
the obviously what ocean can play in
that in that role so at the moment it
takes an area of agricultural land
equivalent to the size of South America
to feed the current population of the
world and its projected that we'll need
an additional land area the size of
Brazil in order to feed that growing
population if you look at a very simple
poche diagram that we've seen through
many direct presentations today and you
do a very simple extraction of those
areas most inhospitable to cultivation
to colonization the deserts the glaciers
you end up with something more like this
in a very simplistic terms and of that
land that's available for agriculture
80% is that's in use is already in use
and 15% has already been laid waste by
poor man
and practices so it begs the question of
how will we feed the world as we grow as
our as our population grows
exponentially Freeman and the role of
what the other 71% of the other surface
might do and not as far as feeding the
earth so the idea of could be could the
ocean form a platform specifically for
the Hawaiians who are the people most
adept to the ways of the water in that
role so you've seen this this map again
this is obviously the shipping routes
across the world but most most critical
for this is the connection between
island nation of Hawaii shown in pink
there and the west coast of America and
some staggering statistics that it's
2,500 miles away they import 92 percent
of their food at 6 million pounds that
are imported every day at a cost of 3
billion per annum and the most striking
figure here that really makes you sit up
and listen is that if any catastrophic
event were to disrupt that umbilical
cord of connectivity they would have
enough food to sustain their people for
only 10 days so as the coast of America
are battered by storms and hurricanes
and tsunamis it's a question really of
survival for the people of Hawaii and
then if you looked surely at the
economic side of it but also surely the
environmental side jumbo jets from San
Francisco to Hawaii emit 600,000 pounds
of co2 and if you look at the shipping
container and pollution equivalent to
50,000 cars 4% of the local greenhouse
gases the emission from 15 mega ships
matched those from all of the cars in
the world and if the shipping industry
were a country it would be ranked
between Germany and Japan as the sixth
largest contributor to global co2
emissions so going back to this idea of
reversing the post a looking more to the
ocean rather than to the land and
specifically the idea of the economic
exclusion zones which is this 200
nautical mile sovereign territory for
every Island for every nation every
other nation has and if you look at this
in the lens of Hawaii and you imagine
what that means so here's the landmass
obviously of Hawaii if you look at it if
you look at its territorial ease Ed's
own it's dramatically different in fact
125 times the landmass of Hawaii so
suddenly their sovereign territory
expands exponentially zooming in
specifically on the island of Oahu
which is where Honolulu is for those of
you that seek that beautiful beach this
is where Honolulu sits so its total land
area here if you imagine it's 12
nautical miles long which is the
territorial water so this is important
because they have sovereignty over both
the surface of the ocean but also what
happens below the surface of the ocean
so it's it's a substantial piece of
territory and through that lens so it's
two and a half times the landmass of
Oahu the other important threshold is
this one of culture so 30 nautical miles
was the distance that people could go
out to sea and still register the
mountains of the islands so there is
this cultural register about how people
how far out into the ocean they can go
and what those thresholds really means
well we also factor this into the
research so looking at this in platform
you get a sense of what those
territories mean obviously this is a
transect looking through a specific oh
wow which I'll come on to describe
further but it shows these imperceptible
thresholds the three nautical mile which
I'll come on to twelve nautical mile
which is the territorial waters 30
nautical mile which is again as visible
the land is visible from this distance
and then ultimately the EZ now what's
really interesting about Hawaii is they
have a traditional land distribution
system called the aqua agua and the
concept here is that for every person
who lives in Hawaii they have an equal
right to a hydrological cycle from the
mountains down to the sea and it meant
that you could basically cultivate the
land using that hydrological cycle
through those different transics but
what's happened is what was once a very
logical productive and ecologically
defined land distribution system has
been broken by land ownership now to the
point where the land is no longer
productive it's no longer efficient and
really it's causing economic instability
I'd say so this is zooming into the
alpha of hey year it's the only bar that
has a military occupation base which
sits right here on the end of the roll
bar so I'll be looking at this transect
for there's those slides and this
demonstrates really the idea of how you
could theoretically connect the
mountains right the way through to the
depths of the ocean the bathymetry but
also obviously the surface of the ocean
and then through that process there's
very in depth varying Ecology's so the
first one is the three nautical mile
again this goes back to the tradition
this was the zone into which you could
free dive so people could free dive for
their food to this distance the Terra
territorial waters which is 12 nautical
miles and then ultimately the deep sea
so in each of those each of those points
there's that there's a depth and a
different ecology at different kind of
creatures that are obviously occupying
the ocean but also the way in which you
can begin to think about how you could
extract and use the depth of the water
but also the bottom of the ocean and
what's interesting I think really for
this is the idea of temperature and how
we don't necessarily utilize the
temperature change both subsurface but
also altitude 'only which this slide
demonstrates that colored band in the
center is effectively what the average
temperature ranges for Hawaii so they
have a very they have a year-round
growing season but they have
temperatures that don't range
dramatically into the cold which for
many many of the food crops that we eat
you need a certain temperature in order
to trigger germination but also to raise
those kinds of crops so this project
very quickly became one about the
horizontal the idea of the land to sea
but also the altitude nor reaching up
into the sky would also then go in
subsurface again through temperature now
culturally again there's a really strong
connection that the Hawaiians have
almost spiritually to the land that the
land and the sea has this certain
resonance with them and this image is
actually the creation of a fish bond
where they build these fish ponds stone
by stone passing from person to person
and once the fish pond is is built they
can regulate the salinity they can
dictate how much salt water they allow
in which creates a certain microclimate
grows out
the algae food the fish the feet the
fish ultimately feed the people so
there's a really strong immediate
connection between land and ocean so the
project stepping off point is this idea
of creating a series of platforms a
series of pieces of infrastructure at a
military scale so the sense of an
aircraft carrier onto which you could
begin to think about deploying these
onto the surface of the ocean as
platforms to germinate seeds to grow
food and ultimately take them back to
land to give you a sense of that scale
this is the newly completed Apple
headquarters sitting within one of these
the transect of the ocean so you get a
sense of what we're talking about the
scale of the ocean operation in that
transect and the idea was to come up
with a series of these platforms that
were self-organizing in a way that they
could be deployed on the surface they
could through that through just the wave
motions how they would come together
ultimately as way of managing the amount
of different infrastructure and how
they're growing food but also two
minutes okay great
and this was a quick study to show how
that might work so the coalescing the
distribution the collision of those
pieces coming together and the
organization I suppose the design of
those shapes in a way that facilitates
the coalescence of those structures was
something that was interested in this in
this diagram and then couple of
screenshots of actually how they began
to come together so the kit of parts
looks something like this as far as
different pieces of larger scale
infrastructure into which there were
smaller elements so there was a parasite
host relationship happening here with a
theory that as these infrastructures
were floating around in the ocean the
smaller internal pieces are Colin are
growing the food germinating the crops
at the point where they're ready to be
taken to shore they're dispersed they're
kicked out of these larger pieces of
infrastructure they're corralled
together and then through the work of
the French engineers looking at taking
icebergs to sub-saharan Africa to
mitigate the the lack of fresh drinking
water there the idea of actually
corralling these pieces of food
infrastructure and taking them to the
shore where they could be more
land-based traditional distribution
systems so here they are being taken to
shore harvested and at that same moment
the larger pieces of Memphis
structure are regaining energy they're
gaining solar they're desalinating water
they're capturing all the surface water
they need in order to sustain the next
batch of crops and then the process the
visual process of bringing these to
shore and what that looks like how you
utilize the existing ports I utilize the
existing infrastructures how you are
designing these structures in a way that
they come through the existing dredging
channels that have been put in place for
the larger military operations happen
within the bay and ultimately how you
could repurpose some of those military
bases as a form of distribution how you
dock these structures and then looking
altitude 'only and really this is about
playing with temperatures how you could
challenge the idea of our reliance on
refrigeration using the natural systems
using our natural processes of altitude
'''l and subsurface temperature change
to go to the crops and then this great
moment to really I think is a cultural
celebration when these things come to
shore and you get this surreal moment of
that process that's it
for our talk we wanted to rather then
try and describe a particular project
describe our interpretation of a
methodology the methodology being that
of the AA's landscape urbanism program
from which we graduated from a few years
ago and of how now had time to
critically reflect upon that in the a a
landscape urbanism program the current
research methodology is pursuing what
they call a territorial practice but
what we would like to call here and that
make approach how to become a mapmaker
architect if you were to follow a series
of these steps so a territorial project
looks at a broader geographical scale a
scale which requires the use of a map
and not only the use of a map but the
entire framing of a project through the
construction of maps of different types
and scales so we're gonna present here
some drawings from the course mostly of
our own but also from some other
students so we we do realization of the
Anthropocene the way
I mean talking around today humankind
now comprehends its influence on earth
systems at the planetary scale this
realization demands of us a designer to
think how we might begin to impress and
to influence these systems while the
role of science might understand these
processes we imagine the role of
designers as one of projects in the
future you have the kinds of the
landscapes that we are interested in
they are the landscapes of what we can
call in the Anthropocene and they are
usually outside the normal practice of
architect or landscape architect who
typically operate through the provision
of a service switch a design is prepared
and delivered for a disparate place
often located in a city instead we look
at the distance territories to find
these consequential landscapes resulting
from the metal burn ization of cities
some examples here include extreme
weather submerged cities reserve
shortages vanish species lakes into
desert and so on so we question
ourselves so how might our spatial
intelligence of designers offer
something within the realm of this
specific land use conflict one example
would be some of the research that we
have done within the program one will be
the RLC the drawing up of the lake due
to the water exploitation by the cotton
industry or in the case of Liam's
research in age if the lake mandala
where the global fishing farm industry
is filling up the lake provoked by the
construction of dam upstream of the Nile
River cause it implementation of the
lake and the erosion of the river month
so we put here a collection of different
atlases while these land-use conflicts
that Elena was describing might be
occurring in one particular place they
must be understood as consequential
landscapes of what is often a much
larger scale issue to understand and
reveal these conditions we produce
atlases which describe a phenomenon
which will often cross international or
continental boundaries these maps maps
are trying to dislodge binaries for
example rural versus urban ocean versus
land or
natural versus cultural they reveal and
represent things together which are
typically not compared so an example of
that is and that was one of from my
project it's the sediment atlas of the
Mediterranean Sea where we represented
both together the natural flows of
sediment moving along the coast
alongside the human or artificial
relocation of sedimentary sand mining
Port dredging and sand trading or in the
case of the sea the author's tried to
showcase the spread of sediments around
the globe as a consequence of the
desertification of the entire LC so in
order to understand these conditions we
are required to think ecologically which
is a very difficult task and in that in
the month of us a kind of imagination
whereby we rebuild things which are
usually invisible so flows of matter
processed or curing through time vast
amounts of information or data which
must be spatially or geographically
located in order to be understood
simultaneously we like to recover an
earlier tradition of making one where
both the symbolic is as important as the
geographically precise so map throughout
history were powerful documents and
tools for those who possess them both
revealing and later shaping the
territories which they depicted they are
not objective or factual representations
but highly craft and manipulated to suit
a particular agenda so we also recognize
that when we operate when we do our maps
we also have an agenda so one particular
map that was of interest to me for my
project was these Portland charts of the
Mediterranean Sea these charts were used
by sailors to navigate across vast
waters facilitating maritime trade
between different regions there are
pragmatic maps concerned with the
challenge of ocean navigation and they
were amazingly very geographically
accurate for the time period they
depicted ports dashed along an imagined
coastline with run lines as vectors of
movement between
well they're very pragmatic and
functional they're also highly symbolic
multi-directional without a correct page
orientation geographically borderless
and within eight depictions of different
settlements so we then gradually make
let's say architect we begin to move
from a position of understanding and
revealing towards a position of
projecting and envisioning imagine in
the future interestingly in this
landscape urbanism map examples they are
describing a future condition they still
maintain otherwise the graphic language
and representation techniques of a map
they are geographically precise but
there's a highly symbolic and
representational they are not
photorealistic they don't render a place
they are not fixed master plan but
instead they try to suggest a scenario a
strategy a strategy a vision which is
considered through time so in the case
of my project we move moving from the
scale of the Mediterranean Sea down to a
specific site of the coast of Egypt in
this drawing we depicted a particular
scenario where an existing coastal
spirit could be hijacked by the local
fish farming industry we speculated how
those fishes might form social alliances
cooperating to build new structures
which would control the growth of the
moving sediment around them these
projective maps display a scenario
through time which is understood and
developed through the act of digital
simulations we are interested in making
use of software's produced within other
disciplines where a script is written to
try just to simulate a natural process
we recognize your the perhaps we can
never fully simulate nature but perhaps
we can try to understand it better
so we're scientist seeks to understand
and document an existing conditions we
seeks to project and imagine future
scenarios
so for example in my project we took a
script built in this case by a
geomorphologist and we began to
experiment with it the scientific
objectivity is abandoned in favor of a
playfulness and desire to intervene with
the process to see what might come out
of that here you can see some very
initial tests we did with this very
basic very crude tool at the costal
evolution model it's called which
interestingly had rarely been used to
imagine what might happen with the
addition of some kind of intervention
from so all of these studies is mapped
since these simulations result is not
the design but instead it seems to be
more and more focused on the developing
about the creation of a tool this could
be in the form of an online map an
interface or a policy this just begins
then to look for ways to share knowledge
and to take informations into a larger
collaborative sphere so collecting
further information and forming
alliances between groups which were
previously unrelated perhaps so the
project is never fully finished but it
will provide a certain point for a
further research so a particularly
strong example of a tool is fish match
an app designed by students Robbie Elsa
and Camilla or saeho it is an app which
supports and allows the cooperation of
struggling small-scale inshore fishermen
in the UK coast it facilitates the
forming of a new marketplace for them to
sell fish trade fishing quotas and
suggest new fishing locations which have
more suitable weather conditions and an
abundance of fish so finally just to
conclude who would be the client for
these kinds of projects we imagine these
territorial projects as a form of
unsolicited architecture the project
that comes before what would be a much
bigger collaborative project through
this mapmaker process we have
illustrated here we arrive at a tool or
a policy which could be passed on to
these kinds of institutions which might
make use of that in the case of fish
match up for the UK coast we put here
together here a small collection of
different groups that might make use of
that tool so they include fish suppliers
economic think tanks coastal managers
and geomorphologists so the question
becomes for us how do we go from an
unsolicited architecture to the reality
of a design practice which can actually
work on a territorial project most
likely the answer to that question is we
need to better engage and collaborate
with these kinds of groups to consider
landscapes and territories never as a
fig scene but an ongoing operative
landscape an ongoing collaborative
project between different groups thank
you so the hazel mitigation Bank in
Green Bay California was established to
offset the destruction of California
tiger salamander habitat vernal pools
swales and other seasonal wetland
habitats were created or enhanced some
100 acres of overused degraded
agricultural land since its completion
in 2006 credits sold from the hazel
mitigation bank had been used to build
projects as diverse as the stone amount
apartment complex
the Balducci wine tasting room the
repair of a cut slope ditch and the
airport approach zone at the Charles M
Schulz Airport similarly the Horne
Avenue mitigation Bank covers 32 acres
of former agricultural land directly
north of an extensive suburban
development marking the city boundary
between Santa Rosa and Rohnert Park
California since 2008 its presence has
ensured planning permission for the
Grattan Ranch arena Rancheria Casino and
hotel the Sonoma gardens and the Cooley
Ranch vineyard dispersed across the
country so thanks to environmental
thanks to an update and environmental
protection legislation newly
financialized ecosystems such as the
hazel and Horn have anew maked
mitigation banks are being fabricated to
offset ecological damage to wetlands and
critical habitats since 1989 and the
enactment by president george bush
senior of the no net loss policy wetland
acreage must not decrease but be
maintained or increase across the nation
in perpetuity which is to say an acre of
lost wetland here is acceptable so long
as an acre of lost wetland elsewhere has
been created or restored with complex
credit systems in place between the
exchange and these banks are entangled
within a greater accumulation regime
that is redirecting real ecological and
economic conflicts into so-called
economies of repair and a 2015
peer-reviewed study of the growing
restoration economy puts the industry in
the United States at fifteen billion
dollars supporting ninety five thousand
jobs farmers are finding it easier to
turn their farm lands into frog habitats
then continue farming golf courses are
being closed fenced up and turned into
shrimp sanctuaries and conservation
parks are closing their wetlands their
waters recreational hunting all in the
name of big economic returns so well you
can see that market demand for
mitigation credits of course reflects
the geographic concentration of
endangered species which is a
designation process that occurs within
all to human political and
socio-economic value judgments the state
of California boasts the highest numbers
of endangered and therefore banked
species in the world thanks in part to
its history of wildlife conservation its
enthusiasm toward the green economy and
its general commitment to financial
speculation so in this map critical
habitats of various endangered species
are seen throughout the San Francisco
Bay Area alongside various mitigation
banks and their service areas which are
effectively their markets or extended
arenas of trade and the way it works is
that land developments land development
companies create ecological surplus by
building enhancing restoring or
preserving wetlands in cheap disused
agricultural areas in anticipation of
ecologically destructive development and
dense urban areas the mitigation banks
can then sell federally recognized
credits to property developers which
regulatory bodies deem adequate
compensation for their destructive
development so because land developers
and property developers aren't even
interested in the same kinds of land
they can work together to basically
create miniature of land rushes and
value so to illustrate how market
complexity can arise when brought into
contact with wetlands there are two
mitigation schemes currently permitted
by the federal government section 404 of
the Clean Water Act is the policy
instrument that sets up the crediting
scheme for wetland mitigation banking
which trades on the basis of
hydrological morphology and these banks
are approved and regulated by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers and the
Environmental Protection Agency and the
second one is about
the conservation banking which works in
the same way only with the critical
habitats of endangered species which
have been designated by the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service and the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration in these two schemes
overlap in interesting interesting ways
so here I've identified a cluster of
banks outside of Santa Rosa California
and if we zoom in to these 15 or so
banks that have emerged in the last
decade we can begin to see how
mitigation banking is systematically
relocating ecosystems from dense urban
areas where property values are high to
cheap
peripheral areas for property values are
low and arguably the wetlands have very
little social value if we go and even
further we can begin to see the
predominant features of a bank which are
these things card vernal pools which
transform over the course of the year
and they're really bizarre and and
miraculous I think ecological events
because there on the one hand their
feeding ground for migratory birds but
they also host these incredibly
resilient species some some of these
amphibians known as the spadefoot toad
actually buries itself alive in the
dried mud in anticipation of the spring
rains which bring it back to life and
similarly there are these million year
old crustaceans that lay at these
incredibly resilient cysts in the hard
mud and can survive droughts for decades
but then when the rains come they're
brought back to life and when the rains
do finally come you have these
incredibly beautiful concentric floral
ring patterns that happen basically
because the species have evolved to
flower and dramatically different ways
based on ya millimeters difference in
water perhaps though what separates
mitigation banking from more traditional
forms of financialization is a
particular kind of ecological
sovereignty that banking deploys which
enlists a number of endangered species
in the name of their functions and
services toward humanity so in this
equation the decidedly non-charismatic
wetland species like the vernal pool
fairy shrimp are maintained by a select
number of entrepreneurial biologists
vernal shrimp are valuable first and
foremost because they qualify for
trading they've been designated as
endangered but secondly because they
keep
fools tidy and clean a process for which
there are very clear metrics such as pH
levels and turbidity so once exposed to
market operations endangered species
like the vernal fairy shrimp can't
necessarily thrive because to do so
would sacrifice their protection and to
be fused to increase in value in this
case so the artists collective cooking
sections summarized this paradox by
asking is it better for species to be
listed as threatened in order to secure
protection or to avoid the label of
endangered so they cannot be
instrumentalized by banks that
annihilate their relatives elsewhere and
you can sort of imagine how this might
play out especially against the backdrop
of the American suburbs so it's it's
it's not really difficult to imagine an
overdeveloped rural area surrounded by a
large privately-owned biodiversity bank
may be formally known as the country
this bank houses the ten species deemed
valuable for ecosystem services to
humanity the species and their habitats
are legally maintained in perpetuity
therefore they must perform as
themselves forever species that begin to
hybridize are excommunicated while a
healthy level of pre financialized
biodiversity was destroyed long ago in
the relocation process and land bankers
and property developers are constructing
a massive financial bubble but there is
no clean air or filtered water left to
pay off the inevitable crash it has all
been consolidated and reduced into one
tract of wetland so just for the last
few minutes and maybe I'm okay on time
but I'll just share a project I've been
developing at the Royal College of Art
for the last year called the vernal
estate and the vernal estate is a post
natural wetland condominium in Santa
Rosa California home to the endangered
tiger salamander fairy shrimp and so
nama sunshine the estate attempts to D
commodify a wetland mitigation bank by
rewinding it with homes for humans as an
on-site offset strategy humans live
within environments previously created
maintained and banked as an elsewhere to
legitimize traditional development by
recup in humans with wetland ecosystems
an alternative property development
strategy creates friction and an
otherwise frictionless paper only
financial instrument
okay so at a landscape scale these tools
transform from dry to wet months of the
year I should have been listed in the
landscape urbanism program to properly
simulate this most of the human drying
happens in an expanded occupation of the
site while the pools are dry and
contracted and then when the pools are
flooded the site is unified by the
grasses and species of the vernal events
and for these few weeks of the year
human circulation happens around the
pools themselves which help them keep
their shape so the composition of the
vernal State takes cues from the pools
from which their names providing a
concentric nesting of climates that
humans and non-humans can take advantage
of in each human home a variety of
enclosures provide different amount of
lights of light insulation and privacy
these enclosures be they walls steel
cables nets or hydrating elements can
all be suspended or propped up right
against its integrity structure which
tries to co-opt the the rural irrigation
machinery found in this part of the
world so just to conclude wetland
mitigation about diversity banks are
actively relocating wetlands with logics
that mimic mimic those of the global
financial crisis
how can architecture participate in the
financialization of nature and more
broadly and environmental transactions
how can thinking with forests to borrow
from eduardo cones work on biosemiotics
or thinking with fur no pools or
salamanders or other non humans open up
architecture to consider that the
existential motives and not just the
functions of non-human life if we can
think this way then I believe we'll
discover many architectures are always
already present and sort of an expanded
open gathering of creatures that
question all these traditional rights of
property
[Applause]
so my name is deadly and I would like to
put two pretty present my project which
I and my colleague benefit are conducted
in 2015 which is called shifting Arctic
boundaries so the project's main
objective is a confrontation between
capitalistic mentality which looks at
the territory as a commodity and the
more differentiated approach practised
by the indigenous peoples of the Arctic
and with the latest terms approaching
like the Anthropocene and capitalist
scene we would like to focus not only on
the physical conditions of the project
environment but also the more immaterial
world like the people's mentality so
looking at the Arctic landscape one can
think that this is an empty space which
at the same time is full of resources
and opportunities ice melts and opens a
new sea route from China and Japan to
Europe which can be 15 days faster than
by suez canal new oil and gas
discoveries are bringing investments in
the region which leads to popping up of
new ports in different infrastructure in
summer shipping routes shipping route
expands dramatically and all these many
times collide with the movements of
local people of the Arctic that still
maintain their nomadic way of life you
can see the arrows the back arrows the
movement of nomadic people's and what
was once a continuous nation of nomadic
Arctic people is now separated into
different countries with its own
legislation countries of the Arctic zone
reform RT Council and the indigenous
people organizations are listed as
permanent participants so in our project
which is not running sorry
okay this is video which should be so in
our project we're concentrating on Sami
the European Arctic and which mainly
adapted to the European Way of life
using new technologies and living mostly
in the cities however they are still
hurting reindeer in there at age two
their local culture and the reindeer is
the most important like reading herding
is a most important occupation for them
so how do we as designers relate to the
Sami mentality and how do we try to show
nomadic people on the map some
themselves they don't have fixed borders
their lands are shared and borders are
flexible this Sami map tries to
reconcile mapping the Western practice
and the magic mentality of Sami showing
the zone of activity of some young
territory and from red to white we are
showing the very oftenly used to rarely
occupied territories state borders are
shown on the map to show how these
people's movements are interrupted and
looking at the Sami closer we discovered
that they have quite unique perception
of territory their own social
organization is called sida and see the
formation existed in Sami culture from
time immemorial each cedar has its
territory which consisted of some
several families territories and common
lands see the boundaries were flexible
they change seasonally some lands
between different Cedars were sharing
and some zooming in to scold sami
territory which is in the north of no
way we can see how families lands had
changed through the 20th century and how
they became bigger led plots which leads
to bigger hurts and over grazing on the
territory on the landscape so in the
most most part of no way we're
originally leaves called some huge plans
are
with the northern sea route and oil and
gas in barren sea port city jerkiness is
planning to develop four big port
projects during the next 50 years
analyzing the peninsula where the port
projects are located we realized that
there are five main actors claiming land
here not only the port but also reindeer
herders military tourism and Airport the
activity of actor is different
seasonally the analysis showed us that
the peninsula is far too small for all
the claims it faces so to continue this
way of using the territory of the
peninsula there is an urgent need for
land management between the actors so
how do we think about the land
management management so we got inspired
by the Sami and their perception of
territory we went on to thinking through
the physical models holding in mind the
organisation of traditional sida
we thought that flexible boundaries that
can be shared and moved might be a
solution so we took the five artists on
the territory and we try to analyze what
landscape features are the most
important for them and depending on that
we tried to create a set of rules for
the their boundaries their territory
boundaries shifting from zero percent
when the actor is not interested in the
landscape feature at all to sixty
percent which is the most important so
we took one actor as an example which is
reindeer herding and in this detail we
try to explain how the shifting
boundaries mechanism works when every
ports day every stage of port
construction is being implemented open
boundaries of the units start to shift
with the most expansion over the green
areas which is important for reindeer by
this will make sure that the land
reclaimed by the unit would be would
have the same quality not only in terms
of
the amount of territory but also the the
valuable landscape that the one it lost
based on these rules we developed an
interactive tool with the help of
processing software where the port stay
fixed while the boundaries of reindeer
herding units inside the cedar are
shifted while the port stages are
introduced we also developed these
sliders for the user to have opportunity
to adjust the size of each unit and how
strong the unit would be against others
we run our tool to have a particular
result that we used later for our
proposal ideally this tool should be
must include the shifting mechanism for
all the actors not only for reindeer so
that the representatives of these actors
can sit around the table and just the
sliders and see their results of their
decisions in real time thinking of how
these boundaries of reindeer the units
would be presented in place we got
inspiration for design from the
traditional Sami constructions so we
created a catalog categorizing possible
techniques like fixed the roads or
fences rock fences and flexible
boundaries we try to analyze how they
will behave in different weather
conditions slope changes and how they
influence their reindeer flow what was
also important is to make place for Sami
herders so we did the research into how
traditional Sami Hut's are created so
returning to the project location we
developed a set of rules of how the
techniques of the boundaries can be
applied this was based on the analysis
of herding process so for example mostly
reindeer travel through the river so the
intersection between the river and
boundary was a place for coral and
winter settlements are usually located
in valleys near rivers while some huts
are usually built in mountains so that's
how we were trying to place the
particular techniques
of the boundaries and applying these
results and techniques from the catalog
we created a strategy for the peninsula
Arctic landscape regenerates much slower
than in other like the other landscapes
in other parts of the world so the court
reaches the stages that were proposed by
the government were not suitable in our
opinion so we proposed also a new
timeline for the port introduction so
this project has changed our minds a lot
as every step we took led us to the
unknown path and we needed to challenge
established design practice what we
mostly wanted to do is to leave some
space for indigenous people while
keeping the development process going
and this is the end of the project but
unfortunately the video I prepared as
the to run didn't work somehow
so maybe I will try to okay here they
are running and I move in the Snider's
just imagine that hi my name is Patricia
and I graduated from the undergrad
program from the a a year ago and this
was developed ended for with John for my
senior annsofi so the project is called
your thing and it's focused on the body
of water yeah so the the event you're
seeing on the screen was happened on the
coast of France it was British vessels
and French vessels
having the scallops war what media
called is kind of salt and this was the
29th of August and in a way this brings
the attention that actually the the
condition of the seats actually that one
of domestication so the the C's
understood as an extension of the land
and the project is trying to address
what is called the territorial waters
and try to subvert this and think about
that space between the UK and France as
actually the land being attached or
extensions of the sea and he starts from
a cultural perspective so this is 18th
century British painting and it's
addressing what was introduced earlier
as this visual condition between the
shore and the sea and it has a specific
measurement of how much you can see from
it but for me the idea of the offing
becomes interesting when you understand
that there is actually a space between
where you're standing and how far you
can see so it's about subverting thing
from land to the sea and trying to
understand what it means to actually
beyond the sea and look at the land and
this brings the idea of perception so
you this offering or this distance can
actually be be altered but very
different elements how four can be this
is crossing the channel on ferry and
that this sound didn't come out but you
actually had the sound of the horn which
is what you can hear when you go on the
channel and you you the ship announces
itself so it actually breaks away from
the only the visual condition and it
starts affecting all the other other
senses and it's in just
what what it does to appears in the 20th
century's that is acoustic their caustic
movers so this was to anticipate planes
and you can see how the offing actually
has to be reenter stood in terms of that
goes beyond visibility so that goes also
in the context off of the radio and the
chain home and these infrastructures on
the coast that are actually expanding
what it means to one thing to be
connected to the other to be seen this
is a image sorry a video produced by to
show the coastal views from the UK so if
you'd stand on the shore how far you
would sort of what you would see if you
were actually be able to see and that
sort of also tackles on this connection
between so the idea of the project takes
on this concept of the offing which is
this idea of space that it's once mobile
but it's also in constant fluctuation so
it's always changing
and it occurs three elements it becomes
a device to staying different things so
what one of them is navigation and since
the introduction of the steam engine
which changed the way ships kind of
navigated the sea and actually
understood how tidal and streams to work
and we have the the introduction of the
the technology that kind of money
towards these things there were many
presentations showing earlier before
that the lines of the ships but actually
I think it's interesting to think that
actually there is no line and see that
these lines are actually registered by
the satellites are actually reading the
iaea state that it's being produced by
the ships
so actually what do you have to
understand that the ship is actually the
the space of the ships actually been
measured by this technology and
therefore
the space that the ship is occupying is
constantly changing because it's not
only relating to the satellite but it's
also relating to the other ships and
also related to the boys and also ready
to the coastguard so this is a space
constant change so the project so in a
way the project ask yourself what does
it mean to to navigate what you once you
understand that space is kind of
fracture especially in the condition of
the water yeah this is a Russian trip
going through the English Channel being
monitored by the Royal Navy sorry my
screen is completely gone sorry so the
idea is that to to question the traffic
scheme which is the way that the English
Channel is navigated nowadays so it's
it's a highway so the the water is
actually being driven through like it
was a highway so there are certain
points in which you have to respect you
have to respect and if we if you bring
in the idea of the offing and the idea
of navigation the the interesting thing
becomes how can you in a way bring the
understanding of of of the way ships
work so if the these different schemes
are showing how the different types of
vessels are navigating these are
actually fishing boats so the bigger
lines are the red lines are actually
container ships or so understanding how
the channel is used can help understand
how it can actually be used in a
different way so looking at these
patterns of these are the ferries that
are actually crossing are traversing
therefore they actually not really
following this traffic scheme because of
the way they navigate so the first kind
of idea of
session is actually if we can if the
thing if the technologies actually mean
that the sheets are constantly
connection with the tools that actually
make them navigate they they do if
there's a way we can actually we can
bring back the idea of tidal forces and
the understanding of how this is
actually moving to real question how
question how the ships move around the
space so the other thing is customs once
the I didn't mention this at the
beginning because I forgot for some
reason but this project started on the
outcome right after the both of the EU
referendum so this was this was October
2016 so in a way it becomes relevant to
think about what happens in the points
in which you know the sea and the
shipping and everything meets the ground
so the customs become the the point in
which the the everything kind of
collapses in a way so I started looking
at at the ports on the south coast and
started to see how actually the ports
have become focused on the big ones so
they're actually the idea that things
get trapped in ports becomes more
evident or even worse because actually
it's less distributed it's focused on
small bigger ports and everything comes
off there so the way to for me to think
about its the idea of in a way of a
buffer zone or what was introduced in
the Mexico project that if we can have
an area that it's just outside between
the border of the sea and actually the
land and what you can see in blue this
really big area is actually all the land
that you can actually you can see the
sea from and here you can see the ferry
connections across the different ports
on both the you can France
my IDs to question if there's a way we
can actually start saying to reconnect
them using the water before we that they
come into the port and they can actually
be redistributed before they go into the
land and that land that it's attached to
the sea actually allows for a better use
of the on the last and this is it it's
the idea of tomorrow time so if tomorrow
time in the 18th century was about
conquering new shores and discovering
new lands and establishment of star
catalogues to reach the spaces the
question becomes what is tomorrow time
nowadays how do we how can it bring go
what is it doing and bringing back again
this idea of this relationship between
London City sees what was shown before
also this how much we can see from the
coast and if we start to understand this
is a space altogether the question of
the Marten becomes that one of measuring
or how do we really these places so this
is the bringing also back what could a
contemporary this is a receptor the re
the restructuring of the coast the coast
in the UK so how the coast is monitored
by the by the UK Coast and we see how
there's reduce spaces that are left over
that are actually located in this places
and the idea for me of the maritime
would be the this what is called the
citizen science if before was about
finding new lands now it's about
actually measuring the existing and
actually trying to control to follow up
so these are the six cities maritime
citizen science that were presented in
the European Maritime day two years ago
so this is urban projects that are
happening in the UK
[Applause]
so I think this group of very
interesting presentation right now are
pushing even more difficult question or
questions as difficult as the previous
one but that also relate to the issue of
mentalities how do we think borders how
do we think lamp is how do we think in
Arial terms and in terms of the area of
a tract of land and it also has a lot to
do with the idea of the consequential
landscape stress boundary relationships
in commodity chains I like to open the
questions to the audience first yep
oh those are really really tremendous
presentations in fact everything today
has been just really wonderful I mean
not throw myself in that group but uh
but um I guess mine's more of a personal
question about work because I mean
there's a lot of complexity analogies
harder sort of focus project how do you
discover these projects how did you come
to them because that's one of the
hardest thing I have a lot of thesis
students right now and getting them to
sort of come to something it's really
difficult so like how you know how did
you come to where you were are you it
was it a specific personal issue or how
do you how did you discover these topics
because they're really part of our
agenda going forward as a discipline is
to create our own projects and I think
each one have you've done that in a
tremendous way so I just from purely
personal standpoint how did that how did
that process begin how did you begin it
was a pain it was a really complex
project and clarinha friend
yeah but personally I was always
interested in how do you the
urbanization process is going on and how
do we shape the planet but I realized
that the S was in the previous
presentations that the organization is
not only the city and what I faced in
this project is that the organization
process that three drives us to extract
more resources and oil and gas for
example it changes the Arctic zone which
is inhabited in our world in our Western
world and this was a really changing
point for the project itself and for me
and myself as a designer because when I
understood that the different
settlements and different mentalities
and social constructions that people are
like doing in different parts of the
world
it can can be designed differently and
like as you were saying that the
different people produce different
cities and different settlements because
for example for Sammy we couldn't say
even that this were cities it's just the
settlements but it's something different
some different construction which we
couldn't we can't call it as we do and
this was really interesting and how we
got to the north we started from mining
I guess and from the oil and gas and
then we got to the northern sea route
and we realized that this is more
exciting even than the mining itself and
then I guess for me the context of the
work was called the coast of Europe so I
mean that actually meant you could
choose anywhere but I'm very interested
in and truly I'm not from here I'm from
South America and somehow when you you
go somewhere else you try to understand
that place in a sense so I was actually
trying to make sense of what it meant to
you know be here and depart for this and
I enjoy I went on the ferry and I went
and my love's I actually like to engage
in things you know very first like
subjective way so for me it was very
easy to decide what I wanted to but very
hard to get an idea what I was trying to
tackle because it's so hard to kind of
grasp so the key thing about all of
these projects is is looking more
closely at the things we take for
granted I would say so very few of us
probably really truly understand how
food supply works how we get our food
where does it go where does it come from
what's the byproduct of that from carbon
emissions from trade deals etc so I
think many of these projects throughout
the day have represented that deep
research analytical understanding of the
things that really are happening all
around us
and oftentimes in in almost corruptible
ways it's just about engaging in that
research with the aim really I suppose
of trying to position it that there's a
really strong argument that we can
improve on that it is through that
researcher trying to find solutions and
part of the part of our role and agency
as as designers is to to improve issues
that we identify that's a key thing so
each of these really is about engaging
in a topic in my an instance of my
project it was about elementary design
the design of food systems and how we
could look more deeper into those
conditions in our case things it has to
do with the jus morphologies that we
were looking we tried to understand and
there's a lot to do with the what the
things that we could discover everyday
life is like in our kind of mind case in
the case of the RLC it was a crucial
moment because in 2014 has been declare
dried up like desiccated and in the
meantime we have discovered through the
research that there was the describe for
help
levels within the Primarch clothes so we
we start to think of the relationship of
the larger much larger context of the
desertification what that implies and so
then we we start to dig into the cotton
industry and how that work and how you
how you cultivate captain and and so on
and so forth so I think it has a lot to
do with many different aspects of the
research that we do and I think the
Indians case
yeah yeah I think it was slightly one of
the things now I think in our group is
different to lady groups was that I can
rather than trying to start by
identifying issue in the problem and
thinking that you could solve there it
was actually starting with the genuine
fascination with the geomorphological
process like finding these sort of
landscapes these really amazing to the
fluid landscapes and being like why is
it looking like that which is that was
probably the starting point for us and
then why don't we discovered all these
land-use conflicts and yeah there was a
lot of sort of panning around Google
Earth and just like looking for some
sort of like crazy thing and being like
why does it look like that but you're
sort of interesting to position it in a
way that it like a lot of the pictures
that we were showing at the start these
are sort of like epic land use conflicts
but like is there something that we can
solve it's not really a problem-solution
thing but more of a raising of some sort
of awareness and trying to get into that
discussion yeah I'm for me I'm from
where you are southern Illinois yeah
which is one of the most sorry most like
yet banal and opaque places that's also
run by entrepreneurial Souls and I was
very disturbed about and have been about
the countryside and then there was a
studio I took about the financialization
of nature's like carbon credit swaps
basically and it and it came out from
there but I do think there's a question
about just like noticing and and
following things and there's really no
time for that like you have to do you
create a project you do all this
research and then like for me it was
like okay the last week let's make a
building you know let's make something
when you just you know the second you
figured out how it works or think it
works you have to perform but I think
there's so much more value than like
just the noticing process and and maybe
they're one of the first speakers today
Caroline this was showing how that can
also be productive but I like to after
this question before another question
because I think there's on the one hand
in some of the theses that were
presented today there's also this idea
of the Adler's that is an overarching
question that includes a collection of
different sites sharing similar
conditions but at the same time being
specific in each of their own ways so
for instance when milena started with
her thesis the way I see it from the
other side
they started because the brief was
telling them that they had to work in
Europe so in the overarching questions
that they were interested in was the
certification processes due to over
exploitation and then immediately
because of a coincidence
in time they are Elsie DRL she was on
the news oh it was something like
unavoidable to look at right and then I
remember them trying to justify we
various historical cartography the fact
that the RLC was somehow in Europe and
then and then a I think they were super
insistent we were constantly telling
them no you should you should focus on
Europe but then they came up with this
label in this idea of the
consequentialist like Europe is
producing the education of and for us
there was no way out of that and he was
super interesting but that's the way I
see from the other side in the same case
in Liam's project again we were working
in Europe and we usually ask a student
to challenge the methodology does the
fun part of it end
they thought that Europe didn't make
sense in the interests but it was but
that the Mediterranean Sea itself was a
was a different for them either he made
more sense as an Atlas over like under
an overarching question so that's also
part of the way they reacted to the
brief I I thought it was quite
interesting this idea that you bring in
of the orphan and the paintings because
he brings in like a very kind of like
subjective engagement with the material
objects and this taking it from cosgrove
that is a like like a reference that is
very important for us in the program and
I think it's a cosgrove talks about this
tension between the subject and the
object in the idea of landscape and I
think this is very interesting answer
into your question because sometimes
these arguments they come from that very
friction or tension that you look at at
a dataset you start understanding
densities but then at the same time you
look at a particular site you look at
particular news so it's within that
tension that these theses happened and
that's what I think from my point of
view if we are talking about eight
systems and the planetary gaze we I
think that this tension in these
frictions are quite it quite important
that we don't lose track of that tension
and Dennis cosgrove criticizes in the
idea of landscape as the discipline of
geography has turned into the objective
side so I mean that in that way it kind
of relates to your question sorry sorry
you wanted to ask
I was worried I was wanted to just
follow up with something that Matthew
said I think in regards to at one point
the mic for come on Matthew said that in
regards to you know he enjoyed
researching in then in the last week you
know you came up with a proposal it felt
very much within the panel and also the
previous panel that uh there was a
certain I don't want to say hesitation
but there's some care at the way in
which you stepped into a propositional
phase in the design project and I wonder
whether that is something about the
scale in which you're working at where
we feel a little bit more responsibility
in the way and how we act that we might
not take so much if we were making
installation in Bedford square for
example I'd like to ask Mimi I don't
know maybe somebody wanted to know you
don't all have to say it but you know
what what do you think about let's say
the responsibility of the designer to
act I think that's you know I I'm guilty
as anybody to put Caroline Knowles's
work in front of my students which i
think is wonderful but if my students
don't come up with a proposal you know
they'll fail no and and and I'm I made
this explicit you know I I feel I feel
there is a responsibility for us to
design to propose um and I'd like to
know what your thoughts are I think for
me there was a very clear stepping off
point that emerged when you realize that
there's this deep cultural tradition
about how Hawaii used to used to use
their land and then through through that
process eaten that whole traditional way
of being custodians for that landscape
was eroded through basically a very
small collection of landowners and it
was a sense that this the planning
system and the organization of that land
had been so fragmented and so disrupted
they're really they're their only hope
was to look to the ocean almost and
almost in a way that they were
rediscovering what made the Hawaiian
people who they are they discovered
those islands right so they when I say
they were the most adept
waters they were they they were able to
navigate the oceans and find these
far-flung islands so I think from a
responsibility point of view is one not
being afraid to be projected to think
beyond the traditional constraints that
we might think like that's outrageous to
think that you're gonna have food
growing in the sky and I felt you know
it is a fantastical idea but I think we
have to push the boundaries as designers
we have to open up new possibilities
that's the only way that the progress I
suppose is really made I think every
every move that you make does have
implications and you we need to realize
and register that when you put pen to
paper when you put pencil to paper when
you come up with an idea that there's
political boundaries I think the fact
that we're looking at the exclusion
zones of these territorial waters in the
video that you showed where there is
this imperceptible border and boundary
that none of us really realize but when
you see boats clashing into each other
because they're fighting over these
territories there is agency there and
someone is defined that I think that
well I think that every every I have to
say the territory or every place where
you design things mostly I believe in
like Michelangelo said that I look at
the stone and it says what to cut from
it so mostly I believe in that so you
can really sometimes guess what the
territory is proposing to you and this
guess I think is the most magic of the
design work but at the same moment I
realized that every human and every
person who designs it puts something
from himself into the design work
anyways like we cannot escape that in
any case so yeah it's it's kind of
bifocal meaning but I think that's
amazing because every person which puts
something into the project so it's like
an artistic work as well so we cannot
really separate the designer and
to make it like a producer of the thing
I think this is really cool when you are
getting a master in architecture and you
can do that this is very interesting
quickly I think that's a very
interesting question to which I have no
answer and I was actually asked this on
my tables like you are an architect what
what I like you have no place in
whatever you're talking about and in a
way I think that in a way that's true as
an architect I'm not trying to find the
solution to this problem
I think the way I see just as the reason
what it is I can only ask question at
this point and maybe people further down
the line can actually try to push
forward but I feeling from where I stand
I can only take this opportunity of
studying something for a year and
actually sort of post a question and try
to understand space through a concept
and trying to build up but I don't think
I am in a position to kind of make a
connection and I think maybe it says
like I'll say not brave thing to do
but I think sometimes also not doing how
he was discussed this morning but the
fact of not doing and kind of resisting
that need to put a building actually
it's it's not necessarily a bad thing
yeah I think it's a very interesting
question it's something that I grapple
with a lot like now as a professional
working in an office I have to act
yes something that I think is kind of
interesting that I could be wrong but
all of these projects are student
projects or research projects done in an
academic environment and that's the same
for I think a lot of the talks today
except for the first one so it's
obviously very difficult to do these
kinds of projects in a professional
sense so I mean that's just something
that I think I'm trying to strive
towards
I know how you would go about getting
there but I think that's something that
yeah I mean you just have to instead of
getting a house or a car I do research
teaching and and projects kind of feed
my addiction to research right so I mean
my advice is that like you just have to
so used to pick your pick where you want
to put your resources and you know it's
but it's liberating when you're not
serving a client right but it's also
terrifying because in a way you've got
to generate there's a tremendous amount
of sort of you can't blame anyone at
some point right so the failure is on
you but so I it's I think academics and
practice are essential I'll give you
have to do them both simultaneously cuz
you have to sort of I equate to like
boxing you have trained for six months
for a fight you fight once and then you
go back to training so you gotta train
for like two or three years before you
do that's research right and then you do
a project so I mean for me that's it's
it's it's incredibly rewarding but it's
also like it's self-sacrifice for an
office to do it because these are not
two right both financially and
intellectually so I don't know maybe
there's another it's more of a question
because I mean what you say I totally
agree with you but on the other hand is
a bit intriguing to think who could be
the client that could push for these
projects right and I'm wondering I mean
because I found it frustrating that your
projects were very pragmatic in in the
problems that they were they were
dealing with real problems also the
approach was quite pragmatic I mean they
were ambitious but you couldn't say that
there were like super speculative but
yet it's it's so hard to imagine any of
these projects being realized that
implemented and I was just you know
wondering did you guys try to push or
you know consider any strategies of how
projects like that could be actual
implement that could be through NGOs
through you know could be something else
I don't know I think that Marty's
presentation so I just wanted to get in
this discussion of the whole question of
the the abstraction the research process
to the degree that it's detached from
the imperatives of practice like that's
kind of the the wavelength that we're on
and I have a few thoughts about that I
mean Namek it was Namek who earlier
raised the question that we're still
kind of wrestling with here this
afternoon about the danger that design
becomes kind of an aesthetic in other
words we have all these incredible
techniques for representing processes
ecologically socially infrastructurally
and there's a beautiful aesthetic that
we've been seeing all day and just the
whole question of how that fits in in
the context of you know the incredibly
catastrophic processes that we're also
depicting I mean there's a kind of
there's a kind of real almost
contradiction like in all of our
disciplines particularly in the design
disciplines because we have all these
aesthetic tools and yet part of what
we're depicting is just catastrophic
social and ecological destruction so I'm
just kind of reflecting on that I mean
that's more of just an observation than
than a question that anyone is going to
resolve but as someone who's not a
designer but who works with designers
who tries to you know engage with
designers that's part of my daily life
and it's definitely on the table today
so one other thought which is also maybe
a bit of a response to the the panel's
responses to Ed's question so yes
serious embedded design research like
that is fundamental to engaging with any
kind of practical problem of design and
that's very impressive in terms of what
we've seen today and we've got to do
that but at the same time and this is a
bit of a maybe a polemical response to
what
been said but push back against what I'm
about to say if you want it seems to me
that the the abstraction and the
distance of research also opens up the
possibility to be much more political
then then actually you can if you have
an immediate client that's also kind of
an engagement with what Niko's just said
if you have an immediate client you've
got to be very pragmatic because you've
got to deliver something that addresses
the client's agenda but precisely
particularly for students but also for
offices that do research where you don't
have an immediate client that actually
opens up the possibility it seems to be
seems to me to be much more political in
contrast to just a you know a purely
aesthetic approach in the sense of
questions about the status of fossil
fuels as an energetic basis for anything
that we're doing for example questions
about property relations like Rania put
put on the table the question of the
Commons which is a very political
concept we can we can be very political
with that concept property relations who
and questions finally about about
governance who's in charge
who's in charge of who has discretionary
power over the decisions about
investment and involvement and those are
all basic political questions and part
of what politics means is that there's
going to be fundamental disagreement
about stuff so taking a position that
people are that might antagonize people
that might that might create or
crystallize conflicts that are already
going on in in society so I'm always
arguing that some some of you who know
me know this we've got to be much more
political which means open up a space
for disagreement about fundamental
matters of what is to be done and how
should we do it so to some degree I'm
I'm missing that kind of political
dimension of this conversation although
maybe it's just beneath the surface like
disagreements that we might have
although maybe we all agree about stuff
I don't know I I doubt it
when I was looking for presentations it
looked to me it was very very visually
strong but I had a very strong sense
that you were thinking at the human
scale and you were dealing with the
geological scale because you're dealing
with earth systems and I'm gonna pull
out one of the projects as an example we
saw Santa Rosa we saw the wetlands in
Santa Rosa now I know that area pretty
well because as ed knows I've just
submitted a PhD on the wildfires in
California and building open risk to
give you an idea at the geological scale
of what you are dealing with in terms of
transitions so the wildfire regimes the
Wildfire behaviors in that area were if
you like hitting a certain peak to a
certain period essentially to the end of
the 20th century however this this since
the 21st century is kicked in we are
entering what you could call a new
geological scale of wildfire events and
how fast is this shifting how fast is
the needle moving well when I looked at
my case studies I plucked out the three
most severe wildfires in the whole of
the western US when I started that Prout
that project and I used the very last I
had to update that because I was
submitting in in 2018 so I used 2017
December 2017 case study two weeks
before i was submitting two weeks
another wildfire event came in a
wildfire so severe that although it
hadn't yet completed so another none of
the data was through it was 33% bigger
than the wildfire of December 2017 in
other words it was an event that has
taken us to yet another geological phase
and what's this relevance to the Santa
Rosa project to the wetlands well when
these wildfires occur all the debris all
the chemicals from the building the
wildland urban interface from all of the
Belton bar
all the toxic chemicals they run into
the hydrological systems into the rivers
so when I looked at that project I was
thinking okay so you're going to be
getting pollution you also have a
situation where the wildfires in that
very very particular place was so
intense that they incinerated the
buildings to their foundations we're
talking about
wildfires that are spreading at speeds
that are practically in some cases in
some areas because of the topography the
speed near the speed of sound that's
what you're dealing with so we are
shifting from one if you like level of
natural hazard events and systems to a
whole new level and my advice to you is
don't look in the present when you look
at your projects you need to go back you
need to go back through different
periods of time and what that will do is
that will give you an idea of how the
landscapes transition and the fact that
we heard words conservation well I can
tell you in California and most of the
regions that you were relating to the
ecological the flora the fauna it's
moving
it is reconfiguring it has to this is
what it is done overall evolution this
is why were your species this is why we
the human species look very different to
our ancestors because we have adapted we
have changed and if you think about that
it will take time and you will have to
look you will have to look at this not
for months or weeks you know but you
will have to think for years about this
it will challenge the very heart of your
thinking you will have the Epiphany
moments and I saw some fantastic
examples of looking to indigenous work
and different ways of thinking and I
think you're in exactly the right space
and all those areas that you were
working with will have indigenous
peoples so I would look down but I would
look I'd look beyond your own mindset
because when we get to policy again
let's have an idea of how much this
impacts this issue so you will know
about the Trump situation you will you
will know that literally policy is being
torched literally when I was doing my
work I was going to download work
because they are literally too
drawing scientific data they have
technically banned 20 scientific words
because they don't like the idea that
these things are happening you can't
actually put them in your scientific
document so we are seeing book-burning
we're seeing data being destroyed we're
seeing it being manipulated wings seeing
fake news we're seeing a dichotomy
between what is real and what is fake
and that again was a thing that you
picked out which is spot-on but we're
also in a situation where we do have to
ask what is the political context and
more particularly when we're looking at
what's happening now if you think about
here in the UK if you think about all
the forces that are impacting upon this
we've got Russia's we've got Russia
we've got hackers we've got arguments
even our own government can't agree when
you look to societal collapse it doesn't
happen
conveniently boom it comes right down it
comes quickly it comes over the place
and in those situations policy and I'll
give you another example of sixteen
hundreds they knew in the early 1600s
that London was going to burn because it
was wood I mean there was no question
that why did that policy not get through
well it would nearly got through in the
1630s but then unfortunately Britain had
a civil revolution and unfortunately all
the critical policy was shelved
so when London burnt to the floor it had
been predicted and predicted by several
parties now government couldn't sort it
out so when you're thinking about your
work I'd also think about how we as a
society mobilize how we in a way act
like indigenous peoples we don't have
centralized hierarchies because right
now I mean this isn't just theory this
is actual practice this is you know what
we've got a very limited window to sort
this out so I thought the work was great
but I would really time frames
I just want to make one comment I think
on the one it was San which I think
Mardis work what really represented is
there's all through the research I think
it's very specific research that if you
don't have a client but you are looking
at something very specific through that
process projects can emerge and can be
built so your work of management where
you're simply just trying to change the
regime's that actually instill a place
that they're doing things one way and
just by a very small change and
adaptation to that process Beauty
becomes more visible and people
understand the design process I think
that more things like Brooklyn Bridge
Park or Michael Van Valkenburg and
Matthew Bansky basically have been
involved in that project for three
decades their observation through
petitioning politicians through just
trying to make a project out of nothing
I think is where we really engage as
designers in that political arena that's
where we can influence policy that's
where we can have some agency
which I see
[Applause]
