axure of our PhD graduate seminar which
today actually is is going to be a bit
dense
because unlike the previous chapters
which were focus on one particular
author today actually I have collapse in
in one presentation three books as you
know the seminar has a very modest goal
which is not to add anything new on
these books but to simply glossy to
gloss them to see if they can propose
issues or problems that in a way are
still relevant today and in fact I have
to say that it's a pity that I had to do
this let's say grouping but of course in
order to really have a rather even
distribution of interest the the span of
the seminar required that sort of
concentration so I had to basically
collapse in fact three books which are
absolutely important for the development
of architectural theory in general and
especially of architectural theory in
the sixteenth century
forgive me if I I will in fact give more
weight to an outdoor rather than the
other two because I think in a way for
me especially in the context of this
let's say lecture series is the most
important the one I would like also to
discuss more in depth and this other is
serial and I will be very short actually
on on venial and Palladio I'm not sure
even if I will be able to it's the first
time I'm giving the seminar so I cannot
I didn't test yet that the length of
this of these lectures
first of all it's it's very important
actually to see these three architects
together because I think that through
there are more books produced in the
16th century that deals with with the
with the theorizing of of architecture
but there is no doubt that these three
books are the most important which and I
have to say that this is really the
moment in which books becomes the most
influential tool to transmit
architectural knowledge and of course
for an obvious reason which I think
everybody could guess which is the
invention of printing which allowed
something that was unprecedented the
mass production of knowledge so if of
course books existed also before as you
can imagine that the labor of copying
them by hand would take a long very long
time and for that reason books were
rather diffused but the diffusion was
pretty much balanced by this technical
difficulty but of course the invention
of printing changed completely the
landscape of even reading and writing
and architecture actually is one of the
discipline actually more than any other
discipline that is dramatically affected
by this technological let's say
invention because while for Alberti one
of the fundamental problem of
transmitting architecture was the
impossibility to rely on images because
unlike written text images are required
a lot of skill and talent to be copied
in a precise way of course this was as
you know the crooks of albertine the
reason why he only trusted the language
the written text
but this actually happened just before
the invention of printing with the
invention of printing this problem was
somehow not completely because we will
see that also within printing that there
is a margin of course of let's say
interpretation and falsification which
of which Sergio was a very interesting
early victim but of course the invention
of printing allow architects to trust
images and to use images as the
fundamental medium of of architecture
and I would argue that I would say that
from this moment on not buildings not
artifacts but images of buildings or
let's say images related to the
representation of architecture plans
elevations perspectives becomes the
fundamental medium of our collection I
would say the very core of architectural
knowledge I mean today even today when
we have much more possibilities to
travel and to visit buildings I think we
can all admit without being embarrassed
for that that most I would say 99% of
our knowledge of architecture is to
basically images of course in our case
photographs and even videos but this
sort of reification of architectural
knowledge through images is a process
that starts precisely at this moment and
in a way produce a new form of
understanding of architecture which was
is not anymore a discipline only for a
few cultivated patterns or few let's say
very skilled painters or sculptors who
can also become a doc architects but
with the mass production rate say of
architectural knowledge through printed
books creativity itself I mean to be an
architect is basically mass produce and
there is no doubt that let's say from
16th century to AD
century these three books serious seven
books on architecture Piniella's the
rule or the Canon of the five orders and
Palladio's four books on architecture
are actually the fundamental textbooks
of
architectural knowledge until actually
the invention dismiss of the classical
orders as the main language of
architecture of course we'll make this
teaching is much less relevant this
actually are just I will be very
schematic because I mean it's almost
embarrassing to concentrate in one our
discussion on these three architects is
almost impossible so my lecture will be
like blocks these are the portraits of
this architecture sarolea and portray
that might be a portrait of sadly
painted by Tintoretto this for sure is
the portrait of vignola because this is
actually what appear in the frontispiece
of his book and this actually perhaps
the most uncertain of this portrait at
that time we were not yet in the age of
eight crocosaur buildings were more
important than the face of the
architects but sometimes they also may
have the portrayed by a very famous
painter like this one who is Paolo
Veronese II maybe we are not sure and
this might be the portrait of Palladio
very interesting Palladio there are no
known I mean despite that his absolutely
famous architect also in his during his
life there are no certain portraits of
him as a persona and actually nobody
knows where he was buried so there is
not even a grave and this tells a lot
about the difficulty of
Eladio in the last years of his careers
I cannot really tell the whole story
which has been recently reconstructed
which is very interesting
so very tragic also and this might be
also the reason why Palladio felt
finally the urge not only to ride a
Booker so to not trust buildings but
something that would be much more
enduring is fame but also for the first
time to include projects by himself in
an architectural territory so in a way
the four books are we can say that it
can be also read almost as a kind of
personal portfolio of Palladio as an
architect so it's a book not only on the
general knowledge of architecture and
antiquities as we have seen with
examples before but it's also a book
that is almost autobiographical and of
course the the the it has actually a
very specific message which is also
among other possible interpretations to
basically give to the work of Palladio a
much more clear and enduring let's say
reputation but as in the previous
chapters I would like to stress a bit
the context in which these books were
written which is something that is
always in a way in the background of
course the for the sake of brevity I
cannot really elaborate this let's say
this contextual reality and therefore in
my sounds very abrupt and a bit
cause-and-effect relationship but for me
actually is very interesting how and I
actually stress also this with the with
the presentations before there is a
interesting symmetry between the rise of
architectural theory as something that
really can be seen as a psychopathic
attempt not to take knowledge and to
give knowledge not only actually a
knowledge about building but knowledge
about cities knowledge about customs
habits and to give it a stronger
encyclopedic structure on one end and at
the same time the rise of social and
political conflicts that's in a way
where situations in
which this Abbot's is knowledge or was
question was radically under truth last
time for example I mentioned the famous
tumult of a Chompy famous short live at
the revolution that actually I was
thinking about it during this weekend
and I didn't stress something that is
very important when we talk about this
event because we are always used to the
idea of a revolution a revolution it's a
very particular concept which of course
always rise the bar of social change
impossibly high now we always complain
and we cannot do we cannot have a
revolution but in fact that's precisely
the problem when we talk about
revolutions the Chompy and also the
event that I'm talking today were not
really revolutions but purity tomorrow
means revolt there is a fundamental
difference between a revolt and a
revolution of course revolts most of the
time and tragically for the people who
actually start involved and the Chompy
revolt and this one especially the
famous battle of franken Heusen where
they ended tragically for the people who
were fighting in this mean that started
this kind of revolts but and that's
actually very important they have a very
enduring effect in changing our own
perception of a particular historical
condition for example the mortal threat
power first power to take measures to
reform very often power itself in order
to prevent other community but very
often they have a strong symbolic
appearance and the symbolism of revolt
is sometimes even more powerful than the
symbolism of a revolution
precisely because is very intense is
very let's say has this kind of sudden
appearance change dramatically the
landscape of a particular city I mean
think of the Occupy movement everybody
now is saying well
sale didn't know what what to ask what
to do but under at the same time is a
movement that has been able to at least
change now our own perception of certain
issues or even our language not that
suddenly certain words becomes very
charged with a very specific symbolism
and even the place now I mean now if you
go to Wall Street you don't think only
Wall Street as the pace pace let's say
capitalism but you also think about this
counter subject so that's actually the
the why I want to raise these events you
know not something that of course had
immediate or direct relationship with
what I'm talking about
but more as this kind of symbolic events
which at that time have a very strong
impact and completely change actually
the perception of and it's sometimes
even the language and the habits to
which let's say things were seen now I
want to actually focus on on this event
which is a battle of drunken cowson
which happen into range and 1525 so
exactly just before the time of
explosion let's say of architectural
theory as a new let's say very important
activity by architects this is a
painting that we can still see in this
amazing panorama that was built during
the epidemic Ithaca Socialist Republic
of Germany to celebrate this event
because Friedrich angles so that the
Battle of Franken housing was the first
class struggle now one of the first
battles which was fought on the terms of
class and not ethnic and purely
religious belonging was led by a very
important figure Thomas Muller and
allied of Martin Luther who at a certain
point detach himself from Luther and in
fact guided a multitude of peasants to
revolt against the Lords of taringa this
first the the event ended
jiggly but he had the rather shocking
than during influence on the mind of
people and especially intellectuals and
artists because for the first time you
have the rise of conflicts and struggles
which would not clearly be identified
within the established canon now of what
is warfare or conflict which is usually
at that time was built on the terms of
religion or let's say ethnic conflicts
of course in the battle of Rankin
Allison class terms but also religious
terms are mixing Muser was as I said
analyte of Luther it was clearly a
symptom of the way the reform the
Protestant reform was impacting let's
say the civil society at that time and
just to give you an example of what
consequences these conflicts had and
this is actually clear direct
consequence of this famous event just
show you this rather enigmatic curious
Monument designed by Albrecht Durer
just if after the Battle of Somme Canal
Zone which is actually a monument a
column of victory a very important
celebration form of celebration which
you can see for example in Trafalgar
Square which is usually built after a
victorious victorious important battle
or a war what is actually strange about
this monument is that instead of
celebrating the winners
dural who actually siding with Luther
against means urgh against the peasants
that started the revolt so in a way
should the column supposed to celebrate
the winning of the Lord's against the
peasants but you have to imagine that
this sort of new conflicts new
polarizations are not yet clearly
articulate and in the consequence is
that you'll make this celebration of
those who have lost the peasants and the
uncertainty between victory and
it is emphasized by the mix of Janet's
that you are showing this column I mean
the column is really as we have seen
with Vitruvius the up the acts of
architecture now your classical
architecture is not just the structural
element but is also the authorial let's
say archetype and here we have a rather
comic column made of peasant tools also
a kind of mockery of peasant life and
then the peasant stabbed in his back and
of course an image that refers to the
famous iconographic theme of Christ in
distress so you have a very uncertain
symbolism which actually makes a comic
mercury with the tragic let's say rather
strange celebration because of course on
top of the of the column you have rather
a defeat figure so I want to show you
this this monument is to reintroduce the
core of the problem that we are
addressing today which is the increasing
the let's say the stress of
architectural Theory especially after
the actual theory that comes from a be
true vien legacy to cope with these new
problems new conflicts new ethos and
trying to give to this problems solvable
representation which of course as the
dual monument shows it's almost
impossible without ending up in this
rather enigmatic or even grotesque
compositions I want to actually pair the
statue of a Bustos and and our let's say
you're a monument to show you actually
what is the problem here with Vitruvius
we have a clearly subject who has taken
a mastery and control of an empire and
is able with this rational impaired
yuuma epitomized by the gesture of
speaking of addressing a commune
to basically rule and construct the
quasi political body on the other hand
we have this situation where in fact
power has problems not only to control
this conflict but also to give them a
clear univocal representation and this
is exactly the crooks that we will see
behind the books and especially one book
that we will see today as I said that
will give more space to Syria maybe we
will even end up with Syria so I hope
that will not be the case but I will do
my best
I have might the clock just in front of
me so I will make sure that we can cover
all three authors first of all there are
many things that make sadly a
breakthrough in architectural theory the
first one of course we have just made
this point sadly or heavily rely on
images so it's really not talking to
erudite or patrons or princes Sandra is
talking to our cadets is the first
author who really speaks a language that
is familiar to our on let's say
profession the profession of an
architect you know what is interesting
is that in a way Sarah himself is the
proto teacher of architecture the
professor of architecture partly because
of course he had very little chances to
build he very few things and perhaps
late in his life so yet as he himself
actually said a lot of time to be busy
actually with with architectural theory
but the fact that he had actually made
that kind of contribution makes clear
that in a way this new knowledge and the
transmission of this knowledge to books
is in a way a fundamental it's needed
and and somehow sell you can find a
market for it which in fact would be
rather successful unfortunately more
when he will be dead as very often
happens to outsource another very
interesting aspect of this work
that she published not all the books in
one book as we have seen before
but he published actually book by book
and not following the numerical order he
gave two books in fact the first as you
can see the dates are very important the
first book published is in fact the book
on the five orders which is published in
Venice in 1537 and all the other books
actually follow this publication but not
following actually the progressive
numbering of them which is a very
interesting strategy because immediately
shows house area is extremely elaborate
and articulates in not being completely
straightforward in his word there is
always something hidden something that
is but at the same time of course this
was a publishing strategy to use each
book as a teaser for the other boom so
you would read the book for and it would
mention something from book first and
second and of course while reading the
book you would be eager to wait and
perhaps by the next the next book a
variant also important things that
characterize serious book is that is the
first to theorize the five orders of
architecture until Alberti the orders of
architecture were three or fourth like
in the case of Vitruvius with salió
actually a new order is included the
most hybrid one the composite but also
there is something very interesting
about the way sir Leo was actually the
first to really talks about
architectural orders as we speak about
them today and the way he understand
this famous can on of architecture while
actually for Alberti the order was not
just the column with the fragments of
the architrave of the tradition as we
understand today orders for Alberti
actually the the type the let's say
architectural for the whole
architectural type
which is actually architectural order
was the structure was a structural let's
say grammar of tribution column but seen
in its entirety
well actually sadder is the first two
being the order as a fragment as a piece
a sister is a very important aspect of
his understanding of orders because it
gives to serie unprecedented flexibility
not only actually to change proportions
and to use them in different ways but
also to use them together in all ways
not necessarily Orthodox ways even if
sadly or professed himself and like
Alberti a big fan a scholar of Vitruvius
and you have to really and we will see
this with vignola you have to really
understand that especially in the mid
16th century when this problem of the
protestant left to the dogmatism of the
catholic church is very important this
observation of rules observation of
canons an especially observation of
Bolivia's rules becomes a very sensitive
problem it was too challenging a
Victorian Canon is sort of analogous
think than to challenge basically the
Orthodox rule of the Catholic Church and
in fact is not by chance that in the mid
in the 16th century that will be
precisely in Rome an Academy that will
study theologically the tribunes legacy
so in a way this between Ian can honor
his experience almost as a sort of the
embodiment of the Canon of the catalog
search against the Tres of let's say the
Protestant reform and actually a serious
role visibly distressed is quite
ambivalent on the one hand he professed
himself to be a big strong rigorous
scholar of the true views and he
actually had also come from the group of
architects the scholar of route C but
he's very familiar also with Bramante's
work and Bramante has been one of the
most let's say intelligent interpreter
of
Vitruvius but as we will see in his
books there are clearly signs that Sally
also likes to challenge this cannon in a
rather let's say fundamental ways and in
fact we will see especially in the
extraordinary Libra the extraordinary
book sadly will in fact attack in a very
interesting way the the Germany of the
Vitruvian cannon another quality that
characterize serious book is incredible
effective layouts the way we combine
text and images you see here actually
this is the from the book on antiquities
book - and you see actually the rather
smart and precise way but it's effective
way in which sadly Oh mix text captions
in fact in serious the the text is no
longer this rather smaller that's in
they would say text by unbirthday but
it's a rather a very light and and sharp
captions but how he makes actually
orthogonal projections with eventually
axonometry Zoar details in order to
really explain these monuments one
that's in the most effective way also a
remarkable aspect of settlers work is
that is very consistent with autoload
projections so you're really trying to
master architectural representation to a
degree that it can become really a
language that cannot leave let's say
doubt and and problems of interpretation
so this the rise of art we know
projection is is also a very important
aspect that characterized the way Cerio
communicate architecture but i would
like to now focus on for me the most
important book which in fact is the only
while one of the two actually that
Sergio was not able to publish of the
entire collection and in fact remains in
the form of two manuscripts one in
uniquor and one in not Columbia the
Avery library what in fact parlor
Sadler deals with the the question of
amputations this really an amazing book
because we could almost say that for the
first time the problem of housing not
just the architecture for churches of
Palace which was the way architecture
was used till that moment you have to
reimbursed and that very few patrons
could afford an architect you know to
design a project so the fact that
someone is dealing with a bodacious also
modest a bodacious house Inga is rather
unprecedented because at that time there
is not yet a market for an architect
dealing with what today we would call
social housing and yet sir Leo who is
actually rather sensible and that's
actually also the reason why among many
other he will go to friends to spend the
second part of his life because at that
time France is more tolerant towards
Evangelic and Protestant let's say
confessions and in a way Sergio is a
sort of sympathizer he's close to people
that are very eminent figures of Italian
Protestant reform and it's within that
kind of a source as you know one of the
fundamental aspect of Protestant reform
is to emancipate merchants and
professionals as a powerful
distinguished economic class within the
city and it's very interesting to see
how sadly in a way design projects in
its territories which are meant to be
for all classes from the very poor
peasant to the very rich merchants and
to the rich cities and of course what is
interesting is that architecture becomes
very very natural you have to make think
about failure right design this book
while he's in France so he adopts a lot
of Architecture from the place where his
leaving
the orders the fundamental Canon of
architecture that moment gradually seems
to disappear so in a way the abduction
of salary is an architecture that is
very much driven by comforter and they
call ma a strong quality that that
serious stress in his book which means
meanness not to be mean to be normal
sadly really wants to design the houses
for normal people people that are
neither let's say two aristocratic or
too poor to afford the even the most
miserable let's say hot which of course
sell your design but of course he still
is living in his own age we still have
to design also buildings like this like
for example the house for the prince
it's interesting now in the same book to
have the house for this poor peasant and
the house of the prince within the same
range of possibilities but sadly is also
a rather pragmatist brighter I mean it's
not emerging like a sort of social
utopia where everybody likes each other
in fact one of the most comical
interesting moments of book sixta is
actually when he scores propose a
project for a prince but why not also
house for the tyrant and of course he
recommend to be the the house or in the
form of a fortress so this really shows
Serio's pragmatism
almost in the verge of being cynical and
ironical versus the powers that at the
time controlled the city after imagining
that between the 15th century and 16th
century a lot of rulers have come to
power in a totally illegitimate way and
Machiavelli actually stress and all this
point in the prince that one of the
fundamental weaknesses for a tyrant is
not that he's a bet
an ugly person but simply that the
people he has subjugated they are not
very staunch really sympathize towards
him also the title has to end in his the
enemy is outside the city but also the
enemies inside his own territory and so
serlio is a pragmatic pragmatic theorist
a realist theorist design also a house
for such a figure without any attempt to
idealize the rather unstable and certain
political condition of Italy and France
at that time but what is actually even
more curious is the follow-up of book
sixth book seven which is translated in
English as a book on situations what are
situations situations are the rather
bizarre urban conditions in which
architecture has to be built so for
example in this book cursor you advise
how to unite different properties in one
building but also how to insert a palace
so something that till then was always
built as a self-standing construction
completely freed from the context around
within a rather intricate urban
condition which of course has a lot to
do with the way let's say we would say
almost the economic economics of land
division works produced this rather
bizarre of square sides so serlio advise
how to adapt the Vitruvian kernel to
this rather strange and sometimes
impossible context well let's say
conditions and it would use a series of
plants which are absolutely stunning for
their clumsiness and complete distrust
for any sense of symmetry and let's say
the column that was very strong in these
reviews idea of architects whereas you
remember seem
is not just a way to organize the
building but it also has a strong
symbolic rethoric about what the
building is meant to represent in a way
the strange sites in South Square sites
where you know we give the opportunity
to say earlier - I would say almost
ridicule the pretensions of a Vitruvian
architecture to control the real
conditions of the city where we would
say a glass of nouveau riche are now
able to afford the let's say
architecture architecture becomes
actually has to pay a price which is to
basically become a rather bizarre and
sometimes task let's say form in the in
the seven books sadly never theorize the
project of the city as such in other
words he never put forward a plan or a
cohesive scheme like filler ad for
example which we idealize the the city
as as a as an artifact like with rubies
for example but in book first and second
when he talks about perspective he
created a series of stage sets which
will have a terrible influence in the
17th century theater stage where in fact
he seems to almost put forward what
would be the outcome of booth 6th and
book 7 also the as usual
sorry always have this kind of deceptive
way to bring a message now so I think
it's fair to speculate that precisely
within the realm of fiction and theatre
he finally put forward what would be the
result of this crazy city where
architecture address all classes he
developed this famous - since the tragic
scene force in theatre there are
different situations the tragic and the
comic the tragic scene has this rather
centralized space which is dominated by
the gate and the obelisk and of course
refers to the
the street especially becomes a new tool
to organize the city within one who has
if let's say space but you see that
apart from the street which is clearly
addressed through perspective
architecture becomes rather exuberant
and totally freed from any overall
design constraints so there are
different styles different languages can
coexist and then there is the comic sea
and what is interesting is that while
the tragic scene it's made of the true
vien I mean not all the buildings but
most of the buildings are made by the
true vien architecture architecture of
columns and tribution the comic scene is
an occasion for failure to really
portrayed with incredible cynical
realism what was the city at that time
not this totally chaotic agglomeration
of buildings most of them built in
rather precarious way with no sense of
proportions well actually in fact the
only means of control is the ground is
this the urban space which is very
interesting because we didn't reduce
what we will see later on or how the
order of the CD is gradually moving away
from the problem of representation and
the problem of orders the problem of
facades as we have seen with the Alberti
and moves to basically the realm of
space now of basically the managerial
control of space which fear is
symbolized by this rather Cartesian
almost super studio like Instagram non
surface that constitute the the very
ground of the city but as I said at the
beginning the most extraordinary in the
literal sense the most bizarre book by
Sergio is the extraordinary
extraordinary book the book that's in
fact it was not officially intended to
be a part of the collection but that
Sergio publishes a sort of PS as a sort
of extraordinary book within the
sequence what the
ordinary book deals with with rather
useless and innocent topic gates it's a
book that is a illustrating something
like 50 if I'm not mistaken gates but
these gates are characterized by a
rather bizarre and at sometimes
frightening compositions what is
interesting is that serie makes clear
the beginning of the book that this book
is about architectural mistakes and he
said that this is exactly what an
architect shouldn't do so he's clear
that the book is showing monstrosities
he really talks about monsters when he
talks a dress this gate because they
complete this be construct and hide the
purism of Vitruvian language he proposed
I mean a sort of sixth order now which
is neither ionic or Corinthian or to
scan accord oracle composite but is a
kind of best realized order an order an
animal asked order which has no
rationality anymore but what is
interesting that we explain some of
these gates some of them for surrey or
absolutely
mistaken so they really clearly shows
what is wrong in architecture but some
of them have a more ambivalent let's say
meaning for example in these gates where
you see a Doric order almost eaten by
this kind of amino first something that
with development of Mannerist and
Baroque architecture will be very usual
i'm actually sadly will have a lot of
success as a theorist but you have to
imagine at the time this is not really a
usual language for architecture and what
is actually the way explain especially
this gate is very interesting because he
said well most of this gate is made by
brutal animal ask one small monster like
forms like natural form like natural
stone but
once you actually remove this form of
barbarism you really have a pure
betrayin Doric order now so what is
interesting is that we have seen how for
Alberti the architectural orders were
basically a conventional an abacus we're
an ornament no and therefore there will
always be constructed and artificial
like all social conventions cell you go
even further with that kind of critique
now showing orders which are absolutely
unacceptable by showing actually what
the apt that shouldn't do he almost
shows the the model of orders themselves
which is something necessary but the
same time something we can always
distrust and it's exactly in the sort of
ambivalence not to professor an order
when service is not he doesn't have any
sort of fantasy to challenge not the
truth in architecture but at the same
time it give us also the possibility to
see them as grotesque convention
something that eventually can becomes
monstrosities and the nevertheless are
important in order to understand what is
true architecture is a very Evangelic
flavor now in this idea that in order to
make something good you have to be bad
that's actually what charlie is trying
to say you have to actually deeply put
yourself in something that is so
impossible to accept in order to
discover what might be the truth of
architecture and the truth exactly in
that sort of moment and I mean that kind
of ambiguity between what is right and
what is wrong which means that
architecture is no longer just a tool to
reinforce a certain ethics you know in
this case the ethics of power but is
also a moment in which ethics can
becomes more autonomous because they can
judge between what is good and what is
wrong and in fact savio leaves this
9 rather ambitious especially in the
extraordinary Libra where in fact you
are never sure when even when sattell is
denigrating a certain example there is
always a little side note of admiration
and even interest in doing that
particular let's say rather precarious
and not rightful exercise but let's say
conclusion of serious contribution to
Architecture cannot avoid the perhaps
the most interesting and I don't have
time to elaborate as it should deserve
this part most interesting book which is
the one on custom annotation a book that
is only drawn it was never published in
a printed form until very recently and
it's a book that trying to reconstruct
from based on polybius histories the
form of Roman military cants what is
interesting about this book especially
if you see this book parallel to book
6th on Abbott Asians is to see how
cellular reduce the plan of buildings
the plan of in this case to a very
strict diagrammatic let's say plans of
course there are tens there are
temporary buildings but this becomes an
opportunity for Sergio to imply a
language that is exactly the language of
modern architecture the language of
diagrams the language that do not
anymore represent architecture in its
build substance but as a organising
device and in fact the most
extraordinary part of this book is a
reconstruction of what supposed to be a
military camp but salió represented as a
city so we tear a baffle with temples
with policies but sorry actually
represent this planner as a built city
so it transforms something that is
temporary the military camp in a real
ideal city which actually
in details and the most extraordinary
part of this is this part on
housing of the soldiers which you know
we can be seen as one of the first
projects of mass social housing and you
see actually the abstraction of this
carpet of AB additions that have no
facades anymore on the corridor streets
and room so addition is reduced to its
most generic properties not the
probabilities of social reproduction so
in a way the opportunity construct an
ancient Roman military camp began for
cellular and opportunist up to summarize
his approach to architecture where in
fact organization housing management of
an avenue actually a merging class of
inhabitants becomes more important than
the truthful representation of of an
order so in a way it's exactly after
Syria that there is this sort of
explosion of architectural theory that
architectural theory becomes specialized
general that involves many practicing
architect but is also savvy actually as
I said before made popular the picture
book the book the architectural book is
no longer driven by a text by a sort of
it's not longer organized around a story
a clearer let's say identifiable
narrative like in Albertus the difficut
area which you really can read as a book
as a novel almost he has a beginning and
an end after cell do we really have the
practitioner manual the architecture for
dummies book the book that doesn't tell
anything if not how to make basically
correct Vitruvian architecture the most
important example is Vignola at the can
of the five orders and hike actually sir
leo Palladio but also birthday bid
reviews Vinny
doesn't concern about anything if not
architectural order so it's the thinnest
book on architecture what characterized
and what will be important actually for
Eladio is that it's the rendering of to
which Vignola represent architecture
which unlike the very rudimental boot
cuts of sarolea are very actually
elaborate plates with very refine
actually an drawing which the whose
resolution was at that time
unprecedented but of course I mean what
one can see in vignola is the rise of
this counter-reformation a sauce now of
making rules absolutely important but at
the same time empty no I mean vignola
really embodies this kind of idea of
after the crumbling of the architectural
kernels you know there is a sort of
attempt to recuperate after the actual
language in a way that is both strong
very accurate very precise honora's are
extremely talented architect but is an
empty architect is an architect who has
no whatsoever message story to represent
and actually that's the atmosphere that
you can feel in his plates of a very
refined
precise practitioner but completely
unmotivated by any social or political
project that of course was never the
direct topic of architectural theory but
one can sense that in Albert ISM and say
oh there is a project there is actually
an attempt to drive architectural
knowledge towards a specific they would
say vision with vijnana that does not
exist vignola
just propose pure empty architectural
form and of course beautifully drawn
because one should say that vinolas
plates are absolutely fantastic and they
will have precisely because the
refinement will have a
huge influence on all architecture till
basically the 19th century and finally a
lady on the last of the three or the one
perhaps where I should talk the most but
we have very little time so I will be
very short I would say just few things
the fact that pallid wipe-alot you've
wrote the four books and like Sarah and
Vignola
as I said before Pilate was interest to
be basically he's on portfolio of course
he had a strong interest towards Roman
architecture triggered by two figures
that are behind Palacios project of
revisiting classic architecture John
Giorgio trissino
and especially Daniela Barbara Barbara
together with Palacio made one of the
most refined version of Petronius de
arquitectura
it was traded by translated let's say
edited and translated by Barbara and it
was traded by enlarge on but also you
have to imagine that Pilate himself was
on one end a very successful architect
that happened to work in a rather
unstable and certain urban context
Benny's Vicenza and and Venice bhishan
saw a rather successful mercantilist
City in the 16th century was one of the
most violent city in Europe especially
because we shan't saw in the sixteenth
centuries the epicenter of reformist
culture in Italy so there are a lot of
conflicts social political conflicts
which often would stop the builders that
would commissioned Pelagius buildings to
to stop to do to take on hold their
projects I mean Paris support or wraps
is one of the most pathetic testimony
enough Pilate of this problem which was
he have never seen one of his building
completed during his life and this
actually perhaps one of the reason why I
felt the urgency to do something that at
that time was absolutely unprecedented
to include his own projects
into basically an architectural Tetris
book the Pilates books are organized in
four books of course the four book is an
introduction which of course ends with
the description of the orders but the
second book is a book where in fact
Palazzo shows along examples from
antiquity also his on buildings and
especially is on villas Palladio he's an
architect that have concentrated most of
his career in the design of what today
we would call real estates which of
course have a strong role at the time at
that moment in the Serenissima republic
because it's exactly that moment that
venice have to shift his economic
interest from the sea to the land and
reclaim the land as a fundamental asset
of his own geopolitical power well
that's actually why Bellagio design all
these villains these villas have to do
with that sort of social and political
reform where agriculture becomes a
fundamental tool to govern this new
territory of course you see how the
layouts of the four books which by the
way is absolutely elegant from is one of
the best book on architecture not only
for its content but for its graphic
design very simple but also very elegant
the text is it's beautifully written but
also the composition text image now it's
very clear very clean and other is not
this kind of little bit messy let's say
layout of Syria but of course
Eladio copy a lot take a lot from Syria
these are actually of course is villas
you see how Palacio gives to this
technology and unprecedented relevance
especially as you know the villa it's a
kind of evolution of of serious non
habitations but what is actually amazing
is the combination of a very urban
technology the palace with the Aroostook
let's say bar answer the bar casa so in
a way the bill
of Palladio a strange hybrid between the
palace and a barn and of course the
abundance of lodges really emphasized
this relationship with the landscape
which was also really a way to frame the
people who would live and work within
these fields and especially in the
bar-kays so in Pilates actually building
there is a strong paternalistic message
you know the Lord is in the middle and
the workers are with the Lord so there
is an element of social reformer so the
the farmers are not young peasants are
not longer living now in some kind of
dispersed place you know in the
countryside but they live with with the
Lord with the patron they are part of
the same building but at the same time
of course the patter is in the middle
and of course the pediment which Allah
is the first to use in a prevailing
building well the very first is Juliana
Sangalo in the palace of pajota Jana but
that is very consistently using the
pediment for a house and you remember in
the discussion about the derivatives
that the pediment is really like the the
symbol of the mastery of power in this
case actually becomes the the the
symbolise the centrality of the pattern
that organized this sort of states when
in fact agriculture becomes the main
protagonist and that's actually why the
villa is this unprecedented openness
towards the landscape for me actually
the most and is the last image the most
interesting and powerful big magic in a
way designed by Palladio is the design
for villa repite unfortunately doesn't
exist anymore because it was destroyed
by a fire if I'm not wrong in the 17th
century well in fact the central
pavilion disappear the villa
I mean it's of course we used to this
rather small pediment the villa becomes
an enormous bar case where in fact there
is no difference between
the peasants the workers and and the
patrons it is known that the repite were
stronger sympathizers or the Protestant
confession and therefore they had this
rather unprecedented the welfare
approach towards the peasants that would
work in their state and it's interesting
how this the rise of this new F was this
new understanding enough social
relationship no longer based on
aristocracy but based on economy and in
the end the villas are productive
epicenters is symbolized by an
architecture that we will see much in
the print next let's say chapters which
is purely based on the organization of
space where in fact our presentation
seems to almost disappear now so what
for so it's interesting to compare the
way Palladio ends his book well in this
case it doesn't end this book but his
second book and the way actually seru
ends these books on architecture Serio
ends with this rather tragicomic
celebration of the absurd in
architecture so we drove in architecture
yes is important but at the end we don't
know really what to do with it and the
only way we can play with it is to make
this rather absurd the combinations of
generals and forms now but logic
actually on the contrary ends his of
course second book with a building that
is purely based on organization where in
fact the problem of representation does
not exist anymore because the ruler the
patrons have in fact left empty that
kind of place the place of
representation and have become embedded
in the very way architecture organized
something that in fact is is
unrepresentable which would be the
fundamental asset of Protestant but
later on capitalist ethics which is
basically production something that of
course in the
Bertie and salya was far more relatively
important but with pelada effect this
idea of production and the way
architecture not simply present but
organize production will be very
important thank you
there are questions I know that some of
you have to leave because it's at three
plus two but if there is some question I
would be very glad to to answer comments
or critique disagreements this is a as I
told you a rather superficial overview
which I'm sure I think would require
much more refinement so if you have
questions I can elaborate certain rather
rudimental passages of my presentation
yes you have to speak on the microphone
because we are broadcast it's a part of
that litigation that I was there is
something interesting about the function
of Marchesa in villa rotunda I mean we
don't have the plan here but I wonder if
you could say something about that well
as in villa rotunda actually there are
no bar cases but there are kind of
separated from from the actual no villa
rotunda there are no burkas I'm pretty
sure actually villa don't away is not
even mentioned by Palladio in the
section of villas but is mentioned in
the section of palaces and in fact we
call we call it villa rotunda but it was
not a villa was a sort of amenity
building for amenity just next to
Vicente and in fact the bill
has no burka is not a productive let's
say building so there are no bar cases
you might confuse maybe with other
examples but for sure Abelardo never
done actually is not a real atrophy
there is fear there is the one may be
yankin confusing it with something else
where burr cases are completely separate
yes there are yes and then they have
completely different different function
as this it's a it's a road that leads
people into the villa and frame certain
views on of the landscape but yeah
anyhow thank you yes of course there are
different I show you only two versions
three versions but yes but cases were
not necessarily a touch to the to the
main body the the palace itself they
were sometimes detached but like for
example Billa force curry but they were
always part of the same compound so this
in fact actually you know when one of
the historian that have made a large
important recently more than sixty years
ago was with Koval now with his book on
Palladian architecture and one of the
most crucial let's say not actually the
book is of course architectural
principles in the age of humanism and
sorry which is a book before and one of
the food iconic page of that book is
this famous page where bit cover made
diagrams of all the villas by not all
the villa but the main villas of
alladia and one of the interesting
things of the diagrams is that bit cover
does not include burrkc he only actually
make the diagram of the central body
which for me is a very interesting way
of reading Palladio's Villas because he
almost amputate
Pelagius villas of the most important
element which were actually the the
burkas
and actually Bert cases actually we're
very often Palladio I mean apart from
this example does not use architectural
orders use rather normal literal columns
other color phd's - yes you are you're
supposed to make question in HD because
he's a PhD seminar so I'm supposed to
talk to like I don't know if you can
help me I've been reading tough for eon
Palladio and unser leo but sometimes i
could confuse in his interpretations
when he speak about both in terms of
syntactic variability and honours
combinatorial and but i can get for him
or in your interpretation with the main
difference between the contribution of
faladi I was supposed to say Louis in
those terms yeah I mean first a little
note footnote on
Pelagius writings both on Syria and
Palladio which are absolutely
extraordinary the article which might be
the one that you have reading is this
article on the religiousness of Syria
which is one of the most important texts
by the for eons early on which it's a
very important text but has a I mean it
shows what was the furries main pleasure
in reading architecture which was is
incredible Sadek pleasure in choosing
architects that would create the most
impossible architectural compositions so
you really indulge in this kind of sort
of rather bizarre a way through which
sadly Oh presents architecture for me I
think that the problem of the food is
reading of Syria is that it stops there
and it doesn't actually see Syria in a
much larger picture where in fact this
rather bizarre if not clumsy
approach is has a certain narrative
which is very strong and is a narrative
that we see also in embryo in Alberti on
one end to create a book on architecture
means to make a book about the art of
governments or
governing a certain range of knowledge
and and and tools to govern and
represents the city and and an
architecture but at the same time there
is an element of irony and I don't of
course it's a word that today doesn't
mean anything anymore everybody seems to
be ironic in architecture but I'd only
there is something tragic in irony irony
is the jet let's say the well I would
say irony which is the possibility of
detaching yourself from the problem you
are dressing is the the precedent of
rationalism in order to be rational
meaning to not be emotionally involved
ah now in this what we have seen with
immediate the monuments of dura really
shows that impossibility non dura is
really emotionally involved I mean with
one of the first artists to convert to
to the Protestant reformer you really I
mean Max Weber in his book on the
Protestant ethics tells about how there
were so many people killing themselves
in the struggle dilemma now whether to
choose to remain Catholics or to embrace
the the reform and also it was a ethical
struggle which was in very strong and
enduring I mean the art of Durer
especially his late work is the
representation of that and he ends up by
doing this rather absurd monuments no
sería and like do of course he's also
sympathizer of this new sensibility but
is also to use a term by Alexander
Naugle a soft iconoclast someone who is
always trying to let's say cleaner I
mean for example Sally repeats very
often the word simplicity but not too
much I mean it's not really its
simplicity is not simple because you
always have this kind of possibilities
of of seen let's say to use a Evangelic
language that for sailors are
opportunities to have Redemption
which is a very dialectical very
conflictual way to to understand the
moral meaning of architecture which I
think the forty was for Tafari was very
important
Danny's were sadly actually spent part
of his life is a city because it's
mercantilist let's say an identity is a
city that at that moment has becomes
actually the hardboard of all these
people that are trying to contest the
moral let's say prerogatives of the
Catholic Church you know for example
people like Kate already know is living
in Venice now there are a series of
figures that are very familiar to Sarnia
and that's actually what what really
constitutes areas were I thought
maladies formal more straightforward
Malaga is already beyond that struggle
is more operative and actually Palladio
is a sort of resurrection if you handle
of the Brunelleschi's approach you know
but of course after bra Mountain after
Sir Leo and I think that my I think is
clear that Palladio owns a lot to say
Leo without Sarah we wouldn't have
Palladio and Sarah is always not
recognized in this kind of continuity
but of course Palladio unlike Syria is
far more close to power in this case the
Republic and the patrons especially the
younger party now within the Serenissima
Republic which in fact promotes
basically his architecture unlike say
Leo who would have no portunities if not
very few at the end of his life to build
something so I think the difference is
really about I mean seriously I mean I I
love Sergio means one of my heroes it is
both tormented and ironical
and I think these are qualities that's
neither nor actually vineya vineya is
really is much more talented than Sarah
but doesn't have this struggle but Sarah
you had that sort of which in fact you
can see in Ilario okay I think okay yes
one okay so it's just I was just hoping
whether you could just sort of maybe a
reiterate a little bit the last point
about the reformist impact on Palladio
and because I'm slave and clear also
like how this sort of fits in with all
kind of Calvinist you mentioned
capitalist kind of infant and stuff and
at the same time how this repetitive
superficially sort of democratic but the
same time I would say it's not
superficially of course but I mean for
the standards of the time this gesture
is pretty strong I mean of course there
is a paternalism but architecture itself
is always paternalistic I mean even when
he wants to be democratic architecture
will always and and the more you want to
be democratically the more you will be
paternalistic
and for sure there is an element of that
but this exactly I mean what I think is
important to realize that the the the
clash between Catholicism and and and
the Protestant reform first of all this
is one of the major events in if not the
major event in Western culture because
it's not only about struggle between two
confessions but it's a struggle between
an older form of power mastery and a new
social and political ethos that of
course has to question radically the
religious theological
framework and it has a huge impact on on
both sides not only actually means you
cannot say the Protestants because
actually they hated the way religion was
very often materialized into objects so
that they promote this kind of idea that
religion should not be represented in a
way but they also forced the the the
catholic' counterpart em to to change to
reform itself to return to for example a
much more straightforward the form of
representation actually the the
installer was mentioning before
Alexander Navin not talks about
strategies of soft iconoclasm
so in a way not iconoclasm like but like
this now so to make a villa that looks
like a villa by the way and but there is
this kind of attempt to basically
respond to these urgencies to these kind
of new mentalities where in fact this
stronger our key girl organization that
we see in the other villas was too
strong I mean a way for me what is
interesting is that the villas of
Palacios are they looks very static and
Ear are kegel but they are the outcome
of profound social and economic
conflicts which first said in fact the
PadFone mean we always see the you know
power in in one direction but power goes
always in two directions because it not
only the power who is imposing a project
but there is also the power who resists
that project so you can read that in the
villa Emma for example the power has
centralized everything's in one body
with the burrkc attached the building
but you can read this project or swim in
the other way the power was forced to
accept that peasants which till then had
no whatsoever possibly to find a decent
space to live to be actually
accommodated on the same ground of the
of the patrons so in a way you know
reform and counter if in the reformism
is a struggle where both sides have
whether one is ruler winner loser I have
something to gain I know something it's
it's it's it's it's an opportunity for
them to change and to reform their own
language and of course Pilates in the
middle of that but I think that while
Sergio belongs to a generation that is
still struggling ethically I mean there
is a strong ethical suffering through it
through cereals or reflections in
architecture in Panaji almost this
suffering doesn't exist anymore another
has found a way you know to put aim to
control these struggles in a language
that is very stable because it's
instability and will proliferate for the
next centuries not only Europe but also
in the United States Jefferson was a big
admirer of blood okay see you next week
