welcome the panel to our discussion of
problematizing the profession this is
something of a historic moment we don't
want to sound like we're involved in
something few nariyal it's we're very
much looking to do we're very much
looking to the future here but the the
the moment of bringing together matrix
muffs and parlor from a Buddhist
perspective is something of a landmark I
don't think it's ever happened before
has it um I thought I was there in
denial it has a in London no well I
wanted to start out by introducing this
rather lively group III I'm sort of
having to say that they're all in their
own when I when I emailed them to tell
them what the panel was going to be
about and how it was going to be
structured they all email back saying no
that's not the way it's good to happen
so they have designed this this panel
and I mean it's all the better for it to
I must say
let me just start out by saying that we
have representatives from matrix month
and parlor and just go around and Julia
and kind of so you're known Julie I I'm
not going to read your entire wonderful
biography everyone has that in their
pack but just to say that she is an
Aussie who studied architecture there
and in the UK including a time here at
the AAA and she if you look in the back
of the book that we've written about
women in architecture CIA you'll see
quite a few references to
je Dwyer who is a very articulate person
as well as a brilliant designer who's
concerned about these connections
between architecture and society which
links her research and practice so
that's Julia I when we think of of
matrix it's impossible for those of us
who who know the members of matrix and
who are members of the sort of larger
architectural community to not think of
Sue Frances who was one of the sort of
strongest thinkers most most creative
thinkers that I know about the issues
that we're concerned with here today
about the connections between art and
society for example about participatory
design and Sue died earlier this year
but we just want to take this moment to
kind of remember her and remember how
important she was not only to matrix but
to aax X 100 and how she continued to
support us throughout her her illness so
a thought for Sue of many thoughts for
Sue actually the other matrix person
who's sitting closest to you and who
you've heard him in the debate earlier
is Jos voice Jos train is Bartlett and
she has been involved in community based
practice research and teaching since
then and she's last appeared here now
I'm going to be corrected again probably
but she's asked a field here at the AAA
talking about this ability and design
which is one of her her current
interests so that's that's Jos lies
ifyour of muff I think the best thing
way to describe Liza is is to say that
she will describe herself but my
favorite lies a story which she told me
in which is I think in her
by oh is that muff really emerged from
the a a she met Catherine Clark while
she was teaching at the AAA and they was
Julia bid good and cathode fill took
advantage of the unit eight room here in
the AAA on Saturdays to begin working
together which was really the beginning
of muff which he's going to be talking
about today so it's really in
conversation with each other and with
other students which as she put it
provided the ballast which came
afterwards
Justine who's looking at me in a very
serious way she's the architecture it is
an architectural editor
oh she's perhaps best known to those of
you in the room through the website the
parlour website which is a fantastic
platform which I'm sure she and indeed
her colleague will be talking about in a
few minutes
but she has a very distinguished life
outside of parlor and his former editor
for example of architecture Australia
which is the Journal of record for
Australian architecture and finally
Karen Karen burns who many of you know
her work she's an architectural
historian she's talked about her
fantastic project with Laurie the
Bloomsbury encyclopedia which is in in
the process of production contract sign
we understand very good but she's a
writer and has written widely on women
feminism and architecture so that's
really the intros I thought I would just
say a few words about what we're what I
think it's a kind of baseline as a
historian for what we're talking about
when you're talking about problematizing
the profession
what is the profession that you're
problematizing and on the screen here
you see a photograph of two young AAA
graduates and architects
who are undoubtedly delighted with being
in the profession they have all the
accoutrements and I don't know if
Georgina is here they even have a brush
which is that I've been told the key
item for getting rid of all those
scrapings out that people had to do when
they were making their designs in the
old-fashioned way but here here at the
AAA since 1917 women's students were
taught mainly by male architect tutors
on the same courses male students so
it's not surprising that they sort of
practiced in in that on that model the
women students were given a systematic
architectural education encouraged to
professionalize to get a diploma to pass
the RI ba exams join the Institute and
after 1921 the a a they aspire to
professional practice they did not
challenge the professional structures
they wanted to participate in them and
this is photograph indicates for many it
was a thrilling journey and exciting
journey they set up on their own they
put their names in the practice they
build up a client list the bigger the
better and they promoted their work
taking care that it was published and
promoted in the building press and these
reims of men and women of the profession
alike now what we've heard and will hear
this evening and in some instances is in
the exhibition and in the book are the
sort of threads of feminism that runs
throughout practice over the last 100
years but we'll let that develop out of
our conversation this evening so could I
invite the the first speakers speaker to
come up as you wish I tell you they tell
me what to do yes
so the order we're going in is
chronological from when each of these
attempts at thinking through
architecture more widely and differently
have happened so that's why matrix is
going first day on things which meant
recognition really about some of the
problems both within the profession and
within society and the thing that was
interesting for us I think working as as
students really coming through places
like the a a the bar with many other
schools it was difficult and
particularly difficult for women and we
didn't really know what it was we didn't
really know how to pin it down and as a
gave us got together
[Music]
new object movement which was a
[Music]
political movement for unionization in
architecture of acceptable workers it
became increasingly clear it was it was
that stereotype you know the women were
still making the team for the men and so
a group of us got together which was
having arguments actually about whether
you worked within the profession or
outside of it their garments and and we
looked for what we could find
that might help us deal with this issue
because you know our fathers and world
told us that there's no problem and we
looked to most importantly really
American Historians like Dolores Haven
and Gordon a night we looked to
particularly a really burgeoning
movement in geography feminist
geographers people like during masse so
we found stuff elsewhere we certainly
didn't find it within architecture it
was nothing absolutely nothing we were
kind of grappling the world sexism
didn't exist we were grappling with this
kind of but just trying to be able to
say things we won't even know what we
didn't know where they were in 79 and
out of that came the non feminist group
women's design service and out of that
came the matrix
book group I wanted to show this version
but because that's the state of the book
1984 it was published it's been handled
by a huge number of people I get emails
we all get emails regularly people
asking us for information about matrix
and that to show you how many people
took it out I mean from my point of view
maybe this beautiful beautiful kind of
remnant of a book what's currently out
of print and which we have every
intention of getting back on screen if
you want to pay a hundred fifty quid you
can you're welcome to buy a copy and and
then I just wanted to talk about what
was in the book practice but it was a
moment particularly a moment where
opportunities arose the worth left-wing
filmmakers for which was trying to put
new kinds of programs out so for example
and this is a which has lots of
interviews with it's about women in the
city in Birmingham which talked to a lot
of women involved in that period and
different feminist activities and
activism which matrix with 1 and this
Petraglia
is an thorne who went on to run around
practice still runs around practice
talking to the client of Jagan re which
is one of the key buildings that they
did in that period and finally just
because I wanted to
[Music]
you're trying to pin down this so it was
kind of part it kind of grown ungrown
really for a bit and then politics
changed all sorts of things made it much
harder to operate in a way that we were
able to Julia just in terms of simple
historical fact I think I I wasn't
really intended to talk about matrix as
a kind of narrative about the practice
in details we've only three minutes so
so it very quickly so a book was written
with Josh showed and then some people
decided to set up a practice and it was
absolutely brilliant here hearing Andrea
merits discussion about the opposite
called the open practice was it the open
the open design office in Boston that
happened in the period before matrix
began matrix began around the end of the
1970s where the open design office was
doing very very similar asking very very
similar questions like what would it be
like if we set up a practice that was
entirely women what would we do how
would we make that practice work and we
didn't know about them I mean it's just
extraordinary all we had we've had as
just said we knew about feminist
anthropologists apparently I didn't know
about them but the truth founders of
matrix were three women sue Francis
friend Rachel and form did and they had
actually conference here called women
and women in space and some people of
course thought it was about astronauts
it was that period but it was actually
in influenced by feminist
anthropologists who were doing that kind
of work the kind of work that we didn't
have a name for and also as Laurie said
volume 11 of heresies which was American
publication about women in architecture
and these are like it's almost like some
is that they were precious print medium
things that we know we didn't know
anything about Boston we didn't know a
lot so we embarked on exactly the same
experiment just a few years after the
architects in Boston and I was just
using this talk as a time to reflect on
what we did rather than go through all
of the things that happened and looking
back over the 12 15 years of matrix's
existence from about 1982 sometime i'll
1992 and the things that I was drawing
out and for this event I decided that we
decided that we would be interested in
the tactics that were adopted given the
conditions of the time that were
mutating through that decade and they
were and they were feminist tactics so
the first was this idea of exemplary
which is not a self congratulatory thing
although it's not completely great word
but it is a good word because we were
trying to provide an example more to
ourselves anybody else about how you
made best practice and you did it root
and branch you you you redesign practice
in every on every level I shown a few
images of things that I just found you
know in the bottom of the draw and
bottom of box just as this is a
corollary to all of this which is where
are we going to put all this stuff later
and this has been a running discussion
in the conference so far and that's a
clip from building design building
design the trade paper for the
for architects in the UK did a series on
women architecture or new practices
actually women in architecture and
that's a very embryonic matrix in the
third image to your to your right we set
up in someone's front room and of course
what we did was we formed a co-op
because that's what you did we went and
talked to an another embryonic
architectural co-op case nerve and we
found out from him how you made a coup
and then we made a co-op and then we did
lots of other things I don't know I mean
lots of things the sorts of things at
the Boston women did experimental with
that we didn't know about like equal pay
relatively flexible working hours on
that flex for but relatively a really
conscious practice around how we went to
building sites and I'll go on talk about
the way work with clients but we also
felt it our duty to write to the paper
when things came up so this is an
example but because we were an exemplary
practice to ourselves and and it became
clear also to other people so we needed
to take on their many many artists that
came into building design taking
exception to this series on women in
architecture why are women doing this
year why it was a very long one and I
haven't clipped here which is about
women really needed to pay attention to
the next generation and not be
architects such trusting architects we
didn't think we were very thrusting but
and that was a woman so you know we felt
as her we wrote that we needed to you
know address fundamental questions
concerning the philosophy behind design
we must challenge those questions and
all of those things so thus spoke some
very young people and we got on with it
so just the first tactic was this notion
of addressing practice routine branch
the next one is one aspect of that I
supposes we we set out only to work for
publicly funded projects and so that's
this notion of selectivity who
what clients we address we didn't do lot
of conversions we didn't do private
housing we didn't borrow from the rich
to pay for the poor that the Boston
collective did so that's a difference
and there was a climate just about in
London which allowed us to survive for a
while doing that kind of work so you see
a social housing project there jagan re
which is a building where the client was
a group of Asian women who wanted a
woman own east facing in Whitechapel a
nursery building and Southwark for the
council and sort of the statement about
of our intent so and then there was very
very much the notion of enabling so we
that another difference with Boston was
that we were able to get a lot of money
I guess from the GLC where London
Council at the time the Women's
Committee listened so to enable
technical aid for grooming women's
groups or groups that benefited women so
we did many many many projects all in
Greater London to help people to put in
applications for funding for building
changes and then there was this thing
about the word instructive we we were
firstly always engaged in discussing
what a building process was with our
clients and doing classes around drawing
with scale drawing all kinds of tactics
around involving people in the building
process and we also were aware of the
legacy we needed to leave in the form of
printed books once the Greater London
council which was then led by Ken
Livingstone would was was closed down by
Maggie Thatcher well-known event so we
left the legacy in terms of printed
material as well and we the two big
projects were a guidebook if you like
very unfashionable it was even
unfashionable then but we decided we
need to do it around building buildings
for the under fives and also quite an
extensively for promoting a career in
the whole in building in the
environment so we covered all we're very
very clear that architecture wasn't eat
it was only one of many things and you
could also be a woman builder or a
surveyor or anything like that but there
me needed to be walk more wearing in all
those fields so that's what we did and
then the next thing I'm reflecting on I
suppose is also that's wrong okay so is
the tales if you like that lint the
threads that Lynn mentions which is of
course a natural word to use around the
sorts of things so the sorts of things
that these kinds of very ground up for
written brand sorts of experiments lead
to and I'm only going to just list very
quickly the things that are directly
directly connected with matrix not the
ripples not the discussion but the
things that occur to me pretty quickly
so publications and polemics you can't
see the text there but it's a series of
demands by women academics for how to
improve architectural education in
architecture school so it's a list of
demands I won't go through them now
there isn't time but they're pretty good
actually they still apply of course
networks and events so a whole raft a
ripple of networks that all of us were
involved with it to different degrees
started to happen in the period after
the end of matrix and 'wipeys including
some organizations like women in manual
trades the Fran Bradshaw was a
bricklayer and she was very much
involved with manual trades feminist
architects networked women architects
for equal representation wafer didn't
remember that and that's a little crop
there's a legible clock there of a leaf
that was given when people like Lynn
organized a meeting with the Labour MPs
at the house of parliament to discuss
the inadequacy of the new design the
parliamentarian officers that Hopkins
were were working on at the time their
incredible engagement with their with a
group of politicians who were not yet in
power and so on and
contemporary organizations groups like
taking place which is a group of
academics and artists some of them are
here which is carried on questioning
form and content around issues to a
feminism space and so on and all kinds
of other brute architects for Health
Association who need technical aid
centers new practices
I haven't listed that linked practice
I've just listed practices people set up
and so on architects witness design
sense and then teaching some of the
feminist practices specifically the
women into architecture and building
course that was set up by von Dean it
was at the AAA and then taken on by Sir
Francis Lynn Lynn Walker taught on it
and all kinds of other people and that
got a whole generate well quite a few
years of women students into what is now
London met going through that going
through those courses and changed
completely the demographic of
architecture students at that university
foundation course medical architecture
research unit sue Francis evening train
evening classes are women builders we
found that we couldn't get women
builders to work on projects because
they didn't know how to cost things and
they didn't know about building
regulations and so on so we did classes
for them and then research which is an
ongoing sort of fall out if you like or
connect a connected sorts of
developments since since matrix thank
you so I'm the first to say you thank
you Lynne first project which I was
already able to point out this wasn't an
unbuilt project because perhaps one
reason the market one of the many
reasons must hasn't managed to be star
architect
is that our very first project as a
feasibility study for the museum women's
art and so we worked hard on our
feasibility study and this is the model
of our thinking and after three months
work the organization who were setting
up just around the first lottery funding
we came back with our conclusion which
was they didn't need a building and they
shouldn't have a building because to
enclose women's art in another structure
would be to perpetrate what have been
going on historically so um yeah that so
it's all explained in the book and also
like say so I'm here representing math
ironically enough and beautifully enough
the studio all 12 of them are drawing
because there's a deadline we have to do
have here we have Sarah Hershey wave Mel
got 97 Helen Thomas and Alcatraz in
different ways members of the studio and
and our and collaborators so who isn't
here Juliet be good I'm glad to say we
are collaborating again and sadly the
late Kath Shan field who you know made
such fantastic work and writing and so I
think each moment was important is to
think of the way the overlaps is not
that each individual practice and I
think going back to the conference so
far the danger of the monograph is to
assume this sort of contained tidy
organization of history but perhaps what
is particular is the time which one
works in and so muff was set up in
during conservative government there's
no such thing as society and there's
also no such thing as funding public
space we
sets muffle set up to make space to make
work and I personally was very clear I
was pregnant at the time that I would
never work again and that was the last
year that I worked last year six years
at the AAA was the year my first child
was born but we are also making a space
to explore the overlaps between our
practice and architecture and conceptual
art practice of questioning limits and
and eccentrically enough establishing
like matrix that we weren't going to do
domestics which is a word that describes
both architectural commissions and and
murders and so this is the this was only
a card for this year of that idea that
we are complicit the project are loaded
and if we're going to frame us work
within histories of feminism and think
about intersectionality and privilege
and that I too had free school dinners
but I'm also in a place of privilege and
how do we when we find ourselves in
projects and complicit establish where
we make the compromises in order to make
a contribution which and and we do it
through unsolicited research the work
that isn't in the brief we just like
matrix bring the tools that we have at
our hands so this is not hard drawing
this is the sort of compromise project
the muff finds ourselves in so making
the public realm framework for this
study and this was our first offering so
this is our drawing and after that came
a complete dismantling of that most
gloutch now no longer exists and a year
later offering something else up simply
good work requires an accuracy but the
dangers projects get bigger where do you
find yourself you know how can you make
that Clifford gets feet hanging out if
you're with the developer
and if you are as an agent of
expensiveness in that privilege you know
where where do you expand the brief and
we simply do it by making sure that
we'll always have a wedge and I'll
pocket nice frequent and stay in the
room long enough and I think I was found
love have matured as we get to getting
sacked later in projects unlike say the
dome stay there long enough to make use
of that privilege and in doing so begin
to change the meaning of the situation
and the brief and so this is a nice
little slide from 69 the crashes in the
director's office and of course all that
means is is the baby under the table
which reframes the desk as the playpen
and to be really awaits the fact that
we're now in year nine of austerity so
in 2008 I met a project manager on site
to discuss a new park and she got a note
on her blackberry to say she'd lost her
job we went to the pub and said that was
that was the beginning of austerity and
so all these the projects that we have
in the studio are in different ways time
trying to create those great spaces make
things public this is the drawing that's
on the desk at the moment and it's
simply a street they're going back to
matrix and the road and who's on the
road here widening the space the
pedestrian squeezing the cars
introducing the same web and drainage so
as to make the water sweet so that less
fish die or wedding the door open to
make invitations those not invited I'm
representing two people so I'm still on
time and now
moving into Julia's period but I never
stopped before she does I'd like to do
this first like and so this was the
invitation from the VNA was to take part
in an exhibition which they had named
all this belongs to you
we invited women for fu G women to test
the edges you know push like in a room
in the dark
pushing the furniture till it falls over
and we had to threaten to leave the
project when we were told that the
Solidarity quilt couldn't come in and
and it did come in unless the table or
barking Town Square you know an attempt
to make a new public space for the best
and worst of days and to give dignity
mystery and an open endedness of meaning
beyond the sort of denote the fantasy of
it of cheerfulness and umbrellas this is
our new publication which is always in a
state of unread Enis and so but it's
live so you can you can buy chapters
it's a clock race and with Helen Thomas
and we recommend you just wait like two
weeks because it's just we've got to get
one the introduction in there but
there's a discounted rate till March so
hope you'll buy one thank you so much
and so we gotta tagged him um we just
wanted to thank Lynn and Elizabeth and
the rest of the team for the invitation
to come and present on this panel it's
extraordinary
to be here with two practices that we
have admired so much it's a great honor
and and parlour is different to the the
two practices that have been described
so fun so I think you know and I guess
the most obvious difference is that we
don't practice architecture but we do
like to think that we practice on
architecture
more old-fashioned use of the term to
deceive sao paulo was easier we come out
of a specific context we were founded in
2012 as an online advocacy and
publishing platform that was part of a
much larger university based research
project into women in architecture again
i think because we were all going well
so what happened we thought it would all
be dealt with by now and it's not in
2015 we then became a formal nonprofit
organization again advocating for gender
equity and architecture and I think our
particular context that's given us the
kind of opportunities that we've found
is really the online and social media
environment and they've been absolutely
fundamental to building and mobilizing a
very active and diverse community that's
not bound by geography and there's
connected to a growing wave of feminist
activism and architecture across the
world so this operation within a digital
environment that doesn't have
geographical boundaries is one feature
that's remarked on to define fourth wave
feminism and now the key feature of this
phenomenon is data whether it's big data
small data institutional data data that
we've skived away from our slightly
dodgy online surveys anyway data
actually they do dodgy data so at power
one of our members Jill Matheson's
statistical analysis of architectures
gender gap has been crucial but also the
visualization of the data which feeds
into a contemporary sensibility about
the presence of data data analytics in
our everyday life but this visualization
of the shock findings of architectures
gender gap has galvanized and persuaded
many including gender skeptics for you
believe this but there are people who
actually don't think that architecture
has agenda problem we've met them we've
transformed them so we are also like to
think of ourselves as a collective and
participatory project quite different
matrix and muff but we would still see
ourselves in those terms we operate in
the space between research and action
and between scholarly and practice based
knowledge we've worked very hard to
embed questions and issues of gender
equity at the centre of discussions
about the future of the profession we
ran a event some years ago called
transform altering the future of
architecture where we asked if
architecture was more inclusive would it
also be in a stronger position and of
course we think the answer's yes
so rather than locating conversations
about gender to the margins of the
profession we would want to claim that
these questions are fundamental to
transforming architectural practice in
the mainstream as well so like good
1970s feminists we provide dy I tools
for change I wanted Yano I will say the
wrong way I wanted them to have this
very retro macrame feel but we've gone
for high-quality designed by Katherine
Griffiths the tan parlour guides for
equitable practice encourage
institutions employers and employees to
attend to the work and labour practices
of architecture the guides provide
concrete tangible information on a range
of issues from pay to flexible work they
are written in user friendly language
and demonstrate the different forms of
agency and roles available for changing
the labor practices of our profession so
we do lots and lots of things and
a small snippet but one of the things
that we try to do with through the
statistics but also through rather more
kind of these are these other tools to
reveal the complexity that's already
within the profession and the practice
the personnel and the practice of
architecture but there's really very
rarely visible at all and they either
the public image of the profession or
indeed that the image that the
profession has of itself so we we really
are a platform we try and provide a
quite a wide range of spaces to speak
which is a play on the name parlor which
dr. burns came up with so we've been
running these things called seasonal
salons which are really just a kind of
conversation between two women at
different stages of the careers and
they're quite informal and intimate we
have guests Instagram hosting every week
we have a different host and we would
really love it if any of you interested
in doing that and these neither of those
things are very heavily briefed in fact
they're really under briefed it's just
here's a platform what would you do with
it and as a knitter so that's quite
confronting but it's good we've got a
Marian's list which is this online
register of women in the built
environment and that's really the first
time we're explicitly saying well it's
not just women and architectures women
in the built environment so every time
we make a complaint about something for
example the all-male panel was she known
quite good at complaining about that we
try to also offer a kind of way for so
we can complain about the all-male panel
because we can point people to Marian's
list because quite frankly I got really
sick of people ringing me up and yeah we
need a woman and she said no and who
else can we have so I saw Wade I guess
but always trying to find these various
tools and opportunities that other
people can get on board and help make a
change so yeah we're trying to provide
the profession with evidence of its own
diversity and the mean
to activate that diversity thank you so
much everyone and I think I think we'll
just given the hour open it up to the
floor please put your hand up and have
your questions ready shaken but not
stirred
yes hi I'm Jenna this is in relevant but
and before I ask my question it's such
an honor to be in the same room as all
of you and all of you as a younger
female architect and who is Marian
Marian Marian is Marian mani Griffin who
was Walter Burley Griffin's
partner and business and life designer
of Canberra the capital of Australia
very influential and frank lloyd
wright's studio karen can tell a lot
more about man she also wore a something
she was she came out of Chicago which is
a really important town for radical
social thinking around urbanism and by
no coincidence it's Obama's hometown as
well this is amazing history of urban
organizing and so they which she was
connected into social movements and
feminism and then in 1911 Sharon Walter
Burley Griffin won the international
competition to design the new federal
capital of Australia and they designed
it in a really interesting way based on
an American model of participatory
democracy so the building at the at the
center of the top of Capitol Hill was a
people's space where where there was a
space for people to speak and citizens
to engage in the democratic process so
we wanted to brand this idea of a
digital register of women
an environment with a particular name
and for all of those reasons it made
sense Miriam was very connected into the
Suffragette movement in Chicago and then
she when she moved to Melbourne she was
able to maintain those connections and
connect into the local suffragette
organizing she and Walter were against
the first world war so they worked
unusual in Australian Armitage which was
terribly conservative that they were
radical social organizers and they had
this idea of participatory democracy in
this space to speak so we named the list
after her even though she's not an
Australian we as we do we adopted her
and like we do with New Zealanders and
we claim that as our own and the other
thing is for a long time she was this
remarkable drawer and for a long time
that there was a sort of assumption that
she'd just done the drafting it was all
really Walters ideas so it also I
suppose there's a large effort to
reclaim her as well and to put the idea
of the partnership which can't
necessarily be disentangled you know at
the center of that model but that's a
good question
so we name everything we spend quite a
lot of time debating about what the
names of things terran as it should be -
because it's part of the intellectual
branding of the projects and this is
very important so I think in Australia
Miriam is pretty it's a pretty
recognizable name straightaway the
people you know not actually not
everyone knows but we assumed it's also
you know it relates to Emily's less this
sort of
matrix because tomorrow listen young
young generation is a new album speaking
and there are other fledgling
organizations in London like this but
they make the kind of they work they
work all day and do you think matrix
could have made the work without grants
so all of it was public funded but they
weren't Gras it wasn't I mean
grants the clients are like you the
month and Women's Committee so the
technical aid there was there was about
40,000 which got lot then a year for
technical aid lot of money there was
about it was I think it was it was less
than half of the being heart as a
practice so the rest of the practice was
getting money but it was all public
funding and so other people making grant
applications for their buildings to do
that too and and actually it's very true
to say that some of it was just regular
housing housing corporations now Housing
Association stuff like that so people so
yeah probably 60% or so of the work
wasn't directly grant funded and 40%
wants only for period isn't it more yeah
we should have be shouting for it we
have been known in a way this will have
an exchange is an example about the way
that women have not supported each other
to kind of think about like moving
forward speaking loudly for what's
needed and the way that's paid we think
about the GLA housing design guidance
although they enshrined some things make
you know that there is very little work
being done about the interior
but lies are using lorem love seems very
good at getting public funding for your
projects I mean from local authorities
projects where the funding comes from
commercial development it's a 106's
these deals with the devil
cross subsidized by us effectively we
like the little we because of the
absorption in the fees that are
competitively established that they're
going to be done then fast and dance
away so yeah I mean I do think the
money's incredibly important and I think
it was a moment in London because of the
GLC because of Ken Livingstone because
the Women's Committee where funding was
there and the word technical aids and
all that so and and I think the sort of
funding sources now are quite different
I think the possibilities of
crowdfunding are actually rather
wonderful consuming and time-consuming
well actually applying for grants uses
ovarian I don't assuming it wasn't just
they said Oh give you the money you had
to you know it was a competitive process
but but I was gonna say I think that
part of that was that the world real
activist networks and again you know you
have to think a world with no social
media so how those activist networks
communicated and how that kind of got
spread but I think that those sorts of
opportunity so I do think the money I
think it's really key the money but I
think the think was fantastically strong
what Julie shone really really well is
it just expanded into all these
different things because that was
possible there was a kind of there was a
whole set of different activist
movements that did did collaborate and
so you had a kind of energy that you
could build up
managed to argue for the context trip so
making the embeds the Museum of London
to do a copy of archaeological dig
perhaps have a leak so that when the
brief isn't sufficient to in some way
reflect the situational in then finding
the ways of means to enrich it I think
we're also in a moment of resurgent
social activism across a whole series of
domains and we have different ways of
organizing people now which are
non-physical and that that you know is
that has positives and negatives as well
but it does really enable these
transnational connections and if you
think about the campaign around the
Pritzker Prize for Denise
Scott Brown you know it's an
extraordinary instance of a global
feminist campaign in architecture
we had a question that was brewing
before you invited that laser butt and
thank you very much I am picking up the
question of the public and the question
for today that you raised Liza in
relation to the 90 late 1970s when
public is you know what is it now and I
suppose it was more thinking about the
reflection of names we've got Mary Ann
with what Ethel we've got this
reclaiming and very very careful
thinking that parler exemplified and yet
we've got absolute facelessness and in
terms of the public and the you know the
patrons is it's not the right term but
the responsibility where is the
responsibility and how do we navigate
that in a world where we are actually
taking a lot of responsibility as making
the built environment and actually being
very you know very spoken about that and
yet we're meeting developers you know
kind of agencies in all the sort of
space of global capital that evades that
constantly I just would be interested in
some comment on that time constraints
we've just finished a project at Easter
a corporate landscape where we made you
know a little a little you know there
are both formally making outside rooms
making explicit the presence of children
with the just so simply tiny
and overtly in terms of the degree of
lateral control of a water fountain to
have free water you know these are a
tiny little dress clothes and each one
is a fight and an argument for it and is
not heroic I mean not muffler invites
him to Vienna as a keynote speaker a
really good conference called crisis or
critique and don't make it look fun they
make it the creative Liza this is
designing your way out of these
limitations because we're almost in that
rubbish place that London's in and so I
have framed the stalkers the ghost of
Christmas future that if you think the
energy on puts in to make the space more
public if you put able to put that
energy into the making of the space how
good that would be so I think this is
continuing tassel to be political and
it's exciting you know at this moment in
London sadhika said we want good growth
then what does that mean to have
development tempered with experience as
mastermind advocates kind of what can we
do to argue case I think one of the
things that Paula does is some we can
test the public realm of architecture so
this is the realm in which
representations circulate of the
profession and its goals and its
membership and we know that that image
has been complicit with austerity and
their liberalism and design for the 1%
and Paula shows us the kind of everyday
life of many many women architects who
do fine work there's a big tradition in
Australia still of public realm work of
commitment to civic
small-scale practices domestic practices
and it's about contesting the dominant
image that's handed down to us the
idealization of star architecture when
the reality is that most people's lives
and practices in their professional
careers are very different and
contribute something really different so
it's very humble but it's kind of in a
way in its own gentle ways taking on
that that giant of representation I mean
you see that just kind of grew and grew
and grew that's exactly what happened to
us I mean we set up a website for a
research project and that kind of went
feral on us which is you know a great
thing but I was going with really my
mind's gone blank I'm very sorry I'm
sure you will remember yeah I will I
will make my my comment if I may I have
to say first that I am absolutely
delighted to see the culture of
architecture that is happening here I
feel that I can be a little bit more at
ease with this planet I have to make a
comment though from what Lisa just said
about the hambo the humble acts that one
can you know fight for and you mentioned
you mentioned children and you you
mentioned water fountains to do to be
present in public space but the thing is
that we are in a very difficult position
at the moment where these little humble
apps have been co-opted also for comfort
by corporations and and and you know
granaries crap it's just the main
example of these by which the image of
children in masses during the summer
playing with the fountains with the
water legitimizes the privatization of
public space so my question and my
comment is
how do you think that we could enter
into a process of negotiation that
doesn't necessarily have to come from
upfront confrontation with these
processes of privatization through
little humble acts but what what do you
think that could be done beyond that to
interfere in a space and in a Polock
reality which is already done and
delivered through architectural design
yes making some efforts there
well I am I am I am actually doing a
research project when you take route
that Instagram to demonstrate how
absolutely to go interfere with it I
mean co-option you know we look at our
practice it happens continuously and
faster and faster and faster I really
love granary square but I almost think
you know if you look this is a winter
and how pathetic it is tragically talk
about it at least that moment when it's
taken over by 200 crates children who do
live over the road in this state at
least they're taking over and we can
think of other places where because of
context what's going on in housing that
they are sitting those families would be
nice elation and there wouldn't be
anyone living next door and in a way
that the battle is to protect mix tenure
housing in the center of the city so
that there are some children to take
over the the gestures you know could the
corporate space and in the sense that is
the slide of the pressures you know in
the director's office is if we can
through planning or through
influence or through being in the room
to make the argument that we make the
adjacencies that pleasures can be stoned
them and I think that that's where its
spatial scale the city is is too big is
to meet I think we have to expand our
practice beyond spatial design it's
actually got to be about policy lobbying
belonging to particular political
parties like it it can't be that idea
that somehow the intervention is only
going to happen through a design
intervention then you fight out this
battle in design terms it's exactly what
you're saying you've got a bear in the
room you've got to be doing boring
things which are incredibly important
like changing policy but I mean I I
think was really interesting because I
think you do all those you know we've
all talked about just try all these
things because of the because of the
public option so it's always going to
happen and it's always reset wardens who
sit back and that's just the nature of
the beast and it's fine um I think I
mean I was interesting for me in what I
feel is a change in how I've come to
understand what I do from the early days
of matrix is seeing how important it is
to really I think matrix was very
interested in changing processes so I
think we were always doing that we were
always getting asked you know what does
the feminist architecture look like it's
like actually we don't care that isn't
the point but it would be the perpetual
question and I think for me it's that
thing about everyday practices about
everyday social and social practices
which again it's a common shift you know
that people thinking more in that way
but for me there's a you know the way
that that muff and Ariza about it's
talking about it as a practice not as a
designed thing and if we look at them as
design things all we'll see is the image
being co-opted and it's not the image
even though that's what we do as anybody
in the building art is we're obsessed
with the something about the
representational home but actually
really what we should be affective
assessed by all the everyday practices
and all the processes above that in
terms of how architecture and the
building are the built environment
professions work and how we can intrude
how we can intrude in different ways and
I think it is often it is small things
but it is also events it is also it's a
kind of it's it's an action it's a set
of actions it's not about the things and
the end is never about the things so I
only have a call out if there are some
whose babies is so energized but is but
it can be about things because you can
make things there's a sense of too hard
to reproduce so in the case of the funny
in barking because it was made by hand
in the situation where everything was
designed build it is difficult to co-opt
it because it's crumbly it's made out of
many different pieces the food by hand
and so in doing so it's difficult to
take that away like to take away those
that embodied experience and I think
that that is something that we're trying
to do more more in the wedding open the
door Katherine's big practice at the
moment is working with the readiness for
work organization and just making ways
that mainly young men have experiences
that can't be taken away from them in
the act of making so I suppose the you
know there are other modes of thinking
formerly of what's made like the spaces
that are made and how they're made and
perhaps bringing in a durational
approach of how long they take to mean
I also think social change takes a long
time you know and you have to be
committed to it long term and that means
you have to wear the periods where the
forces of evil take over and you've got
to have tactics for survival as well and
you have to be committed to long-term
change but also none of us are working
in any current in some kind of pure
environment where you know we're all
kind of free of compromise and
contingency and you know we all and
different people have different skills
and different abilities to work in
different contexts and so one of the you
know in Australia so many people I know
are going will you know practices is one
option but going into government going
you know client side as they call it
because they see an opportunity to
affect change in different kinds of ways
and I think one of the things we've been
trying to do is to say all of this is a
kind of mode of practice and that you
know they're very conventional
institutionalized idea for an architect
is incredibly narrow and obviously you
guys are um you know really challenging
that but there are other probably less
overtly visible ways to challenge that -
and I mean the biggest reaction we got
when we when we launched was oh it's not
just me and I think just building that
sense of of collective identity through
lots of very different ways of operating
is quite important again I also want to
thank you all for being here it's
fantastic to have you all in the room
together and I think one of the things
just listening to you made me think
about where scales of engagement and
thinking about the micro and the macro
and because some of you have a longer
time frame to think about your impact of
work some are much more recent I'm
curious how you think about scales of
engagement and whether through time it's
become something you think about as
having a far ranging impact versus
dealing with the the day to day
to make change and thinking about the
problem problem izing the profession at
the at the moment that you're working
versus a kind of longer trajectory and
if if that longer trajectory is more
because you've had time to think about
it versus you know when I found the
parlor site a few years ago and it was
exactly that reaction of oh my god
there's someone around the world who is
actually thinking about the same things
I am
like what kind of scales of impact do
you hope to have versus that you know
you're working out on a daily basis
because I think those are different ways
that we operate or potentially can
operate now I'm they down just did
fiddling they're gone so I've been
involved in teaching for a long time now
and the kind of practice that I've been
doing has mutated into working
collaboratively with either other
architects and taking place and
academics or with artists and so that
the so I was just thinking about where
public is and there's granary square but
and there's CSM but but but and that's
that CSM just for example which is next
to Randy square is also a place where
public things happen and where I teach
also for me is the extension of the
public realm actually because the
students are although yes the
universities are now semi are the
competitive organizations and they're
run by counsel they're still very much
within operating within a government
unlike this place within the government
context and the students that we have a
large proportion for example
first-generation University
first-generation British blah blah blah
it's commonly the case in many of the
architecture schools in the UK and so
for me the the place of public is
actually in my tea
practice partly and in how I think about
what I say how I do what I do in that
place both in in the studio and in
talking about professional practice for
example and ways in which one might
question practice yeah so and then
working collaboratively in a very small
way not necessarily making work
sometimes making work we taking place
did some work in perinatal unit in a
hospital in Hackney and they're very
small they're very collaborative and
also very very much arising from
discussions with the communities around
that unit that that's where for me is
happening and I think of those places as
public I'm not engaged in private work
for the messinian domestic spaces
probably include individuals very much I
have done it but I've got to say but
generally I think the place of teaching
in state universities if you like is a
sudden extension of the public could we
have maybe one more question
oh good question so just like really
going on celebrating Helens place here
but the dot the the so called book I
described is actually the dotted names
are collaborators in there now could
find herself find herself and then you
know you click and if it's a good but
then you get the website of that person
and you know that person that that
person will see ya as Allison and so you
know this is the recognition that muff
doesn't make money
because we spend any extra goes back
into the unpaid part of the project so
although we're very proud that we offer
greater than the minimum maternity
benefits and we offer flexible working
we can't offer a succession you know all
we can offer is this extremely hard time
you know but I have a hard set of
experiences but what is joyful is that
when we look at that there's a lot of
practices there's people like safety
handler who or leash at and while he was
work in the office
that's unsolicited extra work became
develops of PhDs and they formed careers
I think I didn't know yeah I was gonna
say exactly the same thing in response
to that question which was the same
thing that was coming into my head about
impact and legacy partly because it's
about a different set of frameworks that
might give off into the world different
sorts of references and influence and
maybe Liza said it in respect to muff
which I was thinking of the diagram as
well that many people move through a
practice that happens in every sort of
professional practice but I do think the
difference with the practices may be in
front are a different sort of legacy
there is quite sort of I guess
seismic in terms of a influence but also
freeing and let's say generous in what
it might take you on to that's certainly
my experience and I just maybe maybe
each could answer that but I think if
you think about normal forms of practice
and the competitiveness of the job of
jobs and the profession how do the table
think that their prayer sort of forms of
practice give a different sort of legacy
that might change or is it influential
because ultimately this issue of what's
influential is really important for
things to change I was just gonna say in
response to Laurie I mean one of the
things that keeps me going is the sense
that I'm part of a tradition like and
that's why feminist history in the
history of action left action and
feminist action is so important because
when I'm overwhelmed by the prospect of
change I know that I'm part of a much
longer-term social movement but I think
one of the things that Paula has done
around that sense of scale and agencies
that it redistributes the instruments of
agency so a lot of what happens is that
ideas and tangible ideas for change are
then distributed across various people
in the profession who then go on and
take them on in in all sorts of ways so
instead of just this small organization
doing it on their own it's it's really
about that collective so mal was they
the unemployable disappointment seminar
at CSM so I think that there is these
they get this give and take and the
recognition of the huge investment
people may have in opposites but they're
actually in order to make make this work
and make your work and and yet how
enough in a one-act notice the other but
so if you go to theory and it's exchange
here the game that's held on to becomes
a curse but once it's handed on it it's
a bill I think that's very distinctive I
mean my experience of that is it's it's
highly distinctive as a sort of
practicing profession that's different
it's not well it's often the
competitiveness or privilege of other
forms of professional practice
architectural practice are totally
different and that should be I guess
more for grounded or understood because
it's the sort of
a really influential yet small-scale I
just wanted to ask you something I kind
of it's a really really informative
point it's really good but I was also
thinking the thing is I what's brilliant
about some of the things we're talking
about is that is informal women's
networks and that we're with it one of
the things you know we talked often
about spreading beyond the profession
and not just being within architecture
but the truth is this you know with
matrix to the things you make contacts
you make networks and and those are
strong women's networks and I suppose I
would think the only difference is that
traditional practice within architecture
he's a gentlemen's club and there's
loads of male networks and they support
each other and they give each other work
you know if I look at my facebook feet
the men are always saying really nice
things about other men but they never
say anything nice about a woman maybe
the people that are on my facebook I can
tell you who they are I just know I just
wanted to say in response to that look
that the thing that Paula does that I
think is interesting that you all do as
well as we don't hoard information it's
really about information sharing and
that old idea that that's how you
empower people knowledge is power so you
put put the tools together for them give
them the toolkit they go into the world
and they do it and it multiplies I know
we're just just a minute why wants to
say is I just think that well today
we've talked about many different topics
and one of them was Ken looking at how
women traditionally like things that
they don't always care but then how
that's devalued and what I like about
what I worked at mas and I'm still
involved in laughs and I have mentoring
from off not to be Gashi but but but I I
think that's really important that women
don't in a way overly masculine like the
masculinity so to become so the
idealized version of a man where it's
like I'm going to be tough I'm not going
to I'm going to
super masculine in order to make it in a
man-made environment but too valuable
actually women are and what we
biologically are sort of like I would
like to say program to do and give that
value and just like showcase that and
say yeah we do care about each other and
we can build networks and if we help
each other then eventually you know we
could be on a level playing field and
then just value that in oh my my little
architecture summer school yeah I don't
know about me but yeah well from someone
who comes from as a woman but another
thing that hasn't been discussed is a
woman of color I I feel that
architecture is not very as we all know
diverse no no interest in terms of sex
the in terms of race and class and
economic backgrounds so when I was
interested in once I finished my
architecture summer school well my
architecture education was itself a
summer school for teenagers and young
people to get them to sort think about
design as a as a something that they can
go into that they probably never heard
about so I I myself wanted to build a
network and they make use of the network
that I had built with like and the
network their lives and I have together
you know with end people a month and
just further that and be more generous
in the in terms that I would who could
who could actually see architecture as a
viable career no thank you very much for
that and on that note of legacy and
change I think it's a very good time to
thank our panel hours
ya know and to thank the audience for
their participation and questions and we
could obviously go on a lot longer but
we have to stop sometime and I think
it's now it's a good time thank you very
much thank you
[Applause]
