good morning everyone good morning I'm
absolutely delighted to be able to
welcome you to the a a xx 100 women and
architecture in context 1917 to 2017 I
had to think about that one is where
really it's so wonderful to see so many
old friends email friends people who
have come from afar we have people from
Kenya from Australia from Sweden from
North London now we haven't we have a
wide range of kind of local global
talent here today and we're just
delighted that you've all come for this
major event which is the culmination of
four years of sort of commemoration
exploration research writing and this we
hope will put a real critical edge on
our considerations and and research over
the last three or four years so thank
you very much for coming
we're absolutely delighted to have you
here and I just it's my job to introduce
my co convenors Elizabeth darling who's
a co curator of a ixx 100 Elizabeth is
based at Oxford Brookes Sarah Turner
with our we're partnering with the paul
mellon sinner and sarah has been a
fantastic partner and friend throughout
the the process so thank you Sarah for
coming and manage a ver gaze a who we
say without manage a this would not have
happened and I want to just recognize
her
[Music]
so I will just ask all of the people
I've just mentioned the conveners to say
a couple of words just what to add my
welcome to lens it's really great to see
you all here and to be part of this
conversation which we're going to have
over the next two and a half days I've
just got a couple of thank-yous or one
primary thank you which is the Society
of architectural historians of Great
Britain kindly supported ten student
places for the conference as part of its
remit to encourage and expand the
discipline of architectural history so I
would welcome the students who have
those places and encourage them to join
the society to expand its female
membership and to encourage the society
to understand architecture as widely as
possible
now I also invite you to haven't already
to look around the exhibition while
you're here
and to add your comments to the visitors
book that would be fantastic
and the catalog for the exhibition or
the accompanying book I should say is
also available during the conference one
at a very bargain price that's my bit
much my name is Sarah Turner I'm the
Deputy Director for research at the poor
man in the Centre for studies in British
art and we're based on the north side of
Bedford Square at number 16 and I look
forward to welcoming you out there today
for lunch
and for our drinks reception in the
evening and tomorrow will be also
hosting one of the panels it's been an
enormous privilege to collaborate with
such an important project and to really
a XX has kicked off a collaboration
between the AAA and the PMC and for that
I'm enormous ly grateful and I think
actually working together and
collaboration and friendship is going to
be an important theme
running out throughout these three days
and so we've put it into practice in
Bedford Square and I look forward to
talking to many of you over the next few
days and seeing those conversations grow
but just to add my thanks to Lynne to
Elisabeth to manage a and the team here
for being absolutely wonderful partners
and providing us with such an
intellectually stimulating project to
work on together I just sort of echoing
what everyone has said it's just really
exciting for me as an a graduate and
current employee of the AAA it's so
exciting to be here and see everyone
here to kick off these the conference
that we've been planning for so many
years and I guess my role here is just
really start the whole event by
introducing our two amazing speakers for
the first talk so the opening keynote to
welcome everyone to the conference is by
two very inspiring women in architecture
and the interim director Samantha
Harding Ham and ARMM co-founder Sadie
Morgan the title of this morning's
conversation is being first which
reflects the fact that they've often
been pioneers in their achievements
breaking new ground for women in
architecture which is both exciting but
also makes us question why it has taken
so long for women to be able to
contribute and be recognized in such
varied ways within architecture and it's
related disciplines so to give you a
short introduction to at their
impressive careers to date this is very
brief summary and in the slideshow and
in the conversation you'll hear more
about it
Samantha Harding Ham was an A student
and has subsequently taught across
nearly every part of the school since
2008 she's chaired our undergraduate
manage committee a management committee
as well as being a member of our senior
management team and then she was
appointed the interim director last
academic year she's an architectural
writer editor and curator her most
recent and celebrated work is the
award-winning two volume anthology which
if you haven't seen you definitely
should in our bookshop
Cedric price works 1952 to 2003 a
foreword minded retrospective published
jointly by the a and the
CCA which we launched in this very room
around the same time last year
and it's especially momentous that she
is interim director and the centenary of
women being admitted to study at the AAA
as she is the first-ever women director
of the school
Sadie Morgan was just 26 when she set up
her practice Dr mmm that as recently as
Tuesday evening was awarded the 2017
RIBA Stirling Prize for their
redevelopment of Hastings pier she said
up Durham together with Alex Jericho and
Phillip Marsh and in 2013 was only the
fourth female president of the AAA
Council and she was the youngest
president we've had I think in 2016 she
was appointed professor at the
University of Westminster and awarded an
honorary Doctorate from London Southbank
University she was also named New London
of the year at the awards this year for
her work championing the importance of
design at the highest political level
including being one of the mayor's
design advocates for the GLA she's a
keen athlete and frequently participates
in everything from cycling to scaling
mountains to raise money for charity and
in 2012 she was the only female aboard
the winning GB sailing team for the
commodores Cup so please join me in
welcoming Sadie and Samantha to kick off
the ax
[Music]
can I come here just a phenomenal amount
of work has gone into preparing this
this day or these series of days so I
hope everybody really just thoroughly
enjoys them I you are going to see Enix
what you know I hear either whirring mr.
Waring yourself in two slides they begin
to go on I think some are related to
very much this alien I fear some might
be related to me so it'll be done to you
to figure out which is which I know when
they're exciting this is this has been
billed as a no I'm gonna get the sound
right because there's nothing worse if
the sound is wrong I've got pages of
writing this ad here I've got anything
so I uh yeah I just want to make sure
you can hear yeah see there you go
there's a good one
this has been billed as a conversation
but I think it might be a little bit of
an interview really but we'll see how it
goes and I have to say there's there is
a culture of this room I first sat in
this room thirty years ago as a first
year student exactly thirty years ago
almost a month and I was brought up in
this room where there was really much
less of a threshold between this part
and that part it was highly interactive
and I have noticed in more recent years
that is increasingly less interact it is
it's much less interactive so I would
encourage participation or round and so
I will be really I've got lots to ask
Sadie and I well you know one would be
the other way round but we'll go for
that but I really do encourage
everyone's to ask questions chip in as
and when please don't it's not rude its
audience participation
I think manager has given a really
pretty comprehensive overview of I've
certainly your career and certainly the
some of the highlights they are vast
actually and I went
I had the conversation about what we
might talk about I think it was it was
very apparent that actually the one
thing we do have in common we discovered
is that we both grew up in Kent we are
both good women of men at the Garden of
England so yes this is a very
international school but we happen to
come from a small part of England which
I thought was quite interesting and so I
thought I'm being in a mode where I just
more or less finished not that long ago
this work on Cedric price which is
wholly chronological I'm sort of in a
chronological mode and I think there's
something quite useful about that
particularly in that one of the things
that I know you've said Sadie in your
various comments I found that you've
written it that you advocate the
importance of design that connects
people back to place you and so I wanted
to start by asking you what connect
about connecting you back to at the
place where you started and where you
began and where you grow up and how
formative childhood is do you now do you
think yeah it's funny I think and I can
I sense there may be some formative
childhood snaps up there I I was brought
up in a commune in of all places Seven
Oaks which is sort of an athame of again
is that I think if my communist
grandfather picking the most touristy a
stronghold in in in the whole of the UK
but it it you know I spent a long time
thinking it didn't have much to do with
the the way in which I've I guess formed
and formulated my career in thinking but
actually it's totally fundamental and
the interesting thing about being bought
up in a place where your parents don't
have to be responsible for everything is
that you learn very quickly that you
need a group of people around you with
different perspectives and if you can
learn from those different perspectives
then you come out a feeling much better
about your self
because you can generally pick the
person who's gonna teach you the things
that you want to hear and and also have
a very clear sense of the importance of
looking after each other so I'll give
you a couple of examples there I I was 8
you know we had it was a set up by three
professional families and so they
decided that they would put all their
money into one large house and they
would all live live and eat together so
the rule was one room per person and my
grandfather was a psychiatrist and he
had a lot of gay and single mothers who
he would look after and throughout his
career we would have his patients come
and live within the community so he
actually did start care in the community
and he also believed very strongly that
women should be able to go out to work
so he had a nursery and I went to that
nursery and my mother went out to work
and as I grew up I was surrounded by a
nuclear physicist who lived above me so
I would always go and chat you know if I
had a problem with my homework I'd pop
up there if I needed to have a and
talk about sex I would go to the barmaid
who you know who lived in any flat you
know across the way and and if I you
know so it's probably best to stop there
we better yeah
but I also had a huge sense of
responsibility because from the age of
five or six I would come home and look
after my great-grandmother who by the
time she died was 111 oldest women in
Great Britain and not thanks to my care
it's like I you know I really just went
out there for the Marmite sandwiches but
you know I still feed the very elderly
lady who lives across the way every
Sunday night and and my children have
grown up understanding my two young
there they're my two young girls they're
not that young anymore
eighteen and twenty I have are the most
extraordinarily independent young women
who have know they judge nobody they are
completely capable haven't having
conversation with an old person or a
young person and it's a very special way
of growing up I think so you continue to
live in that way and in the common with
your own family yes I still listen and
never little ever left Neverland many
people keep pointing out to me at the
age of 48 slightly sad anyway yeah so I
still live there yeah well that's a good
and burnt I would say yeah I think it's
really interesting I mean it's a really
interesting social model as we move to a
you know in a place where we you know we
are gonna have a much more elderly
population we have a much more diverse
set of communities who are becoming very
fractured and how do we as a society
encourage generosity and how do we
encourage a sort of sense of community
that if we're not careful we lose and if
you look at what's happening around the
world it's quite frightening
mmm-hmm I mean I that would take me very
neatly into asking about many of the
housing projects that you've worked on
but I might hold back for a
we might come back to that because I'm
now kind of intrigued how how did you
then went and studied architecture only
subject areas it can just turn into yeah
and then I went to the RCA and did
architectural interiors there yeah and
how did because the decision to do that
was that something you knew you wanted
to do or was it a sort of thing I can do
it and I it's funny
I fell into it and I seem to fall into
most things and that might just be a
subconscious you know actually I
definitely want to do that I'm just
gonna find a different way of doing it
but I I studied art and physics and
biology and I because I hadn't studied
chemistry because even though I went to
a very good grammar school they didn't
know there was no ambition other than to
be a legal secretary as opposed to a
secretary so I actually didn't have the
combination of grades to go and be a
doctor or you know so I was a bit stuck
and no one really know knew ought to do
with me I'd go for my careers advice in
that alone I remember that thing I
didn't know whether it is about
something about anybody that ends up in
a school of architecture and now a
number of careers I was offered in I
think pig farmer I didn't get that was
such a combination fitted that I don't
know how art history led to pick man
yeah it is interesting how these things
I think those things that you know I
take heart and I think actually nowadays
it's very different you know nowadays
our young women are given really
different types of advice and they're
encouraged to you know go for
professions that we just you know no one
even considered that would be on offer
to to me so at that point was it was it
a case of finding something that you
enjoyed doing or was there somebody that
was sort of inspiring you to think
actually I'm really interested in design
well my father was an architect and came
to the AAA that had beard clue and my
mother a designer so I think that I've
always been in a family that believed
the design mattered so in in a sense
you're you know there's always huge
pressure to go to wards and academic
career and somehow if you do anything
related to art it you know you're it's
in some way not your you know it's not
the potential isn't always seen so I
never felt any pressure at all about
what it was that I would do or or that
actually I wouldn't make a success of
what I did yes I think I was I think
yeah I mean that that in itself the idea
that you build oh and again I think
we'll come back to it but this idea that
you sort of have a plan when you're
talking about how young particularly
young women I think there is it well I
think it's equal young men and women he
has a pressure to absolutely know what
you want to do and how you're going to
get there and what you need in order to
get there and I don't again we've been
talking about this the other day but I
don't think there's this certainly way
of working when you have no idea where
you yeah I mean did you have a plan I
had no plan tell you I had no say we
face-lifting Kennet we neither of us had
a plan I think in a minute yeah said
then to talk about plan at some point
you set up in yes practice yes and you
need a plan you need a business plan
well the the funny you know the irony
about that is again we so Alex was my
tutor Philip and I went to college
together and we were invited to submit
some work for the architecture
foundations ten new architecture
practices and we sort of because we'd
all slightly collaborated doing
different things we submitted there such
as a group of work and in we said Alex
de Riker Sadie Morgan and Phillip
and then we got picked as one of the ten
with hmm Cruz s engine anyway you know
there's no birds sportsmen I always
called him bear sportsmen ruffian
because I think all him awesome very you
know such a you know some well
well-known names and and on the back of
that there was a competition to design a
a building for the elders of lld see as
it was then and we won it and you know
we would none of us had gone qualified
Oh what you know we hadn't we were just
kind of made to you know and suddenly we
had to formulate a practice and and we
didn't have anybody as I say he was
actually qualified at the time so how do
you yeah so he went home and I said dad
which you can I use your professional
indemnity and she's not a normal request
for the daughter of course he said no
yeah no so he said yes and Mary yeah I
guess how high he would always do
anything for me and but very tragically
that year that summer when we were
designing it dad died very unexpectedly
of a heart attack and say we were you
know forced if you like into a very
different plan and and I think my life's
been a little bit like that ever since
and we you know we we put ourselves
together as a practice we became Alex
was a tutor here and we supported him in
that we basically ran a studio from
there didn't I can't remember
and we datings up in the bar and oh
the AAA is absolutely wonderful for
being able to do things like that you
know we'd say oh well we've you know
perhaps you'd quite like this we in our
spare time and evenings we just come and
use this you know studio space to run
our practice run the office and and then
when it then when people started to
notice we thought we better become a bit
more legitimate and get ourselves a
place so it was an extraordinary time
and and one that was just full of a kind
of exploration and interest and and
absolutely no money but that's very
freeing if you if you don't earn I've
never worked for anybody which its
clients it's quite good so going I
remember getting our first thousand
pounds and it was literally like after
about nine months of working like 300
pounds
things are looking at exactly now well
that is um in terms of firsts this is
about firsts of everything really
but then the first so that was your
first competition yeah and you which you
built or you did you get built and you
know like these are competitions they
don't yes so then you keep doing
competitions and then your first
building yes with with Rogers oak as we
cook yeah but so corrode Segel a bit
developer which is also an interesting
collaboration in it yes and would you
call it a collaboration Roger zagala
which is a developer who was also former
president of the AAA yeah very much very
much so I mean at times it felt a little
bit other I mean the thing about Roger
is he's an incredible passion patron of
young people and and sometimes she
thought oh that's because he can
manipulate you're getting to do what in
runs but he's actually the most
extraordinarily lovely person to work
with and we learnt a lot from each other
and I think any architect who becomes a
developer it's very difficult
stand back and not get involved and
sometimes that's complex and difficult
you know because you it's difficult to
let go and let the your chosen
architects you know do work together but
actually in this instance it it was good
and we'd never build in concrete
we'd never do half the things we did in
that project and it was it was a great
it was great - for your first you know
client relationship to be working with
somebody who understood what it you know
understood architecture so it was
fantastic
I like I like adore Roger ya know well
it's I mean it's a it's a form of
practice that he's really pursue you
doesn't it to try to work with with an
architect and and he's genuinely
passionate you know about what he does
and that's you know that's prayer yeah
unnecessary I think so in terms of the
that then informing and kind of I
suppose set of design themes and tropes
and values within the practice did that
come out of that part of I suppose the
question is how did how did you once the
practice sort of really was once you got
your thousand pounds if that we're on
the way how did the projects choose you
what do you did you choose the projects
was it a bit of both
do you think I think it's a bit of both
I think we we had a fascination with
materials we had a fascination with
using off that you know off the shelf we
had an exhibition in the book that they
published long gallery first yeah and so
that was all about using resources
carefully and inventively
so we tended to be given very difficult
complex problems with very small budgets
and
which is a wonderful place to start
because you all you can do is and be
inventive and clever and problem-solve
and then after a while you look at all
these people who've got these incredible
projects with big budgets and you sort
of looked gate you gaze into the
distance and thing wouldn't that be nice
but you seen realize that actually what
matters to you is delivering projects
that you know you did a lot of social
housing a lot of schools and they don't
tend to have big budgets and that's fine
and you
you take your pleasure and your pride
from designing you know great spaces
better classrooms you know good public
realm more interesting community type
buildings you know all the things that
actually matter I think to creating a
better society and if you can try to if
you have the any chance whatsoever to do
something better or more thoughtfully or
more robustly then then that's I think
as a practice we naturally fell into
that way of working because we all very
strongly believe in that you know I was
in society I I was gonna ask it was that
a kind of collective belief or is it a
part of that work that sort of fall into
between the three partners that sort of
fall into specialisms as it were or is
it very much a kind of collective I
think when we started Alex used to say
he was the head of course yes I was the
heart but it was the hands and will you
have care that idea I I don't really
think about it I mean I sort of I
thought about it about come move onto I
think that's in a minute but so when we
but when we first started we all did
have there
from skills and I think that and
slightly different interests you know
Alex is absolutely obsessed with
materials would in particular and Philip
is very clear his skill set is made you
know planning and thing you know such as
putting to putting things together and I
obviously you know you can do all of it
yes so I'm I I tend to draw people
together and ideas together I think more
importantly is and so will naturally be
the glue that holds these things holds I
think not just that as it was then
Philip and Alex together but also the
wider practices but when it comes to
head I think that that probably isn't a
good analogy because we all obviously
have huge input into the you know there
is sort of intellectual capital of what
we do say yeah it took me a while to
work that one out
yes I got there you got there well it
takes a while and and and doing projects
to make that yes to understand that
arrangement between yeah individuals I
think is um so that that would very
naturally lead you to being all the
other things that manager didn't really
list actually yeah yeah which are all
the things you do currently yeah chair
and the independent design panel for
high speed to quite big projects member
of the National Infrastructure
Commission UK pretty big projects member
of the Thames Estuary 2050 growth
commissioners right mayor's design
advocates the Greater London Authority
yeah and there are more but I'm those
and I'm professor a professor at
Westminster you know
if that's a you know that dude said to
go from the scale of the house yeah or
the scale of the homework to the house
to then National Infrastructure it's all
the same
well is it as scale is different
it's a funny I'll tell you the story
I'll tell you the story about the I'll
tell you the hs2 story because it's it's
quite interesting for today so when I
concluded my presidency of the
architectural Association I my true
belief is that it's it's it's really
important to do stuff outside of your
practice especially if you've never had
a job with anyone else you can get a
little bit introspective so and I loved
I loved that I loved you know having a
different kind of conversation and I
felt that it would be good to do
something similar and a friend phoned up
and said oh do you know there and I've
been involved in putting together the
brief for high speed for the design
vision for high-speed tea and a friend
said or do you know they're looking for
a chair and I said oh no I didn't and so
I phoned up and said could you send me
the job description
no could you tell me where it you know
which pet paper I go to and they said
we'll get back to you so I said okay and
and then nothing happened
you named for a day or two and then and
then then I got a call saying yes we
will send you the Job Description and so
I got I got the job description and it
so it wasn't the pain it was and I
looked at the job description I felt
physically sick and I thought oh and
there's no way you know it was like you
must be you know this and that and you'd
have to be done that and I read it and I
just thought oh how embarrassing what am
I gonna say now and my absolutely lovely
office manager at the time read and said
us Sadie do that standing on your head
of course you can you know you'll be
fine
talking to the BBC you'll be fine
talking to the politicians you'll beat
you know of course you can do when you
know of course maybe you need a bit of
help with that and I self read through
and I thought I should you know once you
break it down and I thought I said
probably could do that and then so I
rewrote my CV sort of and handed it back
in and then I didn't hear anything and
then they said yes the headhunter once
does it I think a headhunter and you
know obviously you never having a job I
didn't you name and this unbelievably
awful man phoned me up and said the
first thing he said to me not hello you
know you do realize what a high-profile
job this is and I said yes I do and you
do realize that you will be expected to
talk to politicians at the highest level
and have you know by their and that was
like I'm I really I don't you tell me
what to do and and so the relationship
went on from there not very well until
he interviewed me and then decided that
maybe I could be deputy nice and and and
I was given an interview you know the
other two were says who are on the
shoulders and and I was given an
interview and I had enough absolutely
nothing to lose and they said what do
you think it's the design we are our
design vision and I said what design
vision I've never seen any have you
looked at your website he looked how
awful there you know and they were and
by the end of it I think they just
thought we could just shut this woman up
know that I mean it they I I think they
understood that they needed to be told
something different and they needed to
be given a different perspective to the
one that they'd been having
they may they're pointed man it was the
you know secound gold now what do I do
you know but it's been the most
incredible journey and I absolutely love
it
and I feel that it's really important
actually to do well it's it yeah that's
interesting the idea that you know there
is nothing to lose you you're right well
part of the idea that kind of it at this
a job description would be something
that would put you off rather than kind
of maybe any one thing no actually yeah
I can never get at that or and then get
to the well it just it shows a sort of
fantastic well it's it's partly
determination but also it's the idea
that you try and put me off that just
makes me want it even more
yeah so it's an its advice to anyone
interviewing out there I suppose it's
and maybe it's not it's a
counterintuitive tactic also but yeah I
think is you know once you it's so
interesting once hit that switch is
turned and once you you actually begin
to truly understand your value and I
didn't understand my value until I was
invited to sit on the National
Infrastructure Commission and I arrived
to my first meeting and I had lured
Hesseltine sitting next to me I had
lured a donor's sitting opposite me I
had dem assess Abbas who I frankly think
is the next Einstein who is the genius
who put together the who be put together
the software that be go which has more
computations and there are stars in the
sky I had certain Baisley he's the chief
economist to the World Bank I mean I
lets you know and I just sat there
thinking I feel I
you know and feel great about this and
it's it's lightly nerve you know and
then the chancellor of the exchequer
walked in and I just think my goodness
well yeah yeah I've never ever felt like
I needed to put my hand up and say I
need to go to the toilet I mean you know
it's just like get me out of this room
and then he's then he I was given that
and then he said well I'm gonna go
around the table and I'd like you to
tell me what you think is a national
infrastructure you know Commission and I
haven't they've given me the papers like
the night before and I kind of you know
really had it much of a chance to read
them like and they at all everybody
around the table started you know with
really sort of you know clever her
answers and any and I think you know
it's fine because we've we had to give a
speed you know they'd asked me to give a
speech to launch it and and that was in
two sort of five minutes and I'm
thinking that's fine by the time they
get around to me and we know be gone and
yeah we too late so and then he said
Lord Hesseltine who's sitting know oh my
god it's gonna be me next year anyway it
was absolutely fine and and then every
time I went to a Commissioners meeting I
would think what is it that I can offer
and and I suddenly understood after
about the second or third one that what
I can offer is there's a lot of big
strategic thinking that happens yet
there is so very few people who have the
capability to bring that thinking and
and touch it down to people in place and
and who can talk about things that in a
way that consider what it means to
normal people and what it might mean to
our environment and and that it isn't
just about GVA
and it's not just about getting the kind
of numbers right that if you're going to
invest in something then you have to
think about the wider benefits and
that's not always cash
yeah that was on the table um I mean I
did I I wonder in terms of now this
definition of architecture and women in
architecture that well one thing as I
was wondering whether at any point in
that it's entirely a it's a spoken it's
a debate and it's a discussion and it's
about speaking and presenting and being
able to present your ideas extremely
clearly and know as you were saying you
said very clearly now what your role is
in that and be able to articulate it and
if if you ever tempted it or maybe you
did but to draw does the drawing ever
come into that means of understand or
did you go home and try to draw it out
to understand it or is it all laughs
it's a different no I designed pursuit
it's all if we one thinks about it yeah
no it's exactly the same design pursuit
in the you are solving problems and it's
it's a very three-dimensional
activity but I I have the capability I
think to do that in my head and that's
the skill that I've learnt over time
because you you have to learn to make
decisions big strategic important
decisions very quickly and I think as
architects you are I was taught a very
different way of working which is have a
problem unpicking work it out take a
look at it you know sort of and then
come back to it and I nearly always came
back to the same you know the same the
first thing I drew but you had the you
had a long time to think about whether
that was the right solution and actually
when the irony is when you're making
much bigger complex decisions you tend
to have much shorter bit shorter time
you have all the information condensed
in front of you which is very different
so you have to analyze it very quickly
and come up with a decision
and that is there's there's that that's
there's a lot of pressure around that
but it's also hugely exciting and and it
really involves a different type of well
know the same type of thinking friendly
enough just it's a very different yeah a
different form
yeah is there anybody that you going
back to the inspiration question again
now out of the out of what inspires you
when you're young to start doing what
you do is there anybody now you sort of
think you focus on picking actually
because it's been making difficult very
big difficult decisions strategic
decisions is is an alarming thing to do
at certain points and then there do you
have a reference point that sort of
reminds you okay if I stick to that it's
just built with your own I I admire so
many people and and they tend to not
necessarily be those who I would suggest
to my pit you know I have huge respect
for a lot of my you know a lot of my
peers and their work that they do and I
respect you know all the people who are
work in my office I respect my sister
who's a nurse I you know I respect my
mother who you know I respect a whole
group of people for different things and
I I tend not to you know so some I had I
was asked that question who's your
inspiration I said Michelle Obama
because anybody he could he can come it
can be such a public profile standing
next to the most powerful man in the
world is a woman that I you know but
that's that's the sound effect lib then
I thought we actually who do I it's a
it's a really complex one and I don't
always have an answer actually I
I tend to take inspiration from those
around me well it's yeah it's also the
business that you're in
it is a which is about the people that
are around you yes yeah but it may I
mean it's like being here isn't it it's
like I'm having to run like you do in an
organization like this it's you are you
know I my the thing that at the moment
I'm really thinking a lot about is that
you have to create something that's
stronger than the sum of its parts and
because there are lists so little
resources around and you find that in
all the work that I do the National
Infrastructure Commission the s3
Commission the HST
you know it's like how do you create a a
group of people or a group of ideas or
whatever it might be that somehow
because it because they're combined
together are much better you much better
because of it it's um okay I'm going to
move on to a well there's a very neat
link here which you don't personify in
any say before my I do have a hero and I
spent quite a long time writing a book
about him but Cedric is my hair right ya
know and you don't look like centric at
all but you behave quite like you don't
smoke I didn't mean in there not
speaking skills but I there are two
really interesting parallels just put
one being totally flatted yeah they're
big shoes to fill
literally that I and I well one I mean
he was a great champion of women and in
the respect of women he was the one man
I think at the time
the early eighties who was allowed to go
to the National Women's Conference
they let him in which was I always
thought it's impressive because he was
always interested in championing the
people around him and how they could be
in the world and how it could be better
for everybody to be in the world so he
clearly identified that and he also did
a lot of work on the infrastructure for
the Channel Tunnel link going from
Stratford so a lot of that strategic
thinking in and around connection and
those those moments of arrival and
departure out of lately create which is
fascinating and visual so did a lot of
work which of course is invisible really
to the profession it is a lot of
although he drew quite a lot of it which
is what takes map that question but but
it is its invisible work in a sense but
also has a 25 year lifespan in terms of
just the thinking before it even has a
physical impact so that sort of scale of
working and then the peer the fantastic
peer which is the prize-winning peer
which I think Alex described as a bit of
a Cedric Project definitely because
there's not much attention or it's not
much building is different about my job
detector which I just one of my favorite
and quotes on one of Cedric's drawings
that he wrote for one of his members of
staff one night having left the drawings
on the table and Cedric ahead and marked
them up and he'd written on it too much
architecture and and it was absolutely
that it just got carried away with form
and aesthetic and not thought about now
what's the idea and what is it actually
for so I just wonder how much of that
thinking is it clearly resonates because
you're nodding and there's a kind of
sense of of those ways of thinking at
the AAA and but what that means in terms
of how a form of your practice because I
I mean I would say that there are no no
single project is like the next one now
and yeah and I think that's very
something we're very well it's we don't
we don't plan it that way
that's just the way it happens and I
think that the if you if you look at
Hastings Pier which I have to say is is
an extraordinary project because less it
less is more in this you know in this
instance and it is about listening to
it's it's an architect is curator rather
than sort of builder and and the way in
which that project came about was was
all about collaboration and all about
restraint from our our side actually
because you know they wanted a a conic
building at the end of the pier and I
tell you as a young architect well we're
not that young but as an architecture
practice that's all you want to do is my
iconic building and then you realized
that that's absolutely the wrong
solution and the right solution is alex
has been quoted as saying a lot listed
you know to do nothing and to make a
service platform with on which every
anything could happen in which
opportunity was you know which offered
huge opportunity to you know the the
local residents and and the community
and I think that if you take that
thinking and say something that I
believe very very strongly increasingly
is that design isn't you know I keep
saying this design isn't just about
aesthetics it's about problem solving
and we have to understand better as
students and as architects what what our
skill sets are because I think that in
five and ten and fifteen years time the
way that we work and operate will be
completely different to that it is now
and we are very slow in
in picking that up and I work as I said
so you know I have a lot to do with
Dennis he was there creating algorithms
which are capable of doing things that
you know this is too frightening to even
think about luckily he is not Blofeld
you know luckily he is the most generous
incredible human being who wants to do
good with his with his huge resource and
brain but you know we're in a place
where algorithms are now designing
structure you know so all the motorway
signage is is put on structures that are
designed not by people but by algorithms
and I'm not suggesting that that's
necessarily something that you can say
will happen to our buildings but we have
to be seen as relevant to a conversation
that begins much earlier on so I think
that if we things are changing so
quickly and I see it you know when we
talk about infrastructure that we have
to as a profession get get wise and get
in early and and convince politicians
and convince big organizations that are
the architects and designers and
creative thinkers have a place at the
table and that without the perspective
and without the ability to think you
know we have an imagination and I tell
you there's not many people you know in
the powers that be that have that
capability or often so we have this huge
skill we can look into the future we can
imagine we can I can't say we can
predict but we have an opportunity to
actually create our future and in doing
so we can think of the problems and the
opportunities in a way that but most
people are capable of doing so if you if
you talk to us when you're you know
writing your brief rather than when
you've written your brief and you need
an answer then you tend to write a brief
that has a
the capability of being of producing an
architectural solution or a
three-dimensional solution that has has
already thought of all the things that
may or may not go wrong but more
importantly what may or may not go right
so you know my big push at the moment is
to convince politicians to convince the
National Infrastructure which I think
I've done to say you need creative
people so we there's a recommendation in
the in the interim report that we put
together a group of you know designers
here and thinkers who will help and
support all National Infrastructure
Commission's and when it's 200 billion
pounds of our money that we'll be
spending over the next 20 years and if
we're not careful none of us will be
involved in that because it's you know
it's a different type of built
environment and we are designing at the
moment so design strategy is a new
course yeah yeah exactly yeah no it's
keep up the good work so I could say and
I'm going to bring this as brings that
you've sort of answered my last question
really which is um there's this
brilliant quote which are now you're not
going to be able to find no I am gonna
find it from Winifred trial that's my
favorite one who was one of the first
the first of the first of all for women
who will be we are really celebrating I
don't know which one the hairstyles yes
okay yeah we must get anyway whoever's
got Winifred on she said that in
in 1919 two hundred years ago that in
the near future the women architect will
not only will be not only a vague
possibility but an absolute necessity
yeah and I would say that you know every
team needs good women and and then the
other way of saying that that is if
every team needs a good woman
you know actually no I'm not even ask
that question it's an assertion every
team needs a good woman I don't I say
yeah you're proof of that and now I'm
going to suggest I mean I've got another
question but I think we should open this
out to our audience and and take
questions any questions probably about a
lot of the pictures that way everyone's
wondering what on earth they're looking
at my question is relating to the
subject that Samantha was just talking
about form and aesthetic or what is the
idea and what is it for that theater
that you designed inside Kingsdale I'd
love to know what the thinking was
behind it in terms of forming aesthetic
and what is it what is it
what's the idea actually for the well
but I mean Kingsdale I mean you need to
sort of step back to be able to answer
that question so well I've been there
several times it is an iconic building
it's absolutely amazing and you walk
into that space and it just blows your
mind so and I've been inside it and so
I'm just very interested in the the
auditorium yet in the house how it came
about how you
it came about because we were trying to
find a different way in which the
children would operate how the soft
structure of the school would operate so
they would have and I can't feel like me
that the name of it's completely lost me
but you have instead of classes so you
have your year groups but you also have
cross-cutting groups that take in yeah
yeah no it's no it's something there's
anyway
oh it'll think of it it's a very school
specific word but it's about having
groups that are made up of much oh you
know older and younger children and and
they in order to facilitate that we
thought we needed a space in which they
could meet and so the the auditorium was
initially conceived as being that space
that was that special space that would
draw together those groups of those
specific groups and and then of course
it became you know because you have to
make that kind of space work much harder
than you know than just doing one thing
it became you know currently kind of
bothered I mean the heart of there's the
heart of the school and a place yes yeah
yes sorry if that's really unhelpful
aslim so it's it's about it's a I mean
it it's trying to break down a structure
and transform it in in order to come up
with a better community actually so it
was disruptive and and that was the sort
of architectural disruption in in the
middle
yeah I think it yeah people got married
in there I mean it's yes they rented it
out they've had at least three or four
people getting married in there and they
you know it's open to the local
community and so how's it I mean it has
become the heart of the school and so in
that sense that house yeah best you know
best best improved school I think two
years after it opened and that's but
that's a lot to do with the concept you
know the the the hard work and energy of
the architecture foundation and my very
great friend Lucy Musgrave who had the
sort of creative idea about making you
know about how you how can design
improve you know school results and that
that how you measure good design is
something that we still haven't grappled
with and I have to say is something that
we have to manage much better and is
actually a part of the national
infrastructure assessment which is which
says we have to find different ways of
measuring outcomes for big
infrastructure projects and and it isn't
we can't do it as I said before around a
business case that does not think about
quality of life and so all of these you
know that's one of the first projects
you know all of those things run through
I think how we have to think about our
future and how we how we put together
strategies policies and briefs that
enable that to happen because unless we
write a brief or unless government puts
down metrics that allow quality to the
quality of life to come true then we
don't have a fighting chance of
convincing them that good architecture
good design matters
[Music]
with your infrastructure hat that
certain seem to be any great idea for
Britain in the future it's all piecemeal
Crossrail it's brilliant but they're not
developing on that they're tinkering
about with Heathrow which isn't a hub
airport if you try to get from one
Airport building to another there's no
transport other than a bus or taxi it's
not a hub airport and they're just not
thinking big enough I was always in
favor of what became Boris's scheme of
having it in the history and I think
we've had so many projects such as the
Olympic project which is enormous
developments in North East London and
then the Isle of Dogs all the what
infrastructure has been built up and it
seems to me and you as a Kent girl would
know this but we should be moving east
so that we don't over ply the city of
London which i think is an absolute
abomination and no other big european
country is important European country
with dream of doing that with their
aircraft are you involved in this great
idea that how we should really be moving
things east where all their recent
development has been well I think I
think they actually would I'd like to do
is answered the different question
because when it comes to a kind of big
strategic vision for the country one
that is visual I think you're quite
right then I think there's a profession
we need to reflect on why that is and
and I think we have to be much more
proactive
about helping government to do this
because they don't they don't inherently
have the skills so if we are critical
about how things are put together then
you know one of the things that National
Infrastructure Commission is trying to
do is to help prioritize and is have to
try to help put down you know in a
report and an assessment of what we have
and what we are needs as a country over
the next 20 30 40 years what it doesn't
do is put that down in a visual map for
instance there is no I have another bee
in my bonnet which I probably shouldn't
go on about that that's about the fact
that there is no visual map no in you
know only Siddiq has only just come and
it has put its putting an interactive
map there is no map that talks about the
development that's about to happen
or the infrastructure that's there as
existing a new infrastructure is no
joined up sinking yes but but who's good
at joined up thinking who's good at
putting maps together who's good at
planning we are and what do we do it
except out it nothing yeah well then
we're not invited to do it
it does who needs an invitation you know
we should be gate-crashing you know we
absolutely should be I mean I was gonna
say I mean it's part of very much a part
of a definition of a way I mean that
stems from possibly the evolution of
maybe the architect and the role of the
architect now I think it's been probably
evolving in this way for a very long
time but that ideas architectures as not
waiting to be asked but but as
provocateur and activist and putting the
projects on the table before waiting for
the you know as I said not waiting to be
asked and their babies yeah you you
would you'd know better than anybody you
know how that unfolds and if you look
back over history you know you're you're
quite right but I don't I don't know
what's happened
feel like recently we've been maybe
somebody can help foresters done it just
unto you I think that we have to move
away from the kind of master plan that
is about a grand vision that nobody can
afford because it doesn't engender you
know trust in an outcome that everybody
combined to I mean I think we have to be
visionary in a way in a different way
now because things are very different
talk about having a new town and
there'll be a new town I think we have
to we have to set down a a sort of a
light touch strategy type frame under
which local you know we can have a much
more sort of bottom-up the pier is a
good metaphor thank you thank you yeah
yeah I know absolutely what you're but
it is if it's a sort of providing an
empty space with a few really useful
bits down to hang on to yeah and I think
that's as a metaphor an idea and which
is right so I I believe very profound
that the Stirling panel has given that
project prize is because it recognizes
that as a form of a plan and not as a
gratification exercise that we all do
things beautifully don't we and I think
that's a major shift for architecture
for the better I hope but it I think it
goes along these lines of how do you and
of course it is a difficult conversation
to have in terms of visual visual
because things that are very flat tend
not to be to be a visual in a very
particular way as opposed to things that
are very three four dimensional and so
that I think in itself is an interesting
I think
also what's interesting is how you how
you explain and communicate so when I
sat on the National four structure
Commission and we do these independent
reports they are always written reports
and we're doing a big piece of work
around Oxford Milton Keynes Cambridge
corridor and understanding why and how
you know how we need to help that area
really develop and and sort of create
the opportunities and I said well you
know if if we are talking about
infrastructure and and that's our remit
then how do we make sure the
infrastructure unlocks housing which is
the thing that's stifling obviously
millions Cambridge and and it's all very
well so we write a report about it and I
said but how do we explain that when you
are putting infrastructure in that you
need to create proper communities and
that you can't just deliver housing we
have to deliver housing that our homes
and we have to deliver homes that are
formal communities how do we do that
what does it look like and everyone's
really frightened of putting down what
it looks like and I convinced him to run
an architectural competition and with
multidisciplinary teams including
economists and there are other people
who would come forward and help create a
vision about you know what what there's
what what good looks like what the
success in terms of building communities
in relation to infrastructure looks like
we just think we need more we need more
examples can I make a historical
connection that's my job is when I was
listening to you I was sitting here who
does this remind me of people who go and
look at an art exhibition and you know
this there are put you know you have
predecessors at the air women who've
done 50 years ago just what you're doing
now being people who are
major players in influencing national
infrastructure and the kind of
environment that people grew up in after
the war so how people like Mary med and
Mary Crowley great school architect
collaborating working with users all
that kind of thing and you have a great
unspoken judicata bar probably the most
important least name architect from
thirty fifties who plays an absolutely
crucial role in developing post-war
housing and in visit and envisioning
what that is it's great tradition of of
women at the AAU identify major social
problems say here are some solutions and
then actually get themselves into roles
where that can happen so it's great to
see that kind of researching and they've
got the model from the past I just
wanted to make that connection okay no I
think I mean I there is nothing there's
no better way of helping to predict the
future than looking back and because
it's nearly always been totally
beautiful just in it yeah it's just you
just have to sort of overlay and then on
to a new kind of set if then often
they're often the same problems they
just you know manifest in a different
way it's been a lot of time cajoling
people - yeah I mean it's actually going
and looking at what good looks like
makes a massive dick I didn't we took
the senior team at HST around Holland to
look at what good as train stations look
like and you know and and actually how
you can regenerate huge
you know with that small piece of
investment if you have joined up
thinking and if you look outside of the
red line which is you know tends to be a
bit of an issue I actually have a small
question for Sam to maybe explain some
of the slides for the topic and to
reflect on a kind of a different career
within architecture that's been
everything from writing books and and
and interviewing people to try and get
some projects down on paper to teaching
a brilliantly diverse selection of
student projects - there's lots of
pictures of sandwiches um and so I
thought it'd be nice to have you explain
that a bit
yeah I'd worried you'd ask me that
question
but I think the sandwiches are probably
the useful point I think because I think
the one drawing that my tutor here
Sandhills although I have to say I
totally go with everybody being part of
one's inspiration but sand was
particularly it was ordinary she now is
in Australia but she was my tutor in
second and third year and the one
drawing she kept of mine was a drawing
which I could I could glamorously say
was a section through a british rail
sandwich but it didn't really look like
a section at all but anyway it was my
best drawing and it was a rubbish
drawing but she loved it and she's kept
in she did tell me last year she still
has it on a wall which is just appalling
not to me as a thought but well I can't
imagine anyway it was the sandwich I
suppose reoccurred and the one thing I
did when I left here or one of the
things I did when I left here and didn't
set foot in the building for about 15
years because that seems to be what has
to happen and as I set up what was
initially one coffee bar and then it
became three and I thought I was just
doing architecture I was just being an
architect but in at that particular
moment in time it was
it wasn't it was sort of not
particularly healthy time in the
construction industry so the kinds of
jobs around weren't particularly
attractive and I think I probably wasn't
sure I wanted to be an architect anyway
but I loved architecture and what what
to do anyway so the obviously in
government would go and make up a coffee
bar but actually what it was about was
was very small-scale kind of rich and
open regeneration because with no money
you discovered the only buildings you
can have I think there are some slides
up there of really derelict properties
which happen to now be in very under
elect Islington and Clarke and well but
it was that period of time where where
estate agents were just desperate for
people to occupy their buildings and
hold on to them until the developers
redeveloped those areas so we had
incredibly cheap rents and we had our
wits about us so we made a business and
which then you know I think there are
bits and pieces up there that well we
would then tap into our architectural
friends and and we'll also came one
evening and he presented the project he
was going to be doing for something the
next week and Paul Finch his office who
was the editor of AJ at the time his
office was around the corner say he came
in for breakfast every day so there was
always a kind of architectural it became
a sort of place where we would discuss
these things but actually just ran a
business I made cups of coffee and made
sandwiches because actually that's what
it's about everybody's coming in for
food and it had to be good and it had to
be open at half past 6:00 every morning
because that's where everyone went to
work and till God knows when at night so
it was a really extraordinary very it
was the sort of project I suppose I've
made it here which is about what happens
if you just open your front door people
come in
people become it becomes the place
you've made the place and actually it
was just pre the one survived this is
how I remember when it was it was just
pre-ripped laptops and we had one power
point at the back of him in the shop and
we discovered that really our clientele
were freelancers that lived nearby and
actually it was a it was a place they
could suddenly go there was a priest
Starbucks pre all of these things there
was suddenly a place to go and there was
a socket and I had a laptop and they
could charge their laptop on my
electricity and it was at that point
that I didn't put that in their business
plan but then it was that moment you
realize and then you start talking to
planners and they say you know we've got
another street down the road Exmouth
market which is just nobody will go
there will you go and cuz we'll go and
foolhardy and and the next month market
anyone who knows that bit of London is
and now another story but it was that it
was of incredibly exciting time just to
go and open at literally your front door
and people would come and then people
would come every day and I remember and
she's probably not in the room but I can
tell it because she's not but lives are
fuel at the time I just had a baby and
I'd noon Liza but we didn't had never
spoken to each other I'd seen her around
the building when I was here as a
student and she walked in the door with
her baby and then she came in every day
with the baby and the baby would sit on
the floor and take cake and rub it into
the floor happily and she would sit lies
would sit there and just read the
newspaper to cover to cover and totally
ignore the baby because the baby was
happy with cake in the floor and
and everyday she would leave and I would
get this cake out of the floor
and I never told them then I've said
anything about 20s later I said you know
what you made me do said yes but you
saved my life
yeah because I had somewhere to go so
that was that's what the sandwiches are
about but what I mean what an
extraordinary I mean that's that's
lateral thinking at its best isn't it in
a funny kind of way and I think that you
you you solve a different you solve a
problem by opening up another
opportunity yeah and yes it's not it
isn't linear no absence it doesn't it
isn't problem it isn't a problem as
presented then you solve it you respond
I suppose in a way that and that and
then that's when it gets exciting
because that's when things pop out that
you've least expected and you become you
know it takes you on a different journey
than the new sort this is probably a
question for both of you and so you
talked about coffee shops and children
are showing people good design and I
just wanted to know kind of actually
experiencing something different often
changes people's minds or challenges
than to think in a different way
what other tactics do you both use to
challenge people's perspectives I guess
in your roles at the moment being first
and also just have kind of in design
generally and how that can help the
world or change people's minds about
what architects do and things like that
I guess or tactics do you use I suppose
one tactics is to ask really obvious
questions and often saying this is a
really stupid question but why are you
doing it for doing that or I mean it
tends to be the sorts of things that
one's talking about our habitual whether
it's a first-year student who already
within a month is kind of habitually
starting to do so
because they think this is what I'm this
is what architect is about or there's
what I think it was supposed to be about
so asking asking and that I think that
does apply to all the way through to a
diploma student who's been doing this
for five six years now and really knows
what they're doing and then you think
well none of us really know what we're
doing so you have to keep reminding us
of why am I doing this and what am i
doing it for
so I suppose though that if that's a
tactic it's asking a really obvious
question I suppose I said it's a great
answer and I I'll give you a good couple
of examples so I couldn't agree more and
I think that if you are disarming and
you are honest then you people respect
you for it
so and that takes confidence it takes
confidence to ask a question about
something you don't understand when you
think everyone else understands it and I
remember sitting in the National
structure Commission and and the
economists were just having a
conversation between themselves and I
only I was just i absolutely lost me and
and I I do know what it means but I said
well what does GVA mean and tim basely
said thank god we've got sadie and i
think you it's exactly right you have to
keep asking the question and in order to
remind people why they are sitting
around having the conversation and it's
a little bit like if you have a game
plan or a vision or whatever it might be
you tend to do it and there
put it in the drawer and carry on and
you have to keep going back to that
belief that ethos we demand we write our
ethos what matters to us up on the wall
you know and and I always keep you know
you you have to remind yourself what
matters you know and whatever that is
because it will help you develop in a
way that is has much more integrity I
think but just you know yeah my tactic
is always to not be threatening and
that's the best thing you can do
surrounded by politicians yeah yeah hi I
wanted to ask you about the politics of
the boys club because if you if you look
at the architects the women architects
we came from the a they've been you know
architects I Rose me stone stead lead
designer of central air state and
ultinice testing patricia tinsdale who
became I think the head of the housing
department back in the 60s and 70s and
understand the importance of getting to
that table and then hearing the
discussions there happening around it
and then it's also about the experience
of that right of just saying of not
being of actually not being afraid to
fail just seeing things through but how
cuz it's is quite difficult to break
into that I know that recently with the
you know all the scandals have come out
there's been a sense of protecting that
you know who actually sits at that table
so just wanted to yeah find out how it
cuz you've now you know you you have
managed to get onto that table but just
having you there isn't enough do you
know I mean it's just um and it's not
just like women this like ethnic my
Noora T's and LGBT voices and that's
something which needs to be no I mean I
we absolutely have to work harder to
have a better you know diverse group of
decision-makers I completely agree with
you the how we how one does that quickly
and in a way that is embedded is is
something that I think it you know
people struggle with I when it comes to
women in the profession I I just you
know my office has always had more women
the men not because of any particular
sort of emphasis on wanting that to
happen but because we employ the best
people and increasingly if we can open
the doors to young people and and show
them that it's a career path that is
manageable whatever work whatever your
background then that's where we have to
start and I think that the process takes
time to filter through and we are
absolutely I'm very very positive about
the the ability for for diversity to
come forward much quicker and I think
when these types of scandals happen or
you know when corks on poppers everyone
talks about and we have to grab those
opportunities and make sure that we show
in a in a positive way the absolute
difference
having a good mix of people around the
table makes and I would just say that I
have never felt in any way patronized or
or lesser because of anybody else's
reaction to me around the table at the N
I see in particular and Lord Hesseltine
you know I was brought up by a a very
socialist background and you know I you
know my hate figure was Margaret
Thatcher when I was younger but because
that was my politics and and then I go
meet Lord Hesseltine and I you know and
here I have to say is if you ask me an
inspirational figure he is one he's the
most extraordinarily clever intelligent
positive man who would make sure in
every occasion that I was part of the
conversation I used to travel round with
him for the Thames Estuary Commission it
was like going with royalty he'd get off
the bus and everyone would crowd around
him I'll just be left on the bus he
would turn round and ask them to move
out the way and bite me down and then
we'd sit round a table it all set you
know any law Hesseltine or Tessa
he'd say I think you should think said
he could answer that question much
better than me and any photograph that
was taken you know in there try and kind
of yeah he wouldn't have a photograph
taken unless I was in it as well yeah is
if there's a sort of I think that you
can be you can imagine things happen and
the worst of people
and then you meet them and you realize
that actually or you put yourself in
that situation and actually it isn't
like that and maybe I've been lucky in
the in the places in the positions that
I've been in but I have to say I've only
ever felt
hugely valued over now but I would just
respond to that point that I think it's
it sort of goes back a bit to the you
know what are the tactics and and also a
bit about what we were talking about
earlier in terms of young people and
they're the sort of plan and the the
emphasis on needing to know what you're
going to do and how you're going to do
it and that's entirely predicated on the
courses you choose and the the grades
you get and you know of course all of
those things are very important but the
other part being that in order to build
it all of those things are dependent on
the confidence and I have said there's a
thing called the personal statement that
every student has to do when they leave
school and they sort of have to live and
breathe that actually in the but but the
level of confidence at that point is not
great it's just part of the teenage
brain it's not particularly you know
together at that point but that moment
between I'm in the room that we're in in
terms of Higher Education that point
from where you leave school and then
really develop as a young adult and gain
some of that confidence to know that I
can ask a question and if it seemingly a
stupid question
it's always an intelligent question and
that is the thing I think that cuts
through any of the questions about
diversity and gender and and and that
would be the bitter I would say
absolutely needs to be encouraged much
more it is it's a to bring that level of
confidence through so that one can be
utterly at ease with whatever the
politics whatever the situation actually
to know that you're asking relevant
questions relevant as well as stupid
I think unfortunately I'm sure that
there's more questions in the room but
we have to cut things short now because
um it's time for lunch but I just wanted
to thank the two of you for being so
generous and sharing so much of your
personal experiences with us and I think
it was also really inspiring note to end
on in terms of what can we do to
instrument change going forward for for
everyone so thank you very much
lunch isn't the poem on center which is
in number 16 Bedford Square and I could
look for the blue flag but that's what
that was what directs you and and then
we'll start the afternoon session at
2:00
[Music]
[Applause]
