so thank you very much for coming um so
I'm gonna start this conversation in a
very particular way which is to sort of
I'm gonna run a hypothesis with you
about what I think is transforming in
architecture and what is transforming
architecture over the next few years and
urbanism and we can perhaps have a
discussion there near the end about
actually what some of these implications
are and I want to propose to you that
that the kind of typical thesis where
there is form follows function or form
full of finance is that form follows the
code of capital so it is how you code
and structure things there's actually
organizing our cities in really
strategic ways and if you want to change
the nature of that you have to change
the nature of how we regulate and govern
so how many of you know about property
rights right who here has studied
property rights of you right now I think
property rights are a really profound
thing they're an idea they're an idea of
ownership right where does this idea of
ownership come from why is it a relevant
idea of organizing cities why should it
be a relevant idea of organizing cities
when was it enacted is it viable into
the future
is it not viable into the future these
are all questions that are open for
debate they are non fixed questions and
our thesis of how we've organized the
world around us has been through
understanding these rights in a very
particular format now if you look back
in history these rights I'm going to use
sort of a bit of a thesis and story is
rights were given
by kings and queens to be able to the
resources of organizing the world so if
you go to indigenous communities if you
go to First Nations they organized in a
different way they all get organized
through treaty in relationship to the
land and one of the things that I think
is changing and is going to change is
the nature of the way we organize and
it's the boring bits the bureaucracy the
reason why property rights exist is
because we were able to organize and
register property in a very particular
format and the efficiency of doing that
was the mechanism that gave birth to
property rights property rights are a
bundle of Rights like the agreed
contract law they're a bundle of Rights
if you want to reinvent cities and I
think this is what what I'm going to
open up actually reinventing things like
property rights are going to be
fundamental to opening up the
conversation so that's a hypothesis I'm
going to give you then I'm going to sort
of backtrack and work your way work our
way through it I'll explain why
we are a full-time team operating from
Seoul to places we have scientists
facilitators to full-stack encoders to
researchers and designers we were
building wiki house open-source housing
opened s open-source furniture company
which you can download and print to
impact house to Architecture zero zero
and part of the studio we've from Junior
sort of something that's kind of mean we
like to build things as well as
different formats there's something some
of the stuff we did in a wiki house open
desk this is kind of Hamsterdam oh man
various other place in the world
however in about 2014-15 we started to
realize that underneath the wiki house
and open desk there were a bunch of
structural questions if you wanted to do
open source design and you wanted to
look at how you did quality control in
open source design you would have to
reinvent how you do warranties without
reinventing warranties you wouldn't be
able to do open source design if you
wanted to trade it so if I wanted to
sell a piece of open source furniture to
someone that corporation I would have to
reimagine how I did warranties because
I'd have to warranty the product and
historically what happens is you
centralize warranties when you
centralize warranties you centralize
innovation if you open source design you
have to reimagine how you underwrite the
Quality Assurance process this is the
boring stuff we like to do but when you
try to do any of these products these
are the things that drive centralization
around the world but the real question
was if you wanted to build a mortgage
you had to be able to build yourself and
you see in front of you is is a
temperature anomalies country 82 2017
you talking about it in the nature of
civilization we have to understand the
scale of the building
I cannot say this more cleanly and
clearly enough and the reason why it
sucks is that the reality is what you
produce what you consume where you
produce it these chains are to be
disrupted the retrofitting of buildings
is a small component in the thesis of
the city so I'll give you a very
practical example Milan as a city is
looking to is looking to reduce car
miles traveled by 50% as part of its
strategy of getting too near climates to
75% reduction so 50% reduction in car
miles traveled 50 percent reduction in
car miles traveled fundamentally changes
the economic geography of your city it
is no longer going to function the way
it did and does now so when we start to
look at this transition this is a
fundamental transition of how we live
and work
phase one now here's a key point climate
change is a symptom of the problem
symptom why and the reason why it's a
symptom is that there are many other
strategic issues that are terminating
humanity whether it's the loss of
biodiversity the pollution in our water
systems or whether it's levels of air
pollution that we're driving there are a
whole system of issues that are
terminating civil a human civilization
so when we talk about climate change we
have to be really careful that we're not
just addressing the symptoms but going
at the underlying issues now when you
get to the underlying issues you start
to have to think differently so the
challenge of climate change I would
argue is not climate change but the
nature of how we've organized our
economy in driving externalities right
so you can have a system where
externalities can be generated and
unco stood or unaccounted in the system
co2 can be pumped out without her being
price biodiversity can be undermined
without a big price to understood
plastics can be poured into the ocean
without her being understood a whale in
a whale which is pulled out of the water
is worth a million dollars right that's
how much is worth if you sell that whale
but a whale that's building an ecosystem
which is incredibly valuable in terms of
co2 absorption of things is less than is
worth less than 50,000 so the extractive
value of it is much higher than the
ecosystem value of and that's about how
we've understood these value value
mechanisms so there's something going on
here that underneath climate change is
there's a structural issue how we've
organized our economy and I think that's
really important as awesome as
architects to understand what the
structural issues are because the
hypothesis when those structural issues
change the nature of how we organize in
the world fundamentally changes and what
we operationalize and this is manifested
modeled multiple formats so if you want
to talk and just look at the
biodiversity issues that we have well
this is a very pertinent piece of kind
of fact right so 96% of mammals on the
earth
livestock and humans livestock in humans
percent are wild animals sent to zebras
Lions
so when we talk about our built
environment or our environment what does
that mean when we talk about elephants
being in elephants and all these things
that we glorify in beautiful video
magazines are less than four percent
that destruction has happened much of
the destruction has happened since the
1970s in a very short period of time in
terms of human history
at the same time I think one of the
things that we also have to understand
it is the fundamental nature of our
economy and the mechanisms of our
economy have changed these are really
important for us to understand is being
constructed around tangible goose other
things increasingly our economy is built
around intangible goods for the value of
that brand and the value of that
association with the discussions
with a Chairs tangible assets and
intangible assets have a fundamentally
different quality intangible assets are
non-tradable are transferable why that's
important is this increasingly our
economies have moved towards intangible
process
because in the world economy but it's
important to understand what's happening
to our cities and around us
at the same time we are in the midst of
an automation challenge did not destroy
the taxi driver
the taxi office
it destroyed the taxi office now why
that's important is that what you see
technology doing disintermediating
everyone thinks automation
so if you want to talk about the future
of cities you have to talk not about
post-industrial cities if to talk about
post managerial cities now why that's
important is that most of our cities are
focused on management driven processes
what's interesting about them is
thousand nurses
less than hundred and fifty
so what you're seeing if you want to
think about cities is what you're seeing
is the headquarters shrink to nothing
all over the city of angles pause in the
period of the angles pause wages fold
human labor flatlined and declined so
the wages though that labor was earning
was flatlining and declining whereas
wages for capital goods so which is
machinery now things the return on
capital was going up we are almost
exactly in the same period where
middle-class wages are declining or
holding steady and the return on capital
is going up now why I say that is that
it's really important to then start to
talk about what does a city look like
because I would argue most of our cities
are still being designed from a thesis
of management so what does that future
look like is going to be really critical
and the reason why I bring these things
together is that as designers I think
one of the strategic objectives and
challenges that you face over the next
10 years these problems are not going to
come at you
they're going to come at you through an
integrated less
how does automation deal with
decarbonization deal with human
development in funda many different
formats
if you look at the modern city it is
also has the function of antibacterial
sort of antibacterial drugs you will see
the modern city it's a function of our
antibiotic capabilities you get rid of
those you start to undermine the
function form of cities you want to look
at actually other issues whether it's
human development so our current city
you guys all know this intuitively our
current city is focused if you look at
is focused on coffee culture is focused
on on serendipity but if you want to do
complex deep work where do you guys go
right it's difficult so we know here's
some things script Safina
in cities is twice as high as in rural
environments we know air pollution takes
out about a year's worth of cognitive
performance of children we know night as
so light pollution destroys your sleep
patterns and impacts your cognitive
capabilities the next day we know sound
pollution persistent sound pollution so
you know the noise of cars in the
background when you're sleeping
minor levels of stress drives stress to
your cortisone into your bloodstream we
takes our years of your life so people
living on roads and to die quicker so
when you look at it from a fine grain
idea of human development and cognitive
performance you start to recognize the
modern city form maybe actually
fundamentally anti-human in terms of the
value of human contribution it is
perfectly optimized to optimize the
value of real estate but is it optimized
for the value of being human
so typically real estate and in-game my
traders architect guys and so we operate
as objects but I want you to know this
stuff because one of my one old
frustrations as objects are
undereducated about the kind of
underlying factors that drive
decision-making so real estate is about
10% of the cost of an organization 10%
paying rent for buildings right the cost
of people for an organization is come on
some hands some thoughts
10% is relocated real estate costs
what's the cost of people not far it's
about sixty percent fifty to sixty
percent so that people pay pay people's
wages and costs is fifty percent of an
organization if not slightly higher yet
all of our real estate strategies and
you see it here as much as anywhere else
are focused on optimizing what the real
estate people
that's because the business model real
estate is focused on how much real
estate you sell and what being so so
co-working for example which you know we
were part of building some of the
original co-working spaces but
co-working as such what do you think the
benefits of co-working are precisely
there is a lot of people would assume
it's about communication so a
traditional architectural pitch would be
there will be serendipity people will
cross over people will talk more they
will have was it called water cooler
moments this is the typical pitch and
you've probably been either part of it
and you know we can all chat because
we're saying and looking at each other
how about if I told you there any of the
research that's been done to say that
actually in open-plan working spaces and
co-working spaces communication goes
down
so what you start to realize is that the
optimization of so we are optimizing
real estate at the losses of human
capital and human development so the
questions that start to come to the
table is what do these features look
like if you want to reinvent
architecture you guys design buildings
and many of you passively design
buildings on the idea of optimizing
human development whichever form is you
do it through art culture whatever
there's an idea a passive idea about
optimizing but the question is do you
know the deep codes that are driving
actually the exact opposite of it and I
would argue that the current thesis of
the city has been all about optimizing
real estate not necessarily optimizing
human development now this is where it's
interesting in a future where
high-performance cognitive emotional
capabilities high-performance emotional
cognitive capabilities are the gold of
the future economy right so if you want
to have the Society of the future you
want to have the highest performance
cognitive emotional capabilities right
that's everything else's commodity how
would you build your cities so in
Stockholm region we're working with the
regional stocker who's asking that exact
question so if you believe that humans
are a foundational gold how would you
think about the city would it be low
noise low light pollution would it be
reflective spaces would it be empty
courtyards which don't actually have any
transactions because actually it's
perfectly fine to sit there reflectively
because the value you're transacting is
not in the coffee shop that makes a bit
of money the value of transacting is the
cognitive capability of the whole city
operationalizing in a different format
so what I'm suggesting there is that we
do you operationalize value do you
operationalize it in the selling of the
coffee shop and the serendipity of that
or do you operationalize it in the
selling of
active space and the high-performance
cognitive capabilities of that so why
this is important is that these
decisions manifest in our architecture
and you passively draw them in you
passively draw in the coffee shop you
passively draw in the rhetoric of their
stuff because it's coded into a thesis
of urbanism Challenger I'm not saying
what I'm saying is right
I'm just saying and I'm genuinely not
saying that but what I'm saying is it's
oh it has a code it has a particular
logic which needs and should be
challenged so when you look at this
transition over the next 10 years I
think we will see a foundational
transition of our cities in a way that
we've not seen before
both in terms of logistics both in terms
of human development both in term and
also in terms of actually the
fundamental sort of decarbonisation of
those cities and what the implications
are and there's lots of different things
behind that structural thesis which is
around
the drivers behind you know genican
violence
psychological well-being typically like
to buy emotional fixes
you by emotional fixes in the moment of
economic stress will stress actually
chocolate dressing goes up
because when you're under financial
stress or any form of stress you buy
certain things that's solve the problem
you're not making rational decisions in
a classic irrational form you solve the
psychological issue which is your
foundation stone look like in a space
when you put people under economic
stress
when you put people under economic
stress you Creighton biases in the
systems design change look like when all
these biases behavioral biases choice
biases exists in the system isn't power
free markets are actually when free
market most places are not free markets
they are free futile isms they're about
they are not about symmetry of power
they are not about symmetry of
relationships so if the bias of most
people say fuel so for example I'll give
you a really practical example you're
this is a real case study a mother this
is done by some friends of ours and
really lovely piece of case study where
they there was a woman who was buying
Kentucky Fried Chicken for her children
every day after school right and they
were like she's she was super cognizant
not like she was super bowl person and
when they did the case study this is
what they found they found well she was
working two jobs she would work til the
children were being picked up she would
go and pick up her children and she had
an hour to pick a pickup with them and
spend time with them so what she
realized was the best thing she could do
was to have an hour of quality time near
as possible from the school on route and
that was a place where she could have an
hour's worth of time with them before
she went to a second job so in the in
her life in the theory of her life that
was a rational decision right rational
emotional decision it was a fully
cognizant decision but the fact is
Ukraine biases in those environments
that if the only option is Kentucky
Fried Chicken that provides that space
then you have created a bias to her life
right so how do you design change in
that theory here's my provocation to
architecture schools part of this how do
we know about behavioral economics how
many look at biases spatial biases how
many you know about econometrics
so these things are born because they
are the tools that are being looked at
to understand the city right so I've
talked to you about topics right but if
I was to talk to you how many know about
burner to me you put your hand up but
you're missing whole fields of
information that actually are the basis
of how we understand cities so this is
so I think the challenge that we have as
designers and I there's a subtle
provocation here so that it's an
intimate orience so we can just talk the
role of architecture and urbanism and
place-based design is not about the form
it is about the place you are designing
places not buildings and if you're
designing places your ability to deal
with complexity and organizing
complexity or what your mechanisms for
driving change into complexity and what
is your legitimacy to doing that is all
open to question I'm not even saying
you're legitimate to do that yet how do
you construct that is really important
and this applies to everything
all houses and how many times you say
architects saying we've built a 50,000
pound house
this is my innovation my contribution to
architecture is I've built a smaller
house
all the time do we actually think that's
a solution
the problem of housing if you look at it
deeply enough about supply and demand a
housing
it really isn't it's it's actually about
the supply of dead facilities it's our
supply of cheap money into buying
mortgages which is inflated housing and
there is no incentive the value of
housing
simultaneously for the developers
because they can earn money by just
building enough underneath the demand
which i think is another conversation
that we should all have I really
recommend the rest of you read stuff
like radical markets and Henry George
and supplies to many many other things
as well
interesting interface windows systems
interface design across disciplines
have you bilities to go to that go
diagonally around that change
what do you know about the policy
what do you know about the theory of
open policy-wise been developing oceans
is not to make anyone feel stupid asking
these questions largely from the
perspective what you should be demanding
so the reason why in our organization we
have research as we have think is
because we've recognized to build design
places
and those diagnosed girls are really
critical and this applies to these
systems stuff applies to many many
things other things that we realized
very quickly is that when you're looking
at complex change is you need a
portfolio of interventions and I'll talk
about this later there is the theory one
intervention the problem is not real in
system stuff we're doing in Birmingham
around radical child care within me core
which is looking at how do we drive
change
it's if you look at the scale of the
challenges that we're facing one of the
underlying problems is that actually
we're responding to very petty types of
change sort of actually kind of micro
level change molecules the effects of it
are not linear so we've known the co2
levels are going up and now they're
going to feed back to the system
and threats and other things so what
we're seeing is a different type of
issues come to the table and those
issues require different types of
institutions destruction of common
resources or future liabilities and you
look at the impacts of these things
whether it's heat island effects degree
centigrade most of our cities will be
going up between three and a half to
four degrees
was that terrain Paris was already at 50
degrees last year
so when you talk about this stuff also
recognize the scale of the risk on the
table this is life-threatening
right there is it's just life
threatening so we know parts of India
are going to be over 50 degrees from
maybe 50 percent of the year so we are
talking about a catastrophic transition
in our climate that will change the
nature of how we live and operate and
one of the things that I think is worth
recognizing is what are the underlying
issues behind it and underlying issues
that are driving some of this stuff now
things I want you to focus on
bureaucracy right so how we measure how
we organize how we administer is
actually fundamental to the nature of
the city right so where there's 1066 and
the first kind of doomsday book or
whatever all these things these were
compilations of organization our modern
nation-state is a function of the of the
Kaiser and how he or he organized the
nation-state through bureaucratic means
our governance technologies are a
function of bureaucracy our accounting
mechanism similarly so a tree I would
just make this very real for you a tree
is a is one is a cost on the balance
sheet of the city which is why Sheffield
City Council was cutting down mature
trees because mature trees cost the most
to maintain and the highest risk in
terms of insurance but unfortunately
when do you think trees give their best
and most optimum environmental services
in terms of co2 sequestration stenum
sustainable urban drainage it's when
they're mature forty years plus so
because the accounting mechanism of
trees sees them as a cost you optimize
you discount
and you look at the cost liabilities and
what that means is that financial many
of these things
I want to put forward to you I'm gonna
bring this bringing this down into some
activations constructed the nature so
the reason why we have private economy
is because the most efficient way of
making contract between people is
between when technology changes the
nature of how we construct a contract
something fundamentally new happens
efficiently
what happens when the nature of
contracting isn't about a series of
bilateral relationships genuinely
multilateralism in a structural sense of
contracture level I think the nature of
where value occurs changes
so the Highland cost about 278 million
dollars to build
two hundred seventy eight million
dollars seventy percent of it was funded
by federal and state twenty-five percent
of it was funded by philanthropy in a
five percent biases
here's a key question I'm gonna call
skin
to 78 million some of you know they
should answer 200 million how many years
would have taken
10% of the land value the land value
went up for an island if you just took
10% of the land value uplift and you
used it to pay for the highlight how
many years do you think it would have
taken to pay for us
yes
it's about ten months
ten months
why that's important is that what this
starts to prove effective Lee
private Civic goods
so the investment that went to the High
Line lifted private property adjacent to
it so significantly remember in that
calculation we discounted all of
Manhattan's increase we discounted all
the abnormalities we just looked at what
was attributable to that area
why that's interesting is it starts to
challenge an underlying thesis
if you own a piece of property
nothing less than construction costs
definitely I think now
the value something like this is a
function function it's a function here's
a keyword monopolistic relationship to
common and shakers
and evaluation required
now why this gets interesting you can
start to picture and common goods and
value you can start to you could start
to build new business models and new
value models new value models that
invest in civic goes if you went to a
school and you said we're going to
million
the basis that all the houses adjacent
to it result of your performance 10% of
it so not only does your child go to a
great school
three
you also most of the benefit of the
uplift of property now why I'm saying
that is that fundamental changes how we
think about cities
and how we invest in our cities as
designers one of the projects we all end
up doing common goes Civic some form of
civic goods designing these cultural
institutions I'm saying business models
of 21st century are going to value those
cultural institutions and cultural
investments and we now have the
bureaucratic infrastructure to do that
applies at many many levels so I'll open
up another thesis so New York is looking
to invest 119 billion into building a
protective seawall around New York
to give space and time rights always
think of property as being infinite when
you start to put in infrastructure you
start to have a completely linked
relationship to those property rights so
when you start to see these linkages
these things in really radical formats
we're doing which is called the free
house which we'll announce soon imagine
a house which is self sovereign which
has a mortgage a perpetual mortgage and
if you want to live in it you right you
buy the obligation to live in it you say
I will cover the perpetual mortgage and
if somebody else wants it you can take
the actual obligation but over time it
becomes near free because that perpetual
mortgage over a hundred years becomes
near zero and the obligation becomes
mayor mayor micro so what you start to
realize is that new mechanisms are going
to change our relationship of the house
and our relationship to infrastructure
like this and what does that do to how
we organize places becomes really
critical but simultaneously lots of
other things we know for example housing
is one of the poor housing is the
highest contributor to healthcare costs
one of the highest country
it''s yet the business model of housing
is all designed around the buying and
selling of housing and rent so we did a
piece of work where we looked at
retrofitting housing strictly Milton
Keynes and it was about retrofitting and
making proving the energy performance
where was the savings from the retrofit
it wasn't in energy-saving monetary
savings which we all everyone thought
the savings would be by the people who
live there all the savings were in the
NHS as a result of reduced pneumonia
cases so when you know value this is
what I'm trying to tell you the value of
your investment in retrofitting that
house is linked to the NHS it's not
linked to the product yeah everything we
design if you want to look at the value
you look at where the value flows now
our historic models of investing in
housing have always been linked to the
tradable value of the house so if you go
to Blackpool the houses are worth
nothing so why does the urban
regeneration doesn't really happen in
black ball because there's no land value
to uplift but if you were to build the
social cost which are owned by the state
billions of pounds a year and invite
that back to the table you could build a
completely new way of engaging the
transformation of urban space because
it's not dependent on land value it's
looking at social liabilities what you
will build won't be high-rise towers
because you don't have to optimize the
land value what you're optimizing is
human value so these underlying
characteristics redesign that all the
biases that we think about urban renewal
and all our procedures in that process
and this happens like in 2000 2002
brilliant project called million dollar
blocks costing a million dollars for the
state in terms of reoffending
so the cost of reoffending investing
because if you advertise about future
million dollars every year to present a
value how much could you invest in that
neighborhood to transform and reduce the
cost of reoffending why that's important
is when you start to freedom
it's pretty much as far as it gets these
days color would you like to paint
whereas if you want to talk about well
this is what reoffending costs are if we
build this housing in a cooperative
format we did live build with people we
would have this effects in a completely
different economics of architecture has
to be creatively joined
and this goes back to this is one of my
absolute because it really goes back at
the kind of thesis of architecture
that's all design fees this can be 4%
could be 5% but on general if you look
at the whole design team in somewhere
that sometimes could be 25% for the guys
more than the capital cost frame
significantly more just to maintain that
building operationalize that building
the people
so currently all your design contracts
are focused where
design contracts are focused on the one
so you optimize the one however much you
fight it how much you dislike it your
whole contractual bias so I mean bias
construction and the trade of that
construction to an end user it's really
important the sale of that construction
to an end user
pppp architects
don't listen to them in a blind way PFI
was really important about PFI when you
were designing into PFI you were
designing for 21 designing for trading
operationalize for 20 years
paintings
why because every three years when you
have to repaint them if you lose the
utility of the room
you think you design differently
maintenance if you focused on designing
optimizing your people so this room when
it's full when we have juries here right
how many parts per million do you think
this room is in terms of co2 levels
typically about 413 parts per million no
more will you take a guess about maybe
about twelve to fifteen hundred parts
per million that's the level that you
can go up to and even go up to two
thousand but it's very rare but you what
do you think that does well it
cognitively destroys you
not just anecdotally which is pretty
factually so if you want to design them
design buildings you maximize your
oxygen levels and you maximize them
there is almost 13 points IQ points
difference measurable difference in
cognitive capability to make decisions
so if you want to get to that eight
you're no longer optimizing the
maintenance cost you optimize the
quality of oxygen in that air and the
air pollution effects right do you see
what I'm trying so first one optimize
the construction second one optimizes
actually actually focus on optimizing
the cost and operationalization of the
building the third one the eight
optimizes the oxygen levels the light
levels in the building but your
contracts are only 2 1 PF I extended it
to 1.5 which means the building's we get
are a function of our contractual
relationships you want to reinvent
architecture reinvent the architectural
contract it's really as simple as that
don't reburn assume you've got nothing
against in the fine books
relationships
or re-invented right and i think this is
really and this is really important for
us to understand second point how long
how long do I have
is this just like one of those a night
so just keep going obscure guess you
guys make decisions second from control
to ennobling the thesis of governance in
control I think you guys should think
about
you know
you will know about planning right
planning laws and so far
and it's really
[Music]
what happens if our mechanism of
planning itself we can start to reinvent
it so why did we have zoning laws we
still as rightly points out we have laws
we have zoning classes you still have
only classes for tanning factories
because there were historic things to
deal with in the water
so thesis of governance of cities is
about to change the future of planning
will dictate the future of our cities
our city's development
does not have to be about control it can
also be about
ennobling and other mechanisms of design
and there's a lot of work that we're
doing around reimagining new forms of
regulation and ruse of writing
regulations as code so what happens when
you can write regulations as code what
happens if you can say you can
operationalize a truck between the hours
of 9:00 to 5:00 and you can get classes
what happens with the city becomes
dynamic
these realities
some of the stuff we did around sort of
homeowners sort of open its tools and
and other things one of the things we
started to realize exactly as we said
around ownership and models of
innovation was that actually you have to
unbundle these things and look at the
warranty infrastructure behind
pick up a few points which i think is
really important from competition to non
rivals economics economics has largely
been driven through competition but not
everything is a competition device
if you want to talk about urban data you
see most you know about sidewalk laps
in Toronto should look it up if you get
a chance Google's Google spinoff looking
at the future of cities and I think
they're the most interesting practice
I'm not saying they're right I just
ignore the most provocative and
challenging and I think if you want to
look at the future of urbanism look at
their work anyone else
[Music]
it's also challenge for me
just all the projection and all the
secretary writes you can suddenly start
to say well actually
so you want to introduce different
mechanisms of driving compliance which I
think should be
need your data so I do anything so I
made a mistake of looking at my Google
Nestor's doing a pie talk just to see
how much data Google is taking for me
it's my shiny president this is cool
listening to everything taking
temperature humidity
whereas a mind which I think people know
they have to pivot and that's why they
allow them to take my research just to
put this out train a conversation back
into my spatial world I'm going to need
anyone's permission
because I already know that world
something has an interesting kind of
just
you should focus on is because of
interventions all the way through just
the second point is prevention doesn't
only exist at the individual level it
exists at the level of you and your
social networks prescribing to place
let's run that scenario you wanna you
are locked and you prescribed the
symptoms of that place
because you intervention in the in the
mechanisms
I think this is really important for us
to realize so we can always dream the
interventions as two underlying
structures which I think we should just
keep an eye on future of rights property
rights and all those infrastructures
it's a kind of propagation to warm us up
a little bit
ownership is the enslavement of a thing
to your utility is the enslavement of a
thing to your utility
we got rid of owning other human beings
we still own land degree we still own
land and we enslave land for our utility
land has lots of system benefits use of
other things which are largely ignored
and reduced and destroyed so what is a
new model of relationship that we did
articulate with land and historically
there are treaties with land you can
have a treaty or a relationship with
land a different format that's going to
happen which I think will be really
interesting future policy future of
contracting I've already told you if we
go to us from a private economy to the
Civic economy there's a whole shift in
how value formation occurs feature of
Licensing how we give permission
and
I also like it's worth just looking at
what it means to be human
thesis of being human it's still in too
individualistic modular man thesis human
you are not singular epigenetics history
of poverty the impacts of poverty passed
through generations we know in terms of
your brain
identity formation whether physically
physiologically you're not one organism
you're a multitude of organisms we know
that micro biomes affect your cognitive
performance we know the idea of the
definitive human is a really interesting
but not a description of what it means
to be human so how do we recognize the
fact that we're highly interdependent
systems
and humans are the means to be human
bureaucracy
in the health
and human development what does that do
to our cities and how we relate to each
other
fifteen cigarettes all these things
the finding in these deep understanding
of what it means to be human those two
forces will change
not to me is I think the boring
revolutionary architecture it's also the
real revolution and the question for me
is are we equipped to be talking about
it designing everything
[Applause]
