okay thank you all for coming thank you
too man thank you to the a or thank you
to the a a funny it's a sort of a funny
thing to discuss in a way I got Dennis's
pictures Dennis sent me his pictures and
I was really taken by them and I agreed
that nothing properly had been said
about the palace with all its kind of
questions of which I think you're near
these a question at the end is sort of
fundamental but not for me to answer
so what I'm going to very quickly in the
interest of conversation I think it is
really important that there's a
conversation I think it is great if I
think it is great that they are expands
its information to vent to through to
events like this so in that interest I'm
gonna go quite quickly through I
realized ten pieces of work that are
about or at the time felt that they were
about some kind of idea of of the island
it strikes me that we in in in in say
medieval studies they they talk about
insular art same thing and I think it's
kind of interesting to look at it that
way that it's an archipelago let's say
of ideas so I'm gonna go quickly they're
just postcards if you like and if I
ramble on too much it's because I've
gotten interested in them again some of
them are quite old there was I thought
there should be a comma between imagined
in Ireland so this is a road that was
made legally in a coal
on the west coast of Ireland by a
developer in a fit of pique and he made
the road over over on a Friday night and
he delivered this over the weekend which
is very beautiful and very rough and so
when it went through the shenanigans of
planning on common land it was found to
be legal and ordered to be demolished so
we went to film it myself the Peter
Maybury because we thought it was really
fantastic and actually when you were
there was even more and the sound of it
and its destruction and it's actually
it's precision and considering the
timeline it was made in it was made out
of somebody's pocket
I'd be going bankrupt and we called it
these islands if this film was a
seven-minute film that then became an
essay in in Saco that I wrote about
where I took the planning report and
wrote it as an inspector calls and
actually the failure of the planning
application and the appeal was actually
the argument for the sublime but you can
see that in San Rocco so then this is
this is entry this is actually the cover
of the government the Department of
Foreign Affairs brochure for before it
was built so it's kind of fun with the
harp and the thing and that without that
that project was 2,000 and it was to
make the first official representation
of the country in in in in in the Venice
Biennale in the jar DeeDee and of course
the question of
not having a pavilion and renting a
pavilion and not having any money and so
on kind of generated an idea about you
know it's kind of like a lot of this
stuff is really good all of this stuff
is actually falls into the same sort of
hoop funnily enough when I look at it
which is maybe sometimes I think it's
comfortable and sometimes I think it's
uncomfortable I think that these kind of
projects are in a way very difficult
because you end up dealing with tjs but
Joseph boys did some very nice work in
Ireland and there's a very great piece
for him called Irish battery which is
two briquettes which some dairy gold
buffer between it and I thought that
that was really amazing and you can buy
this stuff and it's for sale it's ground
for sale so the project essentially
became something a material that was
free and how do you stack it in an order
that has charge and makes a pavilion and
then this is the Ambassador looking at
it you know it's an it's that's a little
north point its entry in cubed it was
dedicated there's a kind of a shaggy dog
story would you about about sins
and then inside it becomes a bunch of
cards which are kind of like football
cards so rather than being pavilion well
rather than being a sculpture it's a
pavilion in that it has some information
to give are being silenced just pictures
and their flip cards where you get front
side you know sandy Lido an empty
professional air in housing in Ireland
the cliche by John hind fennec stamps as
as an money basically it's all about
money it's all about money and value and
speculation and maps and ground but
essentially it's it's an exercise in
corbelling and glue and then it's given
as a gift it was a Trojan was given as a
gift because we didn't want we couldn't
really afford to bring it back so the
talented the Venetian authorities
accepted it as manure for the Giardini
so we make our point
ten years later I curated with Peter
Maybury and Alison kina of taka
sort of a homage to deblocking amar who
were who either there
very much invested in cutting in a I
suppose an invention of a of an idea of
Irish architecture which maybe last
Sunday I mean I noticed that
Andrew Andrew says there's no style but
maybe maybe Dubois Kumar were the great
stylists out of can for a version of
Irish architecture so we made five
stacks of books that were photos
original John Donuts then new photos a
newspaper which was about but the
society and culture of the office and
what a broth from Aircraft Interiors to
you know the chocolate milk and then I
set a full set of working drawings of
the wooden building which is really nice
and then it becomes a kind of a cartoon
you know over-scaled oh paper gold wedge
because the floors the flow was uneven
in the little oratory and like all
exhibitions become became it becomes it
became kind of a caricature and then we
made it chair did this chair which is a
version of a chair that debacle Amarjit
which is a version of a chair that the
opw used in the casino marino so you
kind of riffing off this kind of idea of
continuity and people people people
it was very nice people walking around
big world two drawings very nostalgic
and you know you could take them away
and the information is presented neat
it takes close reading it's very good
there's no hostage - there's no hostage
- those who are not interested in the
black I'm Amara and then it was a very
difficult process
they felt there's a reason why the black
umar don't have a book out put that way
so we made another book after that about
the experience which is without tobacco
March is called off and it's about
making books and having fun with it I
made this for Peter Maybury as well and
it goes to everything about typeface and
spacing and tying of pages and round
versus square this thing is um brand of
this was commissioned by by the
department Foreign Affairs as well it
was a souvenir project to make a
souvenir of Ireland so that it was this
well yes something that you could buy in
a gift shop in in in in in an airport
and I thought - there was this tradition
of um again there was a tradition of
selling the American dying American
immigrants could for a small fee get a
package of turf sent to address in
America which they could burn and die to
the smell of the homeland
so the turf thing is kind of really
great and really portable and very light
and the other side of this is that there
is a game in the annals played by Phil
McCool and all these others called
on-brand of which means the black needle
or the raven and it's a version of Tafel
which is the scandinavian game and
viking game but the viking game starts
with eleven pieces no 11 squares 11 by
11 and as it migrates down the coast of
Europe it gets smaller and smaller as
you would you know it's a portable
portable culture so by the time it gets
to island seven by seven but there's no
board left we don't know what the board
was like there is a board in there is a
board found in the Isle of Man which is
a seven by seven so I thought okay we
have the game but no board interesting
souvenirs so so this is unbranded
brand of at the center of wonder this is
crow or crude the black probe the Raven
corbusier's same thing and all Celtic
cultures have this figure she's sort of
nemesis she flies over the battlefield
and lands on the shoulder of those are
going to die and it's an it's an endgame
game it's played in the round it's an
invaders game they say that it was used
to train you know baby Vikings to powder
how to invade countries but basically
the queen or the crews in the middle and
she's outnumbered she's got four
defenders but there's eight coming from
the periphery and basically ten game
chess where you're you're you're you're
outnumbered
and you're playing for stalemate and if
she gets to the edge of the island
it's stalemate and she wins so the
figures are cut out of worn extrusion of
turf and she she is the conclusion of
the pitched ruse and the butterfly roofs
and she's just funny figure that can
stand up you can see her there being
annoyed in the middle
[Music]
and then it comes in a it comes as a
tube with a rubber band you know in a in
a triangular box with a big crow on it
this is Gregor Tamagotchi this is a tiny
project for a friend Malcolm again who's
taken upon himself to talk to the Irish
people about the Irish language and the
love of words and what a great you know
that thing about it you know the penal
laws the first thing you do is you
destroy a language if you want to
destroy a culture so he's really working
back at all these old words so he's made
it's a theater set really that he can
put in the back of his car and hang it
in a venue and then he goes inside of it
into the middle and he's standing there
barefoot and you go in and he gives you
a word on a card an old Irish word like
a word for goose bump or puddle or you
know and he repeats it two three times
and then you take it away and you have
to use it for bet we call it the wizard
and it's basically linen on a cross form
makes a little makes a little house and
they can hang in any venue and it's cuff
so it so it becomes increasingly
immersive let's say as you go into the
spiral and there he is with them so you
get this funny thing of you know and
naked feet naked legs underneath this
big gown and then a queue of people into
it like hearing confession is and then
they come out with their words and they
start mustering them to one another it's
quite nice and then this is Irish age so
this is Department Foreign Affairs again
where they wanted to
and communicate and educate the citizens
as to where their donations for overseas
aid was being spent and how it was being
spent and there was some office space as
well and there was two to performance
spaces and in a lot of exhibition that
was all projected and so it was kind of
a newsreel thing and it was on the Main
Street in Dublin or Conn Street so it
was a shot fit out basically and it was
a shop shop information it was an open
vibrant communities face so it so the
60s building overhead and it cracks
around that and is intelligent about how
like how air comes in from the back and
is sucked up into the up into the thing
and then all of the exhibition is
projected and it basically becomes an
essay in granite floor and plaster board
walls and in these existing columns sort
of 16 and then projects onto the windows
and so on and really tries to engage
with the street and then this is this is
the last bar this is the land to side
bar in terminal 2 in Dublin which is a
new terminal that was built in 2000 in
tents and we got the job to just make
the bar so again there's this you know
you know landscape oh it's always comes
down to landscape and oh and all of this
business but basically it's a plywood up
veneered assemblage of elements that had
to travel
up to lift and be assembled on the on
the floor and I think two days so so it
makes a bunch of Snug there's vaults and
then it makes this kind of tree that
makes his face under which you think
you're really in Ireland and then and
then this is the palace this is actually
the signage as the section who did Annie
on ultimately but it's the palaces the
palace was made but again it's
government funding out of EU funding
about about centers of a certain size
urban sense of a certain size having art
house cinemas it took a long time to
make
it's really about I suppose it's about
it's the closest getting to perhaps some
idea of hyper kind of ordinary or frugal
glamour or a certain kind of deluxe and
it's really interested in how people
move and go to the pictures and her and
those kind of closures or openings
between outside and inside and dreams
face and reality and reflection and
light essentially natural and projected
and then it tries to it tries to push it
a little on having on temperates faces
and everything but the rooms you see
colored there so the red ones are the
cinemas and they're black boxes the
yellow ones are bar and cafe the rest of
its effectively outside so you get
things like this this is the window
scheme the windows are all done with pat
scarf and Eric Pierce
so that's an unfolded elevation but it's
also the wayfinding and in the picture
the pictures adjust the town and then we
try to make everything we could as
little product as possible and then it
gets
it gets it's very it's kind of I think
now it's it's very interested in the
applied arts basically and reclaiming
them for architecture at the expense of
product
and it's got a wriggly plan enforcer
that's a solar stack off the bar which
which illuminates the the acoustic
lobbies these are all Dennis's pictures
so this is an old building to the front
it's kind of cropped and cropped we just
cropped it so it's not really it's the
ghost of an old building with with the
original teeth and that's how it sits in
the town kind of it has a job to do as
an as a as a urban gateway stretching
the old town to the docks and then it
tries to insinuate itself into into the
existing kind of let's say charming well
certainly merchants Road that building
there and what goes down goes off
decided it sort of it sort of as a
strategy its side steps perhaps the
issue of the corner and and amplifies it
and then it becomes a figure in the town
and it's got a weather very knowledge
and it it's quite simple actually as an
extrusion at the ground upwards and then
pyramid on top and it ends up doing
things like that and that's the last
slide
thank you for letting us in a little bit
inflatable bridge so I wish there was
more ski so how when start to be
architecture then thank you made the
distinction as to whether something is
an installation of sculpture or a
pavilion well there just type something
I mean really they're all I think
inflatables oh well when you present to
the pavilion and you were saying you
almost introduced it like it was almost
more of a sculpture winter scene next
elementary looking at it from the
outside and then actually oh you know it
is architecture because it is because
you can walk into it it's a pavilion
actually you almost corrected yourself
yeah because I mean you're always
between this sort of
duchamp's line and Llosa's lying about
what it's architecture between plumbing
and so on so I just realized that the
thing couldn't really be just a reek of
turf that it had to have some it had to
have some
secret color mystery or something to
make it more and I think it was very
powerful because you know you're in that
a body of material of that and and the
smell and so on but it just felt like
you did you need it to be the piece it's
a propaganda piece and it's jokey but
it's not it's you know it has all that I
mean it was a lot of it was a lot of
it's funny that it's become or it's
funny that it still exists in a way it's
funny you know like Andrew cited in his
series because at the time it was you
know very easy to mock Bugman and so on
but but the actual shape of those things
those briquettes are just if it's a
German system it's they're really
beautiful and the strapping used to be
orange now it's green which is a
disaster usually but now then but soon
they're not gonna be around anymore like
we kind of knew that the projection was
that they would be around for 25 more
years so they're coming to an end but
really it was about the material when we
bothered to Japan bought some of the
materials in Japan or Japanese look like
a really powerful
just you know it's shiny on the outside
and it's cleaved on the other edges and
she's putting it together it was a
pleasure so I mean that but then the
form of it had - well played the
gymnastics of being dedicated to end I
mean her in AZ doesn't end so it just
seemed like it would be fun to try and
do Nicolas of my enemy you've no brief
for these things you know you've no
brief really for these these kinds of
projects unless it's data or sociology
or something so you to you you you're
trying to drop you in front you're
plunging the problem as hard as you can
to generate content sufficient to
actually drive the material into a into
a shape does that make sense
Nicholas of Myra Santa Claus was the
was the lodestar by which decisions were
made but it's just funny and you know
and you can and it's it was really it's
really funny to tell us to you know to
tell to tell his story and to tell all
the stories about his apocryphal life
and and it felt kind of good to do a
shaggy dog story for further an irish
pavilion but i'm kind of resent i kind
of i don't want to be the storyteller
guy i mean it's kind of the kind of
diminishes i think the work so I'm kind
of sort of a double edged sword
do you say that biggest do you think
that's how your work is perceived yeah
that's my own fault
I think because you know you're talking
to you talking to people and you're
talking to journalists and you know
you're just talking about the stuff and
you end up talking to certain kind of a
way I suppose and then that becomes a
story and then that becomes a criticism
or a tyranny and it is really in a way
but but I mean it's but it's said with
all understanding that thing has to
absolutely rock presenting a project
this kind of is inevitably telling the
little bit of a story isn't it even
presenting it tonight and even decided
to make the images really small on the
screen like when you look at it like
that you can kind that's a pretty
continuous inquiry about material and
figuration you could say with you know
John Heinz is there in that they are all
images that are constructed to represent
a reality that doesn't really exist or
so they're kind of but actually by kind
of doing that like all the previous like
Robin Walker and all of these people by
doing that you can actually construct a
new image
[Music]
but it just seems
[Music]
it just seems
[Music]
I just think it's kind of a it's a
funny thing to even have an issue about
a country or an issue about a place like
that it's kind of funny it's kind of
difficult it has to it has two sides for
one is of and one is kind of against
like like I don't like I don't see
myself as living on periphery I'm not
sure I even see myself like I was born
in London you say that because of what
Andrew read of Ireland being at the
periphery yeah I'm not sure that I with
all due respect I'm not sure I agree
with that I think it's you mean you have
to be in the center of you're in this
everybody's in the center you know you
have to operate within that and this
kind of idea of
you know pollination by crosswinds is
sort of sort of
not true
so you feel because you feel
I mean feeling at the centric eye yes
but I guess the influences and where
things come from and how they're
translated and brought to a place oh it
gets moved around yeah transformed as so
it's so it's more like a zeitgeist or a
fashion dare I say oh you know like you
know we went through layers as you have
here and as you are now we're going
through we're going through different
fields of interest and they tend to move
between classical generally and romantic
and they just take tact back and forth
over a generation as we know and we're
in a certain one now again and it
reflects a certain kind of situation I'm
not sure you know I'm not sure
that it's right to not presume that
every every receiver of that information
is not at their own center that it's
somehow secondhand feels kind of shoddy
and you know and then you get you know
William chambers William chambers makes
a model may receive the model you know
makes the model for for Lord Lord
Charlemont
and then it's his genius builder who
takes the pearwood model and builds it
and all the compromises come from that
and that's what we're all in love with
but the doctor isn't interested in
Pilate but it's a series of translations
isn't it that have that originated in a
particular moment in time at least and
usually a place yeah but it but if you
but if you look at a slightly different
way is it not is it no is it not
it's not the fusion line at all it's
actually something else it's actually we
were laughing about Thomas years earlier
Tom you know there is an Irish tonsor as
opposed to the classic Tom's here
the Irish tonsor is firmed up fully
receiving here because all the monks had
red hair and you received this way when
you've got red hair and they ask for
dispensation from the Pope
re-architecture he receive from abroad
Ben I know you're challenging the idea
the idea of have you been doing that
Konishi around the country or Irish
architecture is is perceived I think
it's absolutely incredible and you know
and there's a lot of kind of you know on
the islands of Team Ireland and all of
that but it seems to me that it seems to
me that
it's not a it's not a national effort
and it's not it's not a ground located
project and it's there's something else
going on that's about
[Music]
you know
teaching actually I think it's about
teachers I think where the teachers were
it's about a kind of authority and it's
about a clarity of intention and a
clarity generally of technology as well
and and and a certain kind of politics
that make Irish architecture yeah I
think that makes anything that makes
anyone who makes any kind of if you can
place some kind of collective around
work but it's actually I know with
respect you have to it's it's need to
say that this is our interpretation but
actually that stuff is kind of moving
around I think what's interesting for us
is that even though and we never
obviously would you know claim to soul
or the questions around you know are
attracted after today or to to say that
that's you know that's what it is and
that's where it's at now and to kind of
freeze it in time it's more I guess it's
more a filter through which to try and
understand and start to create almost
like dialogues between some of the some
of the projects and of the ideas some of
the people within a single publication
which I guess is what this idea of a
bound book sort of gives you you know
there's an order there's a structure
there's a rhythm to these things and you
have like a a concentration of ideas
that have there is like a some sort of a
common ground there some sort of even if
it's arguably arbitrary in the sense
that it's the right from you know
man-made borders that that make us
understand the world the way we do
and I guess it's trying to make sense of
something I think that the birth school
is interesting in the in in the magazine
because it's it kind of represents a
tradition that was
at a very precise point probably when
group 91 as we know them came into their
own as teachers and young architects I
mean Peter Marie Doyle were teaching in
UCD when I was there so ashamed and it's
interesting to look at the before and
after pictures when you see the gutters
- gutters I mean for such technical
people to have you know and then when
you see the what's there today and the
whole roof technology and so on so
there's a kind of an interesting shift I
think technically from the let's call it
the museum tradition that was kind of
there's a moment where it was dropped
for a kind of a very very low-tech
approach
[Music]
I I think that I think that what Gary
and John McLaughlin have been doing
about that building and its position in
a kind of a much broader context with
the citizens and someone of a certain
time is terrifically interesting but it
had no it didn't have really any
purchase except if you look at say it's
got tunnel Walker and inquiry I thought
it was really good that you published
that in some of the other pieces and I
guess for us it's important to with what
Shelley McNamara said actually it's like
oh no you know they're architects and
who are old and some who are young
there's some horror live there's some
who are dead and that's kind of what
makes it interesting and I guess if the
project has its carrying of an idea that
is like relevant and has importance
today then then we feel it's important
to to publish it and to include it it
sort of brings it to a present a
conversation and I'm glad you're
speaking about some of the other pieces
in the magazine but I kind of wanted to
go back to your work
and and I wanted and I guess to in that
instance to powers but which I'm
probably saying wrong do you think it's
possible to understand the building
without having been to it
I think it's got nice plans there pretty
tight plans and the section is nice I
think as a scheme as a kind of a scheme
and but know the thing it's better to go
it's better to go definitely better to
go and it's it's it's a very anxious
building to please you and sometimes it
goes a little too far
perhaps urgent as possible or as a large
as possible to how you to manipulate you
as heavily as it possibly can at all
times which is probably not correct but
it does try to do that do you think
there's the program of the building the
fact that it's a picture has a cinema
has a an importance or that could have
been said of any building like it's the
actual program and the fact that you're
you know you're walking into you're
leaving the sort of like the city and
the streets you're walking into a place
and you have this sort of like
transition I guess you have a lot of
stairs but then you're really your
destination is to go into a room you
know a black box we're gonna be watching
a film and you're gonna be somewhere
else entirely so to what extent is the
idea of almost discomfort that you're
imposing on visitors like to negotiate
their transfers
I can't you mean it's what you say it's
difficult to to navigate yeah but it
leaves you a little bit yeah yeah I mean
there was a point I mean you can there's
a shift in the section which you or the
state it could have been just a stairs
and the stairs on the other end and a
stack of rooms great but I need to do a
tummy Cooper move on the back stairs
generates that situation did I want to
do that is that the right thing to do
and I suppose at the time I was kind of
in a mantra of this is not a modern
building this is you know and this is
not a this is not a and I was interested
in Galway idea of itself as a medieval
town if you go there it has some but
it's not a ruse or something like it's
not it's it doesn't have so I but I was
interested in the little pieces of the
heaven how we could intensify that and
it did seem to me that in a town of what
is it eighty thousand people that you
could actually probably go to the
pictures
with a friend that knows it or that you
could ask somebody for directions and
that would all be very very very
positive and so I thought that that it
was worth the
elastication of it yet it is it's not it
could have been a lot clearer but if it
was a lot clearer the bar would have
been smaller and I thought that it was
by pushing the people around the back of
the bar and getting that whole back
stairs thing going on it actually made
the bar a proper suite of rooms that
would really and genuinely probably
support an American cinema so it was
about kind of gaining a bit of space
there but really it was then it was the
challenge of trying to get people
through and around this
I've always loved going to save theaters
like the Olympia in Dublin or there many
of them old ones that you go in the
front door and you go through the
processional thing and then you come out
with the fire escape and you land out
into the town in a completely different
way in the back of house and all of that
and I just love
I've always loved all of that all of
that business and then if you compound
that with going into the dark and in
this case you're not heated so then you
come in and it's warm and then it gets
dark and then you watch the film and
then you come back out again and then
all the windows are messing around with
the light levels and the colour of the
space I thought that it would be I
suppose intoxicating and I'm forgiven
for that indulgence of of asking you to
there aren't enough toilets in the
building that's for sure it's kind of
funny that we want to you know people
say oh wow why should I buy my ticket
outside or and you go but but
but we have corner shops we have kiosks
we have all of that business like our
navigation of the city is always about
thresholds between the inside and
whether it's air curtains or whatever
way you want to look at those so the
expectation that the institution has a
door and you walk into it and after that
it's fine to take your jacket off and
everything is just gonna be clear I mean
it's not a big ass to remove that it's
just like the contrast between the way
you you talk about palaces relationship
to go away and even then I guess with
some of the pictures one of the things
we wanted dennis to do was to like
contextualize the building because I
feel like we had a lot of shots boy it
was kind of very tightly cropped and we
were struggling to sort of understand it
didn't understand how it sits where it
sits and then you know when you were
going through it as you were like moving
further and further away from the
building in your presentation you were
almost talking about it like a like a
character in town you know and like
which face it was it was showing
depending on on which side you were like
approaching it from or and then at the
same time once you get closer to it and
you go and it's it's an entirely
different Wow
I was worried about being concrete I
thought there was going to be war about
it being concrete but nobody has
mentioned concrete and I mean I mean the
audience for the town for a town that
really like stone
that was kind of what I thought was
going to be the problem that the land
the materiality of us but it is
interesting that some people like I
remember Bob Queen the film director
coming up to me saying I'm lost
thank you at the opening but other
people don't want to be lost
but if you go to say something like T
Nocturne or any of those great old old
town O's bars old theaters they have a
kind of equality of that where the where
the where the house
is bigger than its occupants there's
more going on and I think I was
interested in it being a house really
without being grandiose but that it was
a kind of kind of Shambala kind of kind
of that everything insinuates itself
upon upon itself and so it has
consequences that are quite rational
actually whether the the extrusion of
code or it's it's that order of tempered
room versus on temperate or it's square
box against medieval or Georgian
footprints ended and that the clanging
of all of these kind of pressure points
that that could actually be the could be
the kind of cityscape you're saying that
the problem was like no one complained
about the fact that it was concrete I
thought that that would be because it
was in the planning from it's meant to
be quite in the Planning Commission it's
painted white but I mean technically to
make that thing in concrete like it's a
nine story monolith there's no DPC's
it's all cantilever it's in three
dimensions it's tricky it's a remarkable
feat I think from the engineers and from
the builders you know basically
everything is on transfer beams that is
transferring itself across it stairs up
and so on it's very interesting on that
level and and I think you feel that when
you're in it I think you I think you can
feel that they the gearing's of the
space particularly when you walk around
the outside of it I told I suppose the
attempt to resolve that to in three
dimensions was
[Music]
as well as obviously the interest in the
tower house type and the feeling that
trying to elicit that feeling of where
you can get concrete on the outside and
concluding the inside that you and that
you can be in rooms that have
condensation in them and so on but that
you're traveling through them and then
you can get to the perfect plus C's and
a cone of light and the thing happens
and that's great you know cartoon red
dresses are made on each of the rooms
but to kind of push that procedure as
far as it could possibly go
was was I think the concern ultimately
to try and resolve all of the bits you
know because there's only two it's just
one Street which is much this road and
dark road so there's two it only plays
two geometries it's it's it's very
single-minded really in its in its
in its plan and then it's section just
exploits whatever is left over you
didn't show the plan sir did you I know
I showed them I'm just interested about
how we communicate the building I guess
I mean it's a lot of the work that we
have to do in terms of you know
explaining the project but also
communicating maybe like a journey
through it or its atmosphere or and how
and I guess it's a word story for lack
of a better word but kind of what story
do we do we tell it through and and I
feel like even the choice of slides you
know starting with section that is
almost like has like a diagrammatic feel
you know about - kind of like understand
it I feel like we always certainly do
like as editors but I think as
architects we do as well have a little
bit of control as to how we present
something whether you know whether it's
a board game a pavilion cinema and and I
guess I'm just trying to because we were
trying to make sense of it as we were
working on the layout of it trying to
understand what kind of what information
do the pictures tell us what do you know
the sketches tell us or other models how
do we explode it a little bit to kind of
reveal that three-dimensional complexity
and to make it understandable and we
were asking ourselves to what extent I
guess it needed to be fully understood
or whether it needed to remain a bit
mysterious and it's and because it can't
quite be communicated perhaps on paper
Olivares in fairness to two to three
hours ago yeah the lady who commissioned
it originally
really Doolin who was amazing person
filmmaker and many other things she
soared I sent it to her and she said she
said she's gars so I think you think
probably I mean it would be nice to get
to that point where you can't really the
pictures are just indicative but that
maybe writing can get closer to an
experience and I think that's about
right I think that's really maybe the
condition we want to get to isn't it
where you kind of had to be there so I
thought it was good I mean those
sketches
those haven't been published and I don't
really like architecture the sketches
somehow but it's
[Music]
because they have the whiff of did you
knew what you were doing at the
beginning I mean and they're never
really good drawings actually right I
mean I think the intention behind this I
mean the worst sketch is the one the
fake napkin sketch isn't it the one you
do after you know but as a way of
working through the building in
architectural form a three-dimensional
complexity there at all oh yeah building
was done they all get broken but but
rough models and you know no Rhino or
anything like that for most of it was
just done you know it's very
[Music]
it was very defined really the shell so
we had it and it was defined the extent
of a room you had to maximize the number
of seats and and then the rest of it is
just coordinated basically on almost
domestic domestic jumped and turning
circles for stairs and so on so it's
quite so so we could actually take each
piece of the complex pieces and just
model them at one 220 big yeah that'll
work and then draw it and weave off like
that but when when when the contractor
we had the job at a certain point he
threatened to sue because the contract
documents did not describe the building
he said because you can't really
represent the under of the over in in in
even in the section you just can't do it
particularly if it's happening in lots
of different ways so I kind of I sort of
I kind of love that when we drew lots
and lots and lots of sections through
that building but actually the builders
built a tower form we did you know just
like a cat scan but it was all built off
one section you know six brilliant
joiners just worked it out three
dimensions and didn't think I was kind
of
amazing like that when you kind of
realize the power of the power of
those old-fashioned drawings - really
strong and they're the drawings that
often crew like to work with because
it's all there you know and the drawings
that you see crumpled around you know
when they're not useful anymore
but those no those those little sketches
were further work for her for I mean
solace was a group of seniors basically
the old call with Film Society the call
with film flower and various people who
were just interested in in movies so it
was very easy to talk to them about the
romance of cinema and I remember one of
them gave me a book on deco cinemas
English deco cinemas the history of the
death of cinema and the and Lydia
suggested that it would be called the
picture palace it was changed to Paul
else afterwards because he got into
because the ownership changed but when
it was called the minute it was called
picture Palace which was out of the
Clara Palace which was out of something
earlier cinema that kind of set the tone
you know it's gonna have to be a little
big deluxe a little bit deluxe and then
it was a question of how do you kind of
put lipstick on the kind of gorilla of
the object so in suit you know this is
licensed for neon on concrete and
there's license for colored windows and
there's you know it's done so you
started to get quite quite thrilled
naughty you might be about using
using fabrics just and there's nothing
behind but tissue paper so the feather
boa kind of c-terminus then I really
enjoyed all of that and that's kind of
part of that old you know before they
became electric temples when they're you
know that transition in the 20s I
suppose from being musical to being
cinemas that there's little stages and
so on that kind of world was something
that the client was after actually in
the beginning and so supporters all of
the all of the all of the decisions
about tempering and not tempering in you
know the Tea Room as a Hall of Mirrors
and a bar as a traditional all of that
all of those kind of narrative let's
face it narrative discussions were kind
of driven out of an idea from solace
about Galway in the West of Ireland and
making a new building in a small town
that had elbows and maybe put it up to
put it up to the town a little bit
but what these thinks of itself which I
suppose is the kind of closed-loop on
maybe any of those kind of projects
where you're dealing with like you know
it has Palace on one side and pull-offs
on the other and that's you know people
in Dublin was saying
Paulo's porosities just a gator
cessation of palace and you know it's
big routes about Platts your palate and
so on and you know the diacritics and
how they're used in the windows are
sources like just but they're real got
like always the Center for Celtic
studies and languages so it's kind of
getting in underneath the underneath the
underneath these kind of silly silly
discussions really but it's the same
word either side but the Irish one faces
out to the tender in each one faces in
and then the calm comes into palace and
the gable I got a lot of fooling around
like that and I think they're pulling
signage and wayfinding in identity and
you know like what you think of you know
Bonjour tristesse that's only because
Cesar doesn't like graffiti and he
decided that if they painted out stained
that's but then it becomes a difficulty
where actually you want all of the
signage like the Running Man becomes oh
let's arrange the running men so that
they're running down the stairs and the
electrician doesn't know and then what
happens is more signage comes in after
you go and then you feel that the
signage isn't this isn't signage enough
it isn't sign it and signage ease it
isn't signing enough it isn't um it's on
it isn't on the architecture so it
becomes a kind of tyranny in itself
where you try and manage all of the
are you trying that's where you trying
to incorporate the letters into the
space and I like that you I mean I don't
really like the word narrative as word
itself but don't don't don't we all do
that like don't we have to kind of talk
talk it into existence with your
colleagues or makers suppose manage how
it's described but I think that that's
kind of fundamental like it's like and
the kind of process of designing
something is kind of trying to find out
what it is so it's it's a kind of a game
of those images ideally it's kind of has
synthesized into something else yeah it
settles and then and then I guess
there's what happens afterwards I find
it quite interesting that as time passes
the amount of images and drawings that
are used to almost represent at that
point to describe a project reduce you
know and then a week a month a year ten
years down the line you have two
pictures and you taught you name a
project and everyone has the same image
in their mind and it's been reduced and
it changes the story or the perception
or the idea of the building over time
yeah
yeah that's true that's where that's
that's but I guess it's the same when
presenting you know when lecturing about
the body of work the images that we keep
about particular projects and the ones
we bring in as part of the of the
conversation and the ones that get kind
of edited out by the architects by
editors body by everything by the world
of the internet you know yeah it's
interesting
well it's really fun to see I mean the
whole world of internet and Instagram
and particularly public projects where
you can see other people taking pictures
and you can see the pictures that
they're taking yeah that's a really good
picture it's a real joy to see them open
because I was away but it was really
moving you know we have a great deal in
common and that's kind of reassuring I
think quite like it went photographed
and this is why we we sometimes like to
and when we can the Commission
photography almost too to show the
building in a different light either
even to the architect sometimes you know
you see things that you might not have
seen I'm conscious that we're talking
and I was wondering if there any
questions in the audience it's quite
dark so I can't properly see but I want
you to give everyone a chance to to
comment or to question
oh sorry there's a mic coming
and there's one at the back as well I
just wondered in the in the context of
talking about I mean this is a while ago
now but IRA tschn Asst and kind of
differences of opinion on what that
might mean I wondered what you kind of
reckon about being TT's your words kind
of propaganda project is maybe what
you've said
what doing that as a you know sole
individual or as a small group of people
what do you reckon about that role
[Music]
you mean constructing identity yeah yeah
tricky but we did all time we did all
the time I thought when I thought with
Providian in Venice which is which was
and I thought actually the offer was
that the Venezuela pavilion wasn't being
used this year would you like to show
some drawings no let's let's try and
make something too
be on the ground to make something and
and I knew pretty quickly that it should
be in briquettes because I could get
them for free and we could arrange
somebody to try after that once you kind
of
but then after that it was about
twisting it that it wasn't to feel that
one of those one of those stories that
it was actually I mean the thing about
the briquettes is I don't think people
had really the kids were kind of
kind of crap
they were like two pounds 20 and you
bought them in your supermarket and you
went home and you need them and they
burned and they weren't really good fuel
they were bad she will compress to be
slightly better filled but they weren't
as good as coal which is English so so
yes you're kind of in that territory of
the heart
the Department of Foreign Affairs it's a
bit of a bit of a it's a bit of a it's a
bit of
it's you know you're representing the
country is supposed to be from the other
hand in two thousand venice biennale it
wasn't it wasn't you know there wasn't
it wasn't i don't know how many people
saw that thing very few I think actually
was in very remote area and Irish
architecture of capital i capital a
wasn't really wasn't really what it is
today and you know today you have to
compete for that role of being the
author of the pavilion or the authors of
the pavilion then it was I just was
asked would you like to do it because I
was young and probably had loads of
energy so the thing so the so that in a
funny kind of way it was it was just a
lot of fun to fooled around with those
things and to try and try and talk kind
of kind of talk about them actually like
everybody goes oh yeah really after and
all of this stuff comes out which is
kind of with a maybe fiddle music kind
of soundtrack in the background but the
actual thing itself time by having a
kind of a classical order and referring
back to construction and I was obsessed
there should be no lintels that was my
opinion to time no lintels all lintels
of no littles because the lintel is
classical and were not doing lintels and
so it's so it's so it was kind so it was
kind of about going back to easily
without clinton's
I just I think it's interesting that the
in the way that Andrew talked about it
and in the way that it's perhaps
perceive now it feels like an object
with a huge amount of resonance and
today you talk about it you kind of you
do kind of do something distracted I
think there was another question at the
back I remember back in probably 2002
2003 when you came for Crete upstairs
and excited students and we had a good
time and having seen the project and
kind of your explanation now cinema it
kind of it feels I'm not sure what
exactly we're looking at it it feels
that The Times has moved on obviously we
now have so many more kind of pressing
issues the rest of it it's not just
about economy but it's actually climate
and actually how we do things and what
we do them with and kind of looking at
the cinema it to me I mean I I
appreciate your knowledge and kind of
theoretical background but looking at it
it feels almost as a kind of Archaea lot
our geology or it's a kind of a
reconstruction of Soviet architecture
with obviously with a very significant
twist but does it address well enough
the environments that actually end the
main issues that actually need to
address the same same is with the same
actually you know a criticism is its
message do we put across with this
highly intelligent work but also almost
highly irrelevant where does the
tangible point between the challenge and
the work
[Music]
I think that's a good question I think
in I think the issue of climate or
environment or whatever I think that
it's if I'm to defend let's say I think
it's about comfort actually I think that
we really need to look at the culture of
comfort and how it has deep frogs are
changed and adjusted in our lifetimes in
our Paris often just keep going and I
think that that kind of extends into
construction then and how you how you
deal with questions of
temperance if you're if you're referring
to a large concrete building sure and
that that can be discussed but I think
that I think that yeah all of the works
there don't to have a bias I think that
the I think that the palace is very
engaged environment actually I think
it's very engaged for and and and maybe
he's criticized our can be criticized in
terms of in terms of how far a pushes to
user in terms of questions of enclosure
in terms of questions of construction I
don't think I don't think we really need
I mean fundamentally I don't think
Galway really needs a new cinema so if
we if we start from that position I find
it hard to defend
help or do you want to go further it
obviously doesn't mean you can't it's
obvious that is missing the main after
they understand and send your
explanation about comfort and that
you've I haven't been and I'm sure that
the best the best way to experience the
Pyrenees obviously to visit the building
so I can't talk from that point of view
I can just talk through what's being
communicated
I know about the project but I mean
we're not talking I mean the building's
not being built around the experience of
like exposure codeword and comfortable
then you're going I mean they may be
tangible elements but the majority is
it's a large creature with big steel
beams and so it it does not dress at all
this you've actually embodied carbon and
basically any of those talk about
sustainability because we can't the time
is gone where we have to be sustainable
now it's kind of we move to another face
of actually how far we need to actually
reach so yeah I mean do you have any
interest in that I mean I don't think
it's about really comfort I mean I
actually disagree with you I think that
there should people can walk to be able
to control climate it's a trajectory
internally and but
we're not talking in terms of obviously
global climate kind of change unchanged
we're not talking about is that the main
issue is nothing within comfort the main
issues not really no people want more I
mean it's part of the problem its
architects are so in way behind so
behind and also men together stays
behind as well in kind of being more
radical about it because we know that
it's an issue we know that we can go on
like this but it's kind of we prefer the
comfort of of going to something highly
intelligent and getting lost in it which
it's it's valid point but actually I'm
wondering if this is a question which we
should answer by going upstairs having a
Drake and I think it's a very broad
question I feel like if we're trying to
be very difficult to wrap up on that I
think in terms of the AR I think one of
them I mean there's a lot of like I mean
a lot of our content does sort of like
look at an address and you know
completely takes the climate crisis into
account I feel like in some of the
themes that we've done this year whether
it's but money or about oceans or you
know we're challenging a lot of things I
don't think we should only publish
content that enables it enables us to
have these conversations I think we also
a lot of the role of a publication is to
also look at the kind of significant
buildings that are going up and trying
to understand into to unpick them and
there needs to be a little bit of
diversity in the content that we that we
publish in the buildings that we select
and they enable us to touch on lots of
lots of different topics and I don't
know to what extent the extended sort of
timeline of Palace means that it you
know some of the things might have been
done different if it had been in a
different time and but
I I don't know yeah yeah it's a it's a
it's a very broad question I guess in
terms of what we prioritize in the
conversation what we put at the
forefront of of conversations but I
think there's multiple reasons as to why
we builds particular projects or
published particular buildings I think
we have to keep a kind of multiplicity
of ideas and end of debates
it's hard to see how
it's hard to see how we will really
engage with what you're talking about
it's hard to see
[Music]
oli we can build down right down through
the industry and through all to all the
consultants East it's really hard to
imagine how we can build you know big
buildings in cities with with the very
full knowledge of their impacts right
now I think I think we do have to change
what we expect from buildings I think we
I think that has to I think that will
change changing yeah and and personally
I I still notwithstanding your comments
I still find that the most interesting
aspect of the subject at the moment is
this question of how we make space
that's
alert - or more alert or more outside or
less tempered or more in between than so
that we feel differently in it now maybe
that's not maybe that's not maybe that's
not right maybe that's not enough but I
find that the most dynamic dynamic and
interesting aspect of the subject at the
moment and growing I think I have to
agree with you in terms of obvious
saying that there is no there is no
environmental agenda on that project in
terms of its construction is that in
nutshell what are you saying
I don't know where the jury really sits
I mean maybe a little early to say but
but it wasn't very high
it wasn't very high in our concerns to
be honest with you 10 years ago we were
proposing it maybe it would be different
now baby would not I mean I love I love
working with concrete I mean is that is
that gonna go away
hardly how its managed that's gonna get
very interesting I think I think the
salient question is can it be a good
candidate can it is that a fundamental
flaw that you offer use of concrete we
know the current term I know know
without going into but on it Kansas it
does become very it does become very
complex
to ascertain the logic value or the non
value of of a piece of work like that in
a circumstance like that it's not it's
not it's not the the calculations are
are very difficult to make no no I mean
if you take if you expand it to
available technologies if you expand it
to available no house if you expand it
to local needs and so on does it not
become more complex I feel like we
should continue this debate with drinks
and canapes I think it's upstairs in the
front members room is that right but
thank you so much for joining us and
thanks to the a a for having us and
things Tom for
[Applause]
