welcome to the open seminars planned the
planet series at the architectural
Association can you hear me loud and
clear
the seminar is a intersection of
interests that really have qualities
starting with conversation and that our
students here at school have initiated
last year on what they called the
emergency the crisis and the series is
also for us a way through which we could
start delineating
a few of the elements towards extended
understanding of the relationship
between architecture and the
transformation of our planet so we are
today in a third event of the season of
panda planet and because we are in a
seminal I would really like to make a
quick recapitulation of what has
happened in the previous episode what we
what have we been studying and the
initial step was coinciding with the
climate summit of a reaction and
architecture declares and the waste
which the call for revision of the
curriculum was set up that around two or
three hundred people to gather students
from all over Britain and even from
abroad to gather and call for a radical
revision of the architectural curriculum
to start thinking of intersectionality
that is trying to understand how we can
never disentangle one constituent
constituent topic from any other
transformative condition how to initiate
new forms of student and institutional
politics about the environmental
catastrophe that we are living in
and how to start thinking a
decolonization of education and
architecture and the last element was
really hard to start imagining different
forms of outreach different forms of
connection and interconnection it was a
series of discussion that happened
across the spectrum and a second event
that we've discussed last week somehow
picked up on that and started thinking
what does it mean to imagine an
architectural education amongst other
forms generating processes among other
intelligence among other relationships
and among other institutions and this
way we invited Gucci petrol you you
sleep curator at a certain time to
imagine with us what it means to have a
practice that is never condensable in
one and what what does it mean to be you
know upheaval this evening we start with
a very stupid question of course can we
control the planet it's an obvious
condition no of course not how could we
even think such an idea
but the reason of this is really to
catch up on this a notion of the
upheaval of being in a disquiet well
I've been in a moment of uncertainty in
transition the this quiet is of course
on one side because we have no idea what
control means we have no idea what it
entails to think of controlling anything
of course we control the planet because
we are alive and of course we control
the planet because life controls the
planet the planet is alive
we are not Mars we're not Venus our
planet has very strange combination in
earth in its atmosphere of two
components that notoriously when you mix
them explode methane and oxygen and
that's what it is fascinating that's
their relationships constantly renovated
by life constantly there's more and more
oxygen produced by life more and more
methane produced by life and by from the
decomposition so obviously we can
control the planet we control it human
life controls it all the myriad of
species control it but at the same time
we know very well that it's the planet
itself is not an object it's not
something that is under our devices
under our controls so the two
combinations is really what we thought
we would like to address in the third
session and it is a combination that is
a step towards thinking new forms of
practices new forms of activation and
I'd like to start by playing a very old
TV footage maybe and just give us a
little bit of a tone of what is going on
is this on
it's
the technology
it doesn't seem to be working no whiskey
will have to
sorry about this
okay
obviously it was work until two minutes
okay we skip it it's not a big problem
to skip market that before we go ahead
can we check that the video is now
awkward even some other okay some
whiskey I think in 1989 Margaret
Thatcher is addressing the United
Nations General Assembly and the point
that she puts forward is only one and
that is whether the international
community can address the impeding
environmental catastrophe
and she asserts rather forcefully in her
argument that the usual ways of
diplomacy those ways that will deal with
the complete annihilation of humankind
through the thermonuclear war
or regional warfare that can be avoided
by the Security Council nothing
confronted with the ecological
destruction with the unrepairable
damaging of our atmosphere the result of
that speech of course is the
establishment of the integral mental
panel on climate change the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change the IPCC is a direct outcome of
the Cold War at the end of the Cold War
we switch very swiftly into the regime
that take that understanding initial
understanding and make it more and more
precise more and more precise but the
alert is there from the outset the alert
is there in the eighties and this is
where the seminar somehow will try to
revert what what happened
why did we not do anything in spite of
doing everything in spite of getting
together organizing international
organizations studying it in the best
minds we have in the best technology to
study the earth what has happened why do
we have to now in 2019
30 years of
that speech have young students we
somehow rebellious about the education
saying that nothing is really properly
studied nothing that we know so far is
addressing their issue so the question
for us is really one of understanding
what is that planet
what is that control Africa described
and it's a condition that we words on
many ways again on the work of
Jacqueline turret the looming figure in
the entire series here is this
discontent woman Jacqueline 13 most
probably she organ and drew this little
diagram it's martyrs by Konstantinos
doxiadis but we're pretty sure that of
course there's no evidence but we're
pretty sure that it was a diagram and by
turret it's a very simple diagram it's
divided into and basically tells us that
the more we will know the better we will
act on what on the top you see the
forces shaping human settlements and
they converge and they Qualis
instability and then they diverge and
they come back and the present is that
moment when there's multiple direction
saimultaneously
and we don't know really what's going on
and what's happening and you see beneath
an amazing little diagram that tells us
100 percent of knowledge on human
settlements then the moment that you
have 100 percent of knowledge I don't
know what that means there is stability
and then there's instability it's not
clear the relationship between the two
and diagram is not clear whether the
instability leads to ignorant or whether
ignorance leads to instability but it's
quite interesting that this is the
diagram that opens the opposite of talks
at the acoustics book it's book somehow
that lays out the foundation for a an
architecture that will somehow encompass
an entire globe so 30 years after
knowing that something is wrong that is
an alert we're still in that situation
either because we don't know much yet
about it and we ought to know more or
maybe the diagram is also not so
functioning and this way I think the
entire notion of controlling and planet
really reverse whether we think that we
are in any condition sit in a situation
where we need to raise awareness or we
need to be knowledgeable about the
planet about the earth and then we will
be able to act and I think that the
obvious situation that we are facing
today is one way on one side the planet
is becoming smaller and smaller and
smaller and smaller in our travel times
in our ways of communication the
relative and dimensions of our planet
it's decreasing this is not a beautiful
diagram inspired by turret but this one
is bad that means the fula that shows it
hmm
the planet is becoming smaller it's
becoming an object no the globe and at
the same time we have no clue about what
it is
we have no idea of understanding how it
is reacting back or not so there are
three inherent moments of uncertainty in
this question the first one is we
controlling what does it mean to control
the second one is that we have no real
understanding of the planet we have no
real understanding of what this
condition is and the third one is how
the intrusion of this knowledge event of
climate change is received which creates
even more uncertainty because
everybody's seems to be receiving in
completely different ways so we have
three moments of complete
and uncertainties overlapping and the
overlap of these three uncertainties of
what is it to control how does it really
operate what is the planet
what's the horizon through which we
operating and how we are gathered all
here in order for multiple reasons in
order to address this thing is also and
very complicated uncertain condition and
these are the three difficulties of
modernism
the three difficulties of the modern
thought that architectures so much
endorsed that's so much operated with
the idea that you can control the idea
that you can control an object and that
you are separate from that object that
you can control but now we are in a
condition of being coextensive with the
object that we control and it's not
obvious what is the agency it's not
obvious what the capacity of action and
when where the organization of action
actually occurs whether it's in the
object in the media or in the accents
and there's a specific condition in all
of this that is related to of course the
impetus of measurement the impetus that
architecture in engineering has always
of the measurement laying out and
surveying knowing more in order to act
better and you can go from initial
surveys like Borlaug and the initial
beginning of the Green Revolution or the
entire reorganization of Earth System
Sciences what does it mean to study
geology what does it mean to study the
history of the planet does it what does
it mean to move away from a government
organized largely around that knowledge
and a large parliamentarian structures
of the supply chain of the 20th century
or what does it mean to imagine a world
that is really organized around the
Civic enthusiasm for new development so
it's not new ways of gathering new
politics to form what does it mean to
imagine that the decolonization
process leads to gigantic
infrastructures like the vaulted I'm in
Ghana or leads to the reorganisation of
large sways of agriculture like in this
image in org y showing the rapid
advancement of new forms of agricultural
production and at the same time there's
a uncertainty you are pushed to and
develop something and the new enthusiasm
but at the same time you are uncertain
there's obviously rachel carson's calls
for the stop of using DDT but initiates
entire environmental movement that
initiates the international outreach
about coming down maybe that's not such
a good idea
all this rapid development and yet at
the same time you start seeing the
incredible rise of other forms of
calculation and measurement there are
other forms of management like the
International weather forecast that
rises at the same time and the trance
from radical transformation of how we
work the transformation of management
systems for instance this is a meeting
of the IBM Committee on how to address
management structures in Southeast Asia
and all of these are conditions that are
cutting across society but the
transitions are really still dominated
by large enthusiasm and today we don't
really know what's going on now this is
Indira Gandhi with President Johnson
discussing the possibility of diverting
large international funds to development
today the same funds are about trying to
find out how to diminish the conditions
of depletion of our agricultural system
so you start seeing that at the same
time there's a rise of
earning of knowing and puzzlement we
don't really know what is it that we are
looking at and the more we learn the
more we do and the more we transform in
all of this of course in the wake of the
Blue Marble image there's an image of
the earth seen in its entirety it's
probably the very first photograph of
our planet the orientation is the
original one with the South Antarctic on
top taken by Apollo 17 the image
represents the earth system in a system
different elements or components
interact and are interdependent forming
a coherent whole sustained in space and
over time with clear boundaries and
durations of its internal and external
relations Earth System Sciences sit I
have to understand the complex into
relations that characterize the earth as
a whole they integrate a variety of
disciplines and fields of knowledge
production the development of Earth
System Sciences has shown that the earth
operates as a complex single system with
physical chemical biological and human
components each one interacting with all
the others they contribute to a shape to
shape a system that is self-regulating
and presents multi scale temporal and
spatial coherences the relational
dynamics that characterize the earth
system are unique and are dominated by
life the conditions to maintain life are
the result of complex self-organizing
relations between all the components of
the Earth's system the interactions
between living forms and their inorganic
environments affect the atmosphere
global temperature ocean salinity oxygen
in the air the water cycles and the
carbon and nitrogen cycles all of which
guarantee sustainment of life on our
planet
the development of Earth System Sciences
over the last decades has indicated that
human activity is deeply affecting the
entire system the atmosphere the
geosphere the cryosphere the biosphere
and the hydrosphere are faced with new
forces mobilizing the earth towards
instability and possibly great
fluctuations in its in interdependent
dynamics so what we thought was a closed
world of escalatory politics that will
somehow create the condition through
which game theory and computational
structure in the Cold War would lead us
to a better understanding of completely
internalized completely mathematize
world is somehow eluding us the earth
system which is the technical lingo for
Gaia if you're not really brave enough
to discuss Gaia you'll call it earth
system the coupling of all the physical
components physical processes and
dynamics one on top of the other that
forms the whole Gaia at the moment that
we discover Gaia and we discovered in a
very complex set of procedures we also
discovered that it's troubled but
something is wrong so you start seeing
that there's a this is the first
uncertainty the first element of the
uncertainty in controlling the planet is
that we you don't know what you're
trying to articulate and the image here
represents of course the scenarios the
seventh centaur is the main scenarios of
the IPCC report in 2004 it means
basically you have around 30
sinn are different models that are
trying to articulate what the Earth's
system dynamics are doing and then you
break it down you calculate it down to
17 hours if it's and you see that beyond
20 at 2100 that is in 80 years from now
the earth could be anywhere in between
one degree warmer and almost six degree
warm and everything in between
mm-hmm that is the situation and just to
remind us that the one degree warmer is
already warmer than everything that
we've experienced in the ala C so you
start seeing that at the same time as we
discover the earth the planet we're
discovering the Anthropocene we're
discovering the deep unstable condition
of our planet and this is a phenomenon
that is somehow not only an intrusion
into what we thought was our science the
most complex complex science with
multiple different differential
equations coupled and attachment to the
other but what is really interesting is
that suddenly we discovered the Odyssey
we discovered that the conditions of
inhabitation the conditions that have
allowed Gaia to be stable for 11,000
years are now completely offset
completely offsetting the most important
one of the steps towards this
understanding is the healing curve when
professor healing and this is the first
time that is really published as a
complete series and discovers the
coupling of the breathing of the ocean
atmosphere with the relationship in
relationship to co2 concentration in the
northern hemisphere the
in the summer you have much less co2
then in the winter because of the
flourishing of vegetation and that is
picked up by sensors on Mount Aloha on
top of the volcano mountains in Hawaii
in that relationship you start seeing
the breathe in breathe out of the planet
but it becomes higher and higher every
year almost in a linear fashion with a
little bit of decline a little bit of
acceleration now and then and when we
started measuring it the medium parts
per million of co2 around 312 today we
have the measurement every morning in
our news every morning our weather
forecasts we know how much partner
million of co2 are in our atmosphere so
something really peculiar happened in
this last 50 years simultaneously we
learn more and more and less and less
the first models of the earth system are
very basic
they're models that are first of all
represented in some of the first videos
mhmmm computer-generated imagery and
many of us spend days and days in front
of screens this is the very first
operation of such a kind developed by
Chuck Lee and Chuck Lisa was really
interested in understanding how to use
supercomputers that were established and
invented during the Cold War for
understanding nuclear explosion and with
the help of a teller at the Livermore
labs and pushed also by donphan ointment
understood not maybe not so many people
are interested in in the dynamics of a
nuclear explosion but everybody's
interested in knowing the weather
tomorrow so we could divert an entire
industry of computation directly from
thermonuclear dynamics into the study of
the earth system and today that is
[Music]
[Music]
discussion is from a project that
we just go there Anthropocene observe
research into what the beginning
[Music]
terminology and we were collaborating
with photographer Armand Lincoln and
Anson frankly in a minute
before episode
the produce and I would say
transformation of energy believe me or
not by that time the global climate
models global circulation models still
were based on mathematical description
of two segments of the earth system
which is the ocean and the atmosphere
and the land was simply a 1 we call it
green slime with vamp education no it's
nothing
so up to 1990 the global climate
modeling community believed they were
convinced that we can understand the
functioning of the Earth System climate
system by coupling ocean and the
atmosphere so we entered as a community
of land-based land interested scientists
to debate in 1990 it was a very exciting
time because it was a new venture for
all of us coming from the fields of
hydrology and land-based hydrology and
started to have both theoretical and
practical collaboration theoretical
built new models which will make clear
that land component land use land cover
in the earth system is very important
for understanding modeling of the global
climate global circulation models but
also going for a in my career the most
interesting venture ever which was to
design a series of a large-scale
experiments around the world to
understand how the biota how the land
interacts with climate
we started with an experiments which
were based on a so called multiscale
approach to measure everything you can
measure in a grid of hundred by hundred
kilometers from the scale of a salt
column leaf all the way up to satellites
in the aircraft we built international
community between European and American
scientists to do it we went to a couple
of regions around the world to measure
the interactions between land land cover
link you slam vegetation and the climate
we went to Sahel we went to south of
Spain even to Amazon even to boreal
forests in Canada if I say we went there
we went there with a huge Armada of
instruments aircraft helicopters
satellites surrounded scientists and
doing that we realized that it's not
only measuring the current functioning
of the land in decline
this is have a cobot director of the
NASA Institute international advanced
system analysis Institute in Luxembourg
he is sitting on a beautiful sofa in the
Office of the Emperor of the ocean
garyun Empire and the castle is also the
site of the first international
organisations that somehow think of the
transition out of the Cold War out of
the duality of the scientific approach
to the possibility of annihilation let's
listen to the second in command the most
in Nikita knowledge our energy system ok
for example China is building
essentially one core coal power plant
six seven days those called coal power
plants will be around for many decades
once you build it unless you want to
junk it
you know some examples for example in
nuclear energy where we'll be jumping
some power plants so it can happen but
we cannot junk everything and so once
these power plants are built they might
be around 50 60 years the notion is
overlocking
that's the notion we are locking in
ourselves into a particular future
whether we like it or not by making
those smaller cumulative decisions we
lock ourselves in thereby decreasing the
degrees of freedom of taking an
alternative path which might be
renewable energy or something else and
so I think this is a very good example
so in this case it would have serious
consequence for the climate it's similar
in the other areas of you know in time
it is an important part of the
Anthropocene so I think this is this is
really the nature of the dilemma that we
don't have the time to waste even though
it's a long-term problem and that I
think it's very difficult to internalize
the decisions that we've been actually
making over last 20 years are locking us
evermore into into a development pathway
that is not consistent with the notion
of controversy so you have
simultaneously a discussion about
inertia about impossibility of action
lock-in condition hysteresis of society
and mobilization of the planet and this
the inversion of the title of the series
plant the planet what is happening in
this condition is that your move you've
seen the movement re-established away
from the fixed object of the blue marble
the dream of the second part of the 20th
century that the earth will be something
completely controllable suddenly the
agency is no longer in society we are in
a lock-in condition we are talking about
tipping points of glaciers and ocean
circulation and our organization of the
earth as extremely complex dynamic
condition
and the difficult part is that the only
way we can know of this is through the
complex making of the models through the
complex making of those mathematical
models this is called meeting in Varsha
[Music]
is clean
[Music]
human systems in society have formed the
develop over history the specific human
relations are shaped structured and
hardened by these historical processes
individuals groups and societies are
shaped in their interactions by these
processes as much as they contribute to
their dynamics long term in habitation
of cities lands and territories
intricate networks of communication
long-term development of everyday life
forms and rituals all play a major role
in human history as much as local
contingencies and immediate actions do
the intertwined relation between the
history of Nations and the history of
the earth has been at the center of many
different conceptualizations and
civilizations over time the development
of these concepts their specific history
their formalization structuring and
diffusion is equally a key element in
the formation of world systems world
systems are a coherent sweeping force
unfolding across large areas and through
economic social political and cultural
structures and interactions they operate
at very high levels of coherence and
unfold at scales well beyond the
individual elements that shape them they
are hold the boundaries they structure
and the flows of energy money ideas
language social class and rank low
population power all of which
characterize each world system in its
particular development shape complete
systems which operate as complex
entities the social construction of time
and space evolves through rapid
transformations it is a succession of
different dynamics where different forms
of documentation and different practices
of power affect the overall system world
systems developed through tipping points
through transitions that bring the
system from one level of complexity and
coherence to another this is a complex
process of construction and destruction
which leaves stratifications in language
social relations ideas and rituals it
also leaves material forms in its wake
the intricate geometries of cities
monuments fields and infrastructures all
of which sustain a specific form of a
world system and which are carried over
from one world system to a new one
monuments documents technologies are the
material inscriptions of world systems
to decipher them humans need to
conceptualize their own history in
relation to the history of the planet
today to decipher what the world system
is and its extent its cohesion its a
coherent the meter is becoming large and
large what we thought would be in human
reach is now only understandable through
the complex technologies of remote
sensing through the complex technologies
of the double gaze of the view from
above almost like the godly view and
from within and this duality in accent
waits again in the uncertainty of our
condition we never have a vantage point
on one side these are technologies that
on re-establish and reinforced in our
stadia that there is an object to look
at from the outside from satellites
through the gridded view of the multiple
scanners that are orbiting the satellite
on the other side we know very well that
there's no such thing as the globe
there's no such thing as a unique
vantage point there are multiple
localized formation of the global
multiple localized condition where the
globe is invented articulated
manipulated calculated
measured serve it and reestablished so
what you start seeing is not that the
intrusion of Gaia is somehow revisiting
our foundations of society foundations
of the world system to make it more and
more in tune with this new entity that
is Gaia but on the contrary it is so
inherently unstable that it reinforces
our image that the earth is an object
and dismantles it simultaneously and is
the puzzling condition of architecture
when the making of the knowledge of
climate change is a whirlwind that
brings us constantly simultaneously in a
condition of being viewing from above
and from within
it's a duality do allottee that it seems
to us that we are unable to escape
unable to get out of the only capacity
is to understand in the only capacity to
understand the troubled earth is through
the industrial gaze that has troubled it
and this is a real difficulty because on
many levels we start thinking that we
ought to be somehow in tune with nature
that we ought to be somehow more and
more addressing a condition of somehow
pacification of our activities somehow
we should act more properly but the
trouble in that assumption is that you
are in a hollow scene set of ideas where
nature is a stable background that the
backdrop of our activities and the more
in tune we will be with them then we
will have somehow peace today that
ground through which we should somehow
reorganize is equally unstable it's
actual equally plowed through mobilized
transformed and Michelle Sara said it is
moved
the condition through which we can sound
we can measure the earth has augmented
enormous Li in the last 30 years they
have become the way through which we
operate ecologically it's an industrial
gauge that allows more and more
extraction more and more we know the
worse it gets in that diagram of
Jacquelyn turret somehow resonates in
completely different terms today what we
are seeing is that the rise of the
Anthropocene the new geological epoch is
cutting across territories it's cutting
across established forms of life not
only human life but the multiple species
dealt multiple conditions that operate
on the surface of our planet very thin
layer the Anthropocene is the new
geological epoch where the world system
dominates and impacts the earth system
at new and unprecedented scales and
intensities it sets in motion a series
of reverberations and oscillations that
scatter long established boundaries and
it opens up a new set of divisions of
time and space territories are the
specific forms of the link between the
earth and human beings between the earth
system and the many world systems that
human shape territories are the
sustained form of relationship between
human cohabitation and material
processes unfolding in time and across
space they are a construction developing
over time and they mold the structures
of environmental processes as well as
specific forms of human politics the
boundaries of the social economic the
legal political and cultural spaces the
territories shape the rules of
legitimation inclusion and exclusion
their members their hierarchies their
cohesion over time and space are all
reflected and marked into the forms of
terrains river basins shorelines feel
the modes of organization of work on the
land the shape of settlements and the
framing of circulations of goods
people's services ideas and capital
territories evolve in time and in space
they are dynamic system shaped by a vast
array of individual interactions local
contingencies and specific sets of
agents the particular forms of these
interactions and their relative
stability over time shapes vast systems
of coherence and power they shape the
relations among humans and between us
and natural resources and processes the
rise of territories their development
articulation and organization divides
time and establishes boundaries and
borders in space these divisions are as
dynamic as their counterparts for the
rise of new territories cuts across
established relations that forming new
articulations in their wake disrupt and
severe previous ones the
conceptualization of these moments of
transition the relations to the material
traces and the human histories of these
transformations is what guides and forms
aspirations of knowledge governance and
influence over human spaces and earth
processes the Anthropocene is reshaping
these aspirations reallocating and
redistributing agencies establishing new
power relations and new links between
atmospheric chemistry and human
political action between ocean
circulations and infrastructures between
sedimentation processes and engineering
between extraction of energy and natural
resources and the forms of globalized
economy and war the aspiration of guang
governor of good government is what
guides the revision of our practices the
call to change how we govern our
architecture education how we study it's
exactly what is that the same route
as deformation of the Anthropocene the
architectural masterpiece of all of this
is the struck are the structures of
refineries the link between supply and
demand of fossil fuels the refineries in
a nutshell the architecture of the
Anthropocene it transforms fossils from
millions of years ago the biosphere that
used to inhabit this planet and has
disappeared from the earth system the
earth system has survived but those
species have not and we are rapidly
transforming them into food into
livelihood into movement into cities and
all of that process has an enormous
waste an enormous level of rubble and
that is not recirculated so once we
extract that through our complex
contemporary world system we start
seeing the intrusion into the earth
system and we'd like to somehow wind up
the seminar this evening by alluding to
as another element that I think is
equally unsettling not only we don't
know what control is and we are
uncertain but there's a second level
that we mentioned that what is the earth
we're getting more and more knowledge
about it but we know less and less about
it and the third level is how do we
react to this what are the conditions
that gather us around this which is an
aesthetic condition it really pertains
how we can gather around what we can
perceive and how we are affected by it
and we can somehow react to it but
there's a equally troubling condition
that is that the distinction between us
we
and the planet is becoming weaker and
wheat on many levels the Anthropocene
could be seen as nature becoming more
and more human Oh humans becoming more
and more nature and indistinguishability
to use a horrible world fact that we
cannot separate human activity the
social activity from its material
compounds is really the difficult moment
of the contemporary condition of whether
we can control the planet so these are
the few remarks and of course this is a
seminar so everybody is here to work and
participate and we do this in a
convivial way and our friends have now
just brought in some nice drinks but
come to the table and share the drinks
and bread and grapes and continue the
discussion
don't be shy
yeah the microphone is gonna circulate
for your questions because we are
recording this for those who are away
I guess this is a mark of the bread is
cut do we have questions can you tell us
more about the your thoughts on the
external and internal view because in in
in physics is very important that you
are internally into the system rather
than seeing from the outside otherwise
you never understand certain things
about complex geometries or how the
earth actually works in terms of its
laws so can you give us a little bit
more on all that duality that you were
talking about you explain that a bit
more the implication I think that many
levels the you're always inside there's
no externality it's really what we are
describing we an think of the
relationship between the sciences and
politics on many levels we still I guess
envision Sciences as operating within
the lab a confined space and they will
test things and when they are reading
the test they will bring it out for the
public for democracy if you're lucky to
evaluate the test what is interesting in
climate change science is but climate is
really only one of the
the Anthropocene probably the minor one
is that that distinction doesn't exist
we are coexistent with the lab so yeah
there's only a possibility of being
within and that's why there's so much
disquiet around the notion of facts and
because everybody is still calling for
facts there was recently a public debate
on television where basically the entire
debate was shouting at each other whose
facts are better than the others
completely returned in this particular
country to conditions of the beginning
of the scientific revolution so we still
think that scientific facts are on one
side and political debate is on the
other side but what is really
interesting is that if you are only
within there's no possibility of making
that distinction so the question is
either you start seeing that science is
inherently political and politics is
equally inherently based on evidence and
hence you can no longer make that
distinction which brings I think more
than simply a distinction the usual
distinction in say whether you can ever
be somehow a neutral external observer
what is interesting for us is that what
it really brings about is the notion of
constant measurement how many steps have
you taken today did you check your
supercomputer in your pocket that will
tell you how many steps you've took and
whether your behavior follows a dynamic
that is somehow inscribing your daily
movement in a good way now you start
seeing that the entire operation of what
we thought was science and society is
now so merged that it really affects our
daily behavior no this thing is I think
10 times
more powerful than the supercomputer
that organized the first complex coupled
models of climate change I think I use
it mainly to take pictures of my little
son hmm and this is I think the
interesting thing on one side is I
quickly showed no this question at the
end how heavy it is on the rise we call
it in lingo maybe and the rise of the
Technosphere we build so much stuff that
from within and this is again the
question inside and outside we think
it's only an issue of design so we could
design it better because we are
architects and look at the bad
architecture they've done if only they
would have given us the job suddenly you
understand that the magnitude of all of
this is so vast that we are only one of
the components actually we are working
for it rather than it working for us and
by it I mean and the new paradigm of the
earth phone by everything that keeps us
alive so I think that the inversion is
not a say it's not the galilean
inversion where suddenly we are no
longer the center of the universe were
just a little thing but it's a very
interesting upside down view on us we're
not looking at the mmm our friend Bruno
that we will say we are sublunar we're
not going to space yeah under something
you have to understand it what it means
to be within what it means to breathe is
troubling it's deeply troubling and
quieting and we are not living in a
stable planet circulating around the Sun
the Sun is getting warm and warm and
warmer and over our history of the
planet the planet has remained more or
less the same
in terms of the if there are two
viewpoints we accept that to some degree
I mean one could say that in the past
you know the Deauville two viewpoints
where the gods didn't pass so sit well
you know there they had a view from
above us and where they could see things
I mean it seems to me that it's
interesting that um it may be more
possible to react to the internal
politics and the external politics by
that I mean the two views because I mean
there are examples where the satellite
view will when looked in detail from the
inside will reveal something that the
inside would never reveal so that's the
case is a duality or perception in a way
but it seems to me that the the external
view that we're seeing and many of your
images show is from within yes but
they're they're really tricky ones of
how to create an agency or mechanism to
try and deal with the issues as seen
from that distance rather than from
within so do you feel that's the case
that this it's a this is differentiation
between where we connect or not act or
are they so interconnected that it
doesn't matter
first of all it depends what you mean by
action I really think that the major
question and this is for us the major
question on why we bring up entire
notion of control and territory is in
order to somehow make an inversion of
where action lies and action for us is a
territorial condition we are territorial
agents is not that we are novice of the
territory no we are interested in
territorial agencies oh we interested in
understanding how the demarcation of
what keeps us alive can act back on
structures some what I'm trying to say
here is that if you start seeing the
sustained forms of coherence of
inhabitation across time and then try to
figure out how to modify it it's almost
impossible to do that in our mind
without reverting to either a notion of
individuals pushing a little bit here
and there the system or systemic change
but a system is in both your thinking in
both cases about a very complex behavior
a very complex mass and a very complex
set of dynamics and they're all coupled
but they're not one that's the difficult
part so I think that your question is
really important in terms of what can
you do when you're within how can you
act through digression how do you move
away from that I think that is an
important element there's a little sub
and note in your question if I could say
so and you still think that God is above
hmm and that's a really troubling part
of the Anthropocene the troubling part
of the Anthropocene is that it also
implies a complete inversion of the
deity and
and the location of agency so if we
could use that it's no longer possible
to imagine outside in so even that
outside is troubled our discussion with
bishops and leaders of different
religious movement really indicates that
there has troubled as you can imagine
about the inversion of circularity you
could imagine and that the entire
secular movements as we knew it in the
Enlightenment was all about me mechanic
there's a law that is a mechanic no
mechanistic law that allows you somehow
to elude the condition of Providence and
suddenly you discover that Gaia is
really secular because it is not
mechanistic because it is organizing
multiple feedback loops multiple tipping
points multiple coupling it is not that
mechanistic viewpoint that allows us to
think it as an object or as a machine
and this is really the troubling part
and we are as confused as we could be
and this is really fascinating yeah so
confused we have no idea what's going on
just maybe two to add to that the
terminologies like the Anthropocene
hasn't been around for so long it's just
nineteen years since it was first
uttered by Paul Crutzen and
terminologies such as Technosphere is
just like four three four years old and
equally the Earth System Sciences are
decayed like we are in this new sister
situation but we haven't been there so
long so there was something I really I
find very interesting the idea of this
duality and I think with what you've
discussed and presented to us I
personally feel much more aware of
certain terms and nuances and how in
fact advocating at this scale of thought
is of
crucial importance and I agree with how
I I really like how you started saying
that we were wrong there is something
wrong around us and in fact when
something is wrong we perhaps one way of
dealing with it would be to backtrack
and and see what we've done wrong and
perhaps start from somewhere that is a
good starting point again but at the
same time I wouldn't want to you know
question and throw everything that we've
done so far because the untrue person is
not just bad but one of the wrong
decisions we've done in the 19th or 20th
centuries definitely the way we've used
air conditioning and heating and the way
we've you know created the built
environment because we know today with
how we measure things as you mentioned
we can sort of sort in in a list of
where it would be the most relevant to
act or where should we cut down these
sort of inefficiencies or or loss of
resources and definitely one of the
biggest thing that could concern us as
architects er it's definitely the way we
create spaces in which we live and those
are responsible the way we build today
is definitely responsible for a nearly
half of the global carbon emissions in
this Gaia so I think within that duality
you know we're almost half from within
we have to deal with something that is
so practical and something that we've
there's nothing you know we've always
there is bioclimatic architecture there
is a there is a temptation to climate
there is a vernacular architecture
they're all interesting things about
particular they're not law architects I
think it's amazing I think what might be
troubling if in our fascination with the
native in the vernacular is the fact
that there's not one single polity
not one in history that has had to
organize their life because of the
intrusion of the introducing so we might
somehow be happy for a few minutes in
thinking that we go back to nature we go
back to how we done it before and
suddenly we find their solace but I was
writing down here you know to what you
were saying it which is really
interesting the air condition and going
back to find the moment when we didn't
do it so wrong there's a technical
description for that going back it's
called the shifting baseline and this
really comes from in the work of among
others someone called Jeremy Jackson
fantastic ecologist and we are very
happy to call him a friend and a
shifting baseline and marina knows about
this is a condition where you imagine a
pre-established condition that you want
to somehow you aspire to go back to it
without understanding that that baseline
had already declined in the function of
the earth system so what happens is that
you end up having no as you progress in
the destruction you go back to a
pre-existing baseline that is in itself
destroy so most of the time this happens
in our image of nature and it for
obvious reason our image of nature is
formed when we are kids
so my image of nature is somehow less
destroy than your image of nature but
maybe by 20 years and that's it you have
no image of nature those years before or
better you have an image that is a
heavily constructed image through the
articulation of culture of the world
system and this is the troubling element
that is one thing that I think could be
interesting to look at about air
conditioning
I personally like air-conditioning quite
a lot mmm
in particular in cars I usually the coal
is to make things smaller open the
window rather than have air-conditioning
I mean she says also in the other
dimension to make things bigger no if
you look at termites they have the
relationship between their homes and
them and their body even the societal
body is much larger than ours with to
make everything little imagine if we
will be able really to make gigantic
things and able through air condition to
start thinking of reduction of energy
consumption I like air conditioning but
I don't like internal combustion two
different things no I think that we when
we really get it wrong is when we burn
things rather than when we use a
converted energy I wanted to tell when I
we were looking at public about about
the amazing thing of computers know
those ventilators are just there to cool
down the supercomputer so the
supercomputer that is calculating
climate change for the European Union is
consuming as much as one town yeah it's
funny but if you think about it how much
are you consuming when in one year what
is the town and so the interesting
element is exactly that the reaction is
how one are but how can it be so they
should consume less energy but this is
interesting how to increase efficiency
of computing in order to calculate
somehow more and have more knowledge you
remember the graph is one where we've
reached peak computational capacity if
you go and visit if you have the
batterer hobby like we have of talking
to the modelers and you
having them constantly discussing when
are they gonna buy the new supercomputer
it's not that it's gonna be more
powerful it's just gonna consume less so
you see when we're saying that you're
within it's even the knowledge about
that you're within no you have to
imagine that the computing capacity is
limited by energy consumption I was I
was a bit struck when when I realized
and what I've seen tonight the the idea
that it's true we are trying we are
still in the Holocene there is an
approach that is no no sorry maybe now I
mind that this idea or this aspiration
to adapt to a climate and consider it as
a stable measure or as a stable entity
is wrong because it's evolving is being
moved and that at a pace that is still
on understood but is do we have that
much time in order to to the victim is
such great change I mean within 50 100
years the IPCC is predicting some more
drastic variations and more
uncontrollable you know the piece will
be higher the average will be a bit
higher the the code will be colder the
hot will be hotter and that's worse and
worse which means that we have sort of
adaptation opportunity you know we
instead of having anything fixed we
could see a future where we adapt and so
if you are in design I don't know you've
been then you need to articulate that
adaptation around very clear
baselines to go back now know if you
look at London you could imagine that
we're gonna say we are very close to the
sea we're gonna face major disruption
through
storm surge and maybe there's even more
and more heavy rain I mean this last
month has been quite heavy so the last
report that came up came out two weeks
ago which is in the circuit is
considered quite a conservative report
tells us that the rate of sea-level rise
is almost double than we thought ten
years ago
so imagine ten years ago we might have
been adapting we were not and the last
time that we started adapting was at the
time of Thatcher we gave up that but if
ten years ago we would have been
adapting we would been adapting at a
rate that is now into the double so we
would not have been able so you're in a
situation where the certitude of what
you need to adapt to is impossible so
it's a good talk to imagine yeah we can
plan this our baseline we need to be
there we need to adapt we need to
organize society so that we re allocate
resources demand and supply should be
distributed in that way in space and
time but all of this at the moment of
rapid transition and this is the
difficult part of architects because on
it's obvious that we have a major task
at hand in the next 30 years we have to
redesign everything if you listen
carefully to them to the IPCC to
redesign everything but the only way
through which we can design you know
very well is through stability this is
the situation now and I hope to have it
like that in the future and this really
disquiet of such a little question can
we control the planet obviously not but
the point is how do we operate within
that how do we start making our way
through and how do we do that also with
making clear alert markers
I think towards the increase operations
of what we call the empire of calculus
but everything needs to be calculated
everything needs to be measured your
heartbeat in relationship to how many
minutes of screen you will looking at
while texting your friends know
everything is that sweeping condition of
calculation I think I find it extremely
troubling hi Thank You Ann Sophie and
John again for bringing us together in
the most convivial of ways in the
biggest roundtable that's ever been in
this room I'm always so intrigued you
know when we when we join in and you
elaborate the complexity and its various
contradictions and I think this evening
the word survey was fascinating for me
but not in terms of the measure of
things but in terms of almost a survey
of these terms this lexicon that we are
struggling to find or not struggling but
in a sense reveling in and and that is a
good thing I think so the question I
have is how do we find our way in it
through it with it we have Anthropocene
but there's also the Capitola scene
there's also the titular scene from
Donna Haraway all of which I think bring
with them other points of view too you
choose one of your phrases you know the
poly viewpoint the polyphony of things
and I guess that is what is both
unsettling but also intriguing and
exciting I think for us to try and grasp
these not to measure them not to contain
them in a sort of enlightenment sense of
stability but to actually see what
instability might give us as an opening
I think we still we sort of literally in
a transition point here we now we know
okay but we still sort of locked in two
ways of knowing that we realize are kind
of outdated surplus to requirements so
it's very intriguing to me you know when
I hear you both and I see what you
reveal and how you reveal it and I'm
working on something called the
infrastructure of bracket climate change
there's there's a do turn around that
I'm not quite sure it's leading but you
know in reading Timothy Morton and his
view of the hyper object his sense of
the scale lessness that the Anthropocene
and all the other scenes are showing us
is that scale is somehow with us and no
longer relevant but we still not quite
sure how to work within and beyond in a
sense of in a way of I think what's the
other word that he uses when he
describes Margules notion of you know
the mitochondria which co-host with us
it's a coexistence it's a it's a
meshwork you know that's an another term
user so again I don't want to throw more
words into the onto the table I think
there enough words wine and bread but I
think all these terms are for us as a
constellation of options and
possibilities and not to be so fear
struck with headlights because I think
there needs to be agency I'm not quite
sure what an agency of coexistence might
mean on all levels across all scale so
if you have any sort of unrehearsed and
and you know I really share this is to
invite you back on the 11th of November
where I'm gonna host Tim Lenten Tim is a
major scientist of the earth system and
the way to which he and his mentor
Watson and the mentor of his mint James
Lovelock would approach this
it's really fascinating in our minds
it's not about whether the Anthropocene
is better than the stool gene or the
plantation scene and you choose which
you pick and choose them they're very
clear they say look we've done maybe 20
30 years of choosing which part of guy
you like and each one has a their own
version of Gaia but the question is now
how do you not recompose them back into
one but except the guy is exactly that
uncertainty on how it is received that
it demands so much in order to
reactivate a polity that has been
gathered by this intrusion of climate
everybody's troubled by it but we
haven't really understood that we all
travel by it in different ways but yet
we gather and I think that is really the
interesting thing architectural II it's
to me the most fascinating thing it's
not that we are interested in say
planetary turn we're interested in the
fact that there's a new possibility of
aesthetics and that is to understand how
the presentation of evidence the
presentation of diatribes and
inconsistent thoughts is gathering a lot
of people with multiple voices and yet
is not institutionalized maybe it won't
be institutionalized but definitely that
gathering is posing a lot of pressure on
it swaying in other institutions and I
don't know anything else an authority
does then accept that way in so there's
a lot of authority happening at the
moment there's a lot of interesting
gatherings but then not one and I think
that is the to me the most promising
element haven't word that I would like
to add to the discussion and that is a I
know that some
people in the room and working with us
and they will hate me turkey just kind
of a question and I have but would you
say that so the knowledge the discussion
about briefing but they a bit about
acquiring a hundred percent knowledge
kind of intrigued me so would you say
that a hundred percent of knowledge is
what we word for what we would take for
factor present as a means of evaluating
the present by that I mean that the
strive for acquiring a greater knowledge
in order to transform an inherently
unstable system will continually place
us in a state of unknown and the
psychological and therefore societal
patterns that arise from the unknown so
what one might call the stage of chaos
so what I'm trying to say is that
effectively if we take a mark at present
and let's say cease to research but
simply reflect then we've to some degree
achieved 100% knowledge and with that is
where I think the institutions form it's
as you both in your work advocates for
the architects to not simply be
designers or curators but I think more
negotiators or various scientific and
creative fields it would almost seem
kind of more it would just it would just
make more sense I think in some cases to
almost cease research to kind of halt it
right now as you collaborate but only if
you think that research is coming before
action well if you are in that state of
mind that you think are the more know
first I need to know and then I will act
but one thing that I found as well very
intriguing is that the graph that you
showed of
our raising temperatures from the IPCC
the you have the what I think would be
regarded as the volatility area in that
kind of spreading out at the very end
and what we are shown or what is being
discussed more broadly and media is the
bottom is the kind of most amicable
scenario it's the one point five why are
we not simply just accepting the six why
are we not simply accepting and
discussing the the six scenario as
opposed to operating within the one
point five which that allows us time to
research and to therefore find new
information and still constantly be in a
state of unknown the it's a very
interesting intriguing remote there's
one aspect in Lovelock's
work which is maybe helping us here when
says three away from the outset from
Tulare public a first publications on
Gaia that it has a gold the gaya has a
gold which is very different from what
Darwin would say
Darwin is very clear that there is no
goal in evolution there is a goal in
Gaia and that is to maintain inhabit
ability of Gaia itself so you can
imagine that yes six degrees you say
maybe then we can adapt first of all
it's not clear whether there will be any
of us to be in six degrees now with yes
Gaia you could imagine is doing exactly
what it is meant to be doing and that is
when it's perturbed it's trying to
maintain structures of that allow in
habitation may becoming warmer hence
reducing the possibility of livelihood
of the perturb and
and that is maybe what's happening by
reducing the surfaces and the areas
where we can inhabit maybe guys
protecting itself the Technosphere
operates let's remind us about that
through our comfort which is now
contrary to the comfort of navigation on
the planet that is precipitous but just
make clear 91.5 degree target which we
think is actually our major territorial
marking implies another 1.5 when
everybody cheered in Paris for the one
point two degrees moving towards one
point five it implies one point five
billion people having to move because
their homes the current homes will be
submerged by this rising sea levels so
that's one point five degrees and you're
talking about six degrees as a possible
wait I don't follow you there I think
that that is well beyond us
within human life thank you sorry I've
been waiting I'm quite scared by godly
views as you said technology
acknowledged II complex technologies of
remote sensing and I've always had that
question in my mind are we are we God
you know the further when you when when
when you started this conversation can
we control the planet it's it's a
philosophical question and it extends
from Carlos's question of the external
and the internal
and it scares me it really really really
scares me it scares you're gonna make a
plan to be honest we're looking from
above we're looking from a distance that
it that is unknown to me maybe not
unknown to scientists but it's unknown
to me and this is not a question because
you actually answered my question I'm
just posing this sort of remark you
answered by saying and it's honestly
this is one of the best statements of
this talk you answered by saying you
still think God is above and I think
that's really really important to the
conversation that we're having here to
anyone who's thinking that are we God
because I was we I agree with you and
maybe thought a few things because I
want to know so use the opportunity
maybe there was a previous remark about
scale
I think it goes in hand-in-hand with
this when you draw your plan when you
look at the map you do have the view
from the Zenit but remote sensing is not
that remote sensing is not a map remote
sensing has simultaneously that
viewpoint and a view from within
it is technically you could you can call
that a by location you're simultaneously
in two places which is a very
complicated thing to discuss I mean if
you into a religious thought you can
understand that by location has to do
with notions of transformation or in
particular transubstantiation and the
condition for one entity to operate
across islands but the reason why we are
insisting so much on remote sensing has
nothing to do with the fact that it
shows you things at a large scale on the
contrary it is showing us that the very
notion of scales needs to be revised
it's a structure that is highly
networked where things that are very
large and things that are very small
simultaneously operate on the same
system so you have to really abandon the
possibility of let's say the Russian
dolls one inside the other you go from
the small scale to the larger to the
bigger and that I think is really
connected to a notion of the by location
of the condition of not really being
able to establish ever where you are
which then poses all kinds of other
troubling questions some of them have to
do with the Canon and religion and all
kinds of other troubling conditions of
the Anthropocene the Anthropocene is so
many different things it really pertains
the structures of the exit from the ala
scene from the entire civilizations that
we
top which is based on stability the
entire organization of human language
arts creativity is from the Odyssey and
I don't think that we can use concepts
Oh better I think it's very difficult to
use concept developed in the alla scene
and apply them straight into the
Anthropocene so we're so when we say
that we are we don't know what's going
on we are really troubled we had really
lost
but this thank you so I mean I think I
think that the the complexity of what
we're at is understood and I think
probably shared so if I mean I think the
the the way you describe there's a
coming together in the sense of people
discussing the ideas and that's a
positive thing clashing yeah but I mean
is there is this sort of coming together
of ideas that reveals certain things not
only in terms of the scientific data but
also in terms of our into relationships
with each other and so on um but it
seems to me that that leaves us in a in
a difficult place and I think we all are
aware of that that in the in terms of
the title of your seminar you know plan
so I mean that that pretty much is out
the window
you know the idea of plan in a to a
certain degree and then the their
reaction is complex to because of the
changing context within which of the
reaction takes place so do you do you
think that the this this coming together
in a sense of of knowledge information
and agency is a sort of a kind of hybrid
between the two because if if if it was
a feedback system that actually
understood the the dualities of seeing
things in different ways that the fact
that they're interconnected the fact
that everything is fluid and everything
is changing then that might work in the
sense that you know a kind of sort of uh
a management system like you you're in
your hated internal combustion chamber
that there is a sort of you know a car
will have a computer that is trying to
balance everything out as it goes along
it doesn't it doesn't actually have an
answer it doesn't plan it doesn't
actually sort of totally just react it
tries to create a level playing field is
that the sort of thing I mean I'm using
it as a metaphor obviously that the
coming together is about a certain
extent
to the extent that the new polities
let's call them like this the new
formation of are not only linked to
humans yes if we have a way of coming
together that involves machine with a
your control mechanisms and non-human
intelligence and by non-human
intelligence I mean not only computers
but I mean plants I mean the biosphere
in relationship to the surface rocks so
there's a huge intelligence in the way
through which the biosphere is recycling
itself yes then that's it's better
technically I think it's also limit far
more limited in our thoughts it has to
do with the inversion of an aesthetic
regime we tend to think in particular in
architecture in the last twenty thirty
years to the detriment of our knowledge
we tend to think that aesthetic is the
way through which you look out how
things look first of all things don't
look but
you look at things but so I think that
it is a rather interesting inversion of
that or an addition to that of course
there is an evaluation of what is good
and what is bad which is the first order
of aesthetics the second one is how what
are the conditions that allow you to
perceive the world but there's a third
one which is really interesting for
architecture in the gathering and that
is that there is something happening
which bring people together without
having to agree without having to share
and I think this is really the most
interesting element of the current
ecological crisis is that many people
utterly disagree but they come together
we haven't yet recognized that we are
together in disagreeing but we are there
mmm the crusties is an interesting
remark that has happened the other day
by the current prime minister if only
that video would have were we would have
heard the Prime Minister telling us that
we are facing a major ecological crisis
which is even more puzzling because you
thought that left and right were clearly
established terms and suddenly you see
the archenemy of the left proclaiming
what is now the mantra of the ultra-left
so it's a very troubling condition but I
think that the idea of gathering yes oh
yeah we wanted to ask why it was titled
can we control the planet instead of can
we control people not to sound
authoritarian er but I mean even the
fact that the National the secular the
religious all these active agents who
seek out mass control are even part of
the ecological crisis conversation it's
not like they're actually doing anything
to actively attack tively combat it but
it all really does come
Tomas control yeah I think it it's
mainly in deference to James Lovelock
there's a particular passage in Gaia
where it mentions that of course we are
never gonna be in control of the planet
and he says it sounds like if it's like
thinking that the goat will be a good
gardener humans will be able to control
the planet of course not that has to do
with our impetus first of all we are the
only species that controls fire that's
why I think that they can internal
combustion engine is really intriguing
because we've reached now that moment
where we know that we have to stop being
human we have to give up the fire
we cannot burn things we have to burn
them in a complete different way that we
used to be but I think that your
question is about population and
territory yes there's an inherent
condition about in a territory around
policing about people I'm at the all
important element that has been
discussed out of that connection I say
the connection because this is now we're
in a seminar mode comes really from the
understanding michel foucault of the
relationship between police and
territory and population and the
interesting element of that discussion
is that it was then labeled biopolitics
and the debate then collapsed their bio
politics is immediately distinguished
between what is bio and what is Joe it's
never becoming a condition of thinking a
politics of ecology of what it's worth
what other but it's definitely got to do
with humans not with the rest of life so
that distinction of life remain
and it's very interesting element
biopolitics is really at the heart of
the contemporary discussion and it
excludes clearly or better eating makes
very clear the distinction between the
beers and it all which I find puzzling I
find the entire notion and I hope to be
able to indicate some of the elements
the distinction between people masses
and ecology is a false one especially in
the Anthropocene it's impossible to
distinguish but if you're just looking
at it as you know every action has an
equal and opposite reaction
the humans fall on one side of the scale
so in a sense we do kind of create the
distinction right and it's the puzzling
element of why we put the question like
that
my father controlling us can weaken
govern ourselves of course we can govern
ourselves the question is we are enter
enter in a complete different and the
short term decision that we're gonna
make in the next year's have consequence
is not on the long term or medium term
but have consequences of things that
happened already that's why it's so
puzzling because I feel like the
discussion doesn't involve human
practices enough because my father has
this silly little example where he talks
about how the Japanese and the Americans
culturally imitate a lot you have the
Japanese on one end who will boil tea
and then you'll have the Americans on
one end who will boil tea - then I sit
and then it's like this cycle and then
they'll add milk and they just keep
learning from each other and it creates
this cycle of okay it's creating this
distinction between two cultures that
learn from each other but then are
actively building on kind of taste but
you still can't tell the two people that
they're overusing in terms of energy
and he to create something for the sake
oh it's a difficulty no I think we were
discussing it the other day in class and
I'm happy to see you back but the
difficulty is that you cannot tell
people to change what they've been doing
seriously go to someone say look all of
your livelihood is wrong first of all
they will treat you as the fool of the
village why you tell us these things hmm
after which pulpit are you preaching us
so people will not follow you the second
one is that the moment that you try to
bring the arguments why you should
change your life again you'll fall into
the trap of whose argument whose science
who me yo and then I think you're not
exactly in the situation of the
coevolution of societies its of its
obvious that the Pacific in the 20th
century was a Co development of Japanese
Empire and American Empire I mean you
don't need to read many books to
understand that you don't even need to
have the cataclysm of the bomb in
Hiroshima to understand that you just
think not retexture Frank Lloyd Wright
it's obvious that there is a coevolution
as exactly the same way as that there's
a coevolution between this side of the
Eurasian continent and the other side
China the same so the distinctions of
people among themselves are enough my
question and I think the way that and so
he was articulating what is a world
system it's indicating that it's not a
distinction between us everybody who's
got blue eyes on one side everybody
who's got one blue and one brown eye on
the other side no doesn't work like that
what we're discussing is that it's
impossible to distinguish what humans
are that's the troubling and at the same
time beautiful world of the Anthropocene
because we don't know what
who's the anthropos not only we don't
know who
the planet is we have no clue who the we
is that's one of the reason why we
didn't call it can we control ourselves
what's because we're not Protestants
it's interesting that the cumbia on
record
they cut the comment of number two
long-haired man with a white beard not
the one in the nice sofa he was pretty
upset about the construction of the coal
fire stations absolutely so there is a
sort of I mean we talked about this in
the last seminar actually that it's a
tricky one there's a level of re
calibrating re understanding which is
required to possibly be involved in the
process of the future not necessarily to
solve the problem but I feel very much
from that comment that he made that
there is also a kind of again what I
said last week there's a there's a need
for militancy I mean there's a level of
understanding that the system is
evolving in a way that is not going in
the right direction and I think we all
accept that but there's also one of
saying look you can't be completely
stupid and commit the same mistake all
over again so I talked about it about
urbanization the last time but I mean
when he says it about the coal power
stations and that's it you know once you
built it it's 50 years of damage in this
short kind of estimation so it's an
interesting one I think because I think
you were making I think I probably
appropriate in some things it's not
people control but it is that she may be
legislative control or control in
another way or or a body tight you just
say you can't do that not you can't make
exactly the same mistake again in a
sense so that coming together I think
has to have also a sort of authority to
some degree
absolutely in that sense we need to
change our lives
I have to know what they are but I think
up on the it they're literally just
metal bottles reusable so that people
are encouraged to use less plastic good
I wanted to - maybe just again I'm just
hung up on words at the moment because I
really want to challenge the orthodoxy
and the seamlessness with which we are
just accepting some of these words
without actually slowing down pausing
and thinking in terms of precautionary
kind of principle status of some of
these things so you mentioned
biopolitics you mentioned eigem you
mentioned Foucault we mentioned and in
May but you know and then we talked
about militancy like absolutely but you
know when we talk about this emergency
we're in that term if we remember a
Gambon and what he have ield to us can
be used by you know the dark forces to
completely destabilize a sense of policy
or gathering that we want to secure and
I'm playing with words here but I'm
trying to kind of regain them so that
they're not enclosed because you know
the emergency allows states to do all
sorts of things with our polity with our
gathering and so I think we need to be
very cognizant about what emergency as a
word does if we want to decolonize it or
D derail it from complete user patient
by the so called state and whatever that
might mean so it's just a moment of all
of us I think we talked about plan and
we decoding that and I think that's
fundamental but I think we also at some
stage within a seminar discussion with
different interpretations of these terms
need to understand what the emergency
the climate understood as let's call it
global warming understood as an
emergency heating does global heating
yeah
global heating technically you are
referring to a particular passage in a
little booklet that is beautifully
translated into English state of
exception altered by an Italian
philosopher George agamben and I think
it's chapter four and you can tamaki
concerning avoid if I recall correctly I
teach this every year so I should know
the question is it that incumbent as
usual enters etymological discussion is
very much interesting undoing the common
use of parlance in order to reveal in
the animal world conditions of splinter
this association is very Pena minion in
that but he follows a discussion between
Walter Benjamin and at a distance Carl
Schmitt the theorist
of the 20th century Nomos the question
is whether there can be pure violence
and they all disagree but in the
disagreement is sort of a back and forth
of writings they'd really never talk to
each other but they never directly quote
each other but it's obviously in the
construction of a gamble that's what is
at stake is the possibility for on one
side Benjamin to accept pure violence
and that means violence that is not
inscribed into politics and on the other
side
Schmitt says no that's it absolutely
impossible and in order to achieve that
impossibility he needs to go all the way
to the point of saying that the
sovereign is he who decides on the
exception and then the exception and
emergency is where the entire discussion
is but
there's another element in that of
course has to do with contemporary forms
of you ridic Oh practices that are not
so much interested in decision but on
ongoing and revolving conditions of you
ridicule mmm see adjustments and I think
we will have on the second last session
a lot of this will be discussed we've
invited two phenomenal new radical
scholars one is a professor of
international law at the fridge of
Nansen Institute a vides who's rewriting
the law of the sea and another one is
colleague at the London School of
Economics whose work is phenomenal
because he's interested in property law
and how property notions of use are
completely to be rethought in
contemporary terms thank you for
alerting us to the difficulty sorry for
being pedantic in professorial it is a
seminal I just wanted to add like you
know these kind of gloominess and crises
and whatever we have I we continuously
tell indeed for that what an amazing
place to be a student today is because
it's about kind of raising the questions
of what it is and taking for what we see
out there also to be reality and
addressing that rather than through many
layers of narratives and whatever we
have constructed in their last decades
and and this is really also the the
people we have invited for this series
is really people who just look and tell
about the situation and I think that is
different one and foremost that we have
to see and do
today I'm gather say thank you thank you
for joining us
a little bit of before we gather and
continue drinking and profiting from the
conviviality offered by the architecture
Association I would like to really thank
all the students for having initiated
this year's rethinking it's in
particular the group that is Qualis
around what you call a a action and I
would like to thank of course manager
Vargas for organizing the lecture series
and the seminar series it it is a
continuation of course of what we
started a few years back on the study of
the heritage of Jacqueline turret and
this is work supported by the Graham
foundation in Chicago to which we are
thankful next week we have a session and
that is gonna look at the fact that
green is not a color and we are going to
investigate what is the state of nature
it's a session organized by Sylvia hair
and Matilda khazzani who teaches here
and so please join us again on Monday
the following week is I think open week
here so there will be no seminar but
there is a very interesting event on
Monday evening when the curator of the
Museum of Modern Art will join us in
discussing her work she's been recently
curating a fantastic exhibition called
broken nature in Milan at the try and
three knowledge so Monday and the 28th
is Valentin le we will return on the
Monday November the 4th with a session
where we gather members of the
Anthropocene working group and that is a
group of scientists geologists in
particular that are trying to formalize
the current geological epoch and the
title of that is
are we thank you
[Applause]
