welcome everyone and welcome to this
evenings talk ways of seeing
experimental architecture and the arts
foundation short list I'm Shelly Warren
I'm the director of the Arts Foundation
it's a charity which has for the past 25
years supported individual artists
across the spectrum of the Arts with
10,000 pound awards the support is there
to pay for living and working expenses
leaving the recipient to focus on their
creative practice without the worry of
rent payments or the next era of
research how to cover that the
foundation uses experts and
professionals across the UK to nominate
a long list of talented practitioners
from which a shortlist is chosen
tonight's a special evening not only are
the shortlist here to give a little
insight into what lies behind their
individual practices but we're also
joined by Justin McGuirk and Thea Spyer
Bellis who were part of the judging
panel for this award after the talk
we'll be delighted if you would join us
upstairs for the opening reception of an
exhibition by the shortlist which will
be running until the 17th of November
I'd finally like to say a big thank you
to the AAA for hosting the talk and to
the maintenance crew those in the
workshop and the AV team who helped us
enormous Lee putting it up and finally
thank you to theo who's both also an
artist and educator here at the AAA and
who is the inspiration behind creating
this award for 2019 okay so that's very
kind words from Shelley and I think
realistically speaking I think a lot of
the conversations around this awards
with Jonathan and with others was very
much about trying to see architecture as
a kind of inclusive space as a space
that in some ways kind of allowed and
afforded a certain kind of form of
practice and that practice fundamentally
was predicated with
space as a kind of construct and as an
interface for seeing different ways of
manifesting and kind of articulating how
design art architecture could in an
expanded sense sort of participate I
think what we've had as a kind of
ongoing conversation and particularly
with Shelley was trying to sort of
understand the nature of what
experimentation is and I think when it
came to the judging and so forth that
was a very kind of important word in
some sense because let's say in this
form anyway of the architectural
Association experimentation always kind
of served as a way to sort of ask maybe
more informed questions about how we
sort of engage in the nature of practice
how we sort of enable a certain kind of
discursive strategy and how that is
basically kind of opened up and shared
so that the world of art and
architecture and design can be made more
accessible I think when we went through
the conversations particularly with
Justin and Shelley those kind of
conversations about the nature of
experimentation were something that I
think shortlist speaks to in some way
and I think in many ways speaks to the
aspects of what virtual practices are
how making is a form of thinking how one
can intervene in the public sector and
start to think about strategic forms of
practice how one could actually look at
maybe certain communities that are
operating within the city and how they
may not necessarily have a voice so I
think in many ways I think the
conversations that a lot of the
participants that were nominated for the
awards
I think opened up I think served I think
for a much more engaged and informed
kind of conversation with that I think
the nature of what the discussion is
tonight is really something that is more
conversational part of the conversation
is really predicated on the four
participants speaking to their practice
and I think I would leave that to them
to sort of introduce themselves and how
they would want to speak to that
and then Justin and myself what we're
trying to do is to moderate a little bit
of the conversation through maybe some
of the discussions that we may have had
with Shelley and with Amanda that will
sort of start to maybe open up and
problematize or even complexify actually
why architecture I think is an important
framework to kind of think about how we
sort of engage the world today I
actually really and I'm trained as an
architect I find myself in very
different definitions in terms of if I
operate as a technologist or an artist
or an architect I I fundamentally
actually don't really believe in
disciplinary distinctions and I think in
some way with the participants in some
form I think that that shared and so I
would like to welcome everybody here for
not only the presentation but this is a
space in terms of the architectural
Association that by its nature is an
association in terms of people coming
together to discuss a lot of these
things it was set up as a charity I set
up as an association because education
of an architect was not something that
was common at the time it was
non-existent really so you learn by
basically working and you came here to
be able to share and I think that in the
spirit of that I'm very happy that
Shelley and the trustees agreed to
actually have this here I think it's an
important thing I hope that it is
supported in the future in some form and
I think with that I think I'm gonna kill
this introduction and sort of get on
with the show and invite everybody
afterwards to see the exhibition on the
work of four very young practitioners
trying to do things in the world that's
necessarily to be honest with you ten
thousand pounds doesn't set up a
framework for all of that but enables I
think a certain belief that some of that
even if it's just a recognition to be
nominated for that is important and it's
valued by a kind of community that in
some sense I think owes at least that
much
so for that I'm going to ask the first
speaker Finn Williams from public
practice to come up and to sort of share
some of their work and then I'm gonna go
and I hit parade of four participants
and then I'm going to introduce Justin
who's chief curator of design museum
we're gonna have a conversation and
we'll have some drinks and see some work
okay so Finn please thank you very much
the thanks for having us here we're
really honored to be here and alongside
Lawrence and Holly and Chris so I
studied architecture but on on going
into practice was really struck by the
disconnect between the the ambitions of
Education and the reality of the role of
the architect and I suppose the the
disconnect between that kind of
experimental culture that I'd been
trained in and the room for
experimentation in practice so always
struck by this statistic exactly how
true it is but apparently architects who
are involved in less than 2% of
construction globally in the UK of
course it's more but in terms of new
homes only six percent are actually
designed by architects right now and
what we spending our time doing
seventy-seven percent of the
architectural workforce in inning in the
UK's it's been working on on single
family homes and that wasn't necessarily
the work that I'd gone into
architectural education to end up doing
40 years ago it's very different almost
half of all architects work for the
public sector and graduates who coming
out the AEA saw going into public
services as really a privilege is
something they wanted to aim for in
their career and there's an amazing
tradition of public servants coming from
this school are going back not only to
be polite nev Brown and but also to
people like Owen Fleming in the 1890s
today
less than 1% of architects work for the
public sector and for me it felt like
there was a really rich territory there
to try and recover some of that
experimentation the agency of the role
of the architect but also that
interdisciplinary blurring of roles in
in the public sphere in in the public
sector in in the kind of practice I was
doing I suppose if you look at the built
environment as a whole as a kind of
triangle in terms of say budget you've
got a lot of buildings out there that
aren't being designed by architects near
the bottom that are lower in terms of
budget the standard houses that are
being churned out by Barrett Taylor
Wimpey and and in terms of my options as
a practitioner it felt like I was being
driven to working at the tip of the
iceberg so to speak and I work for four
big-name architects and when I did it
felt like we were kind of stretching
this this diagram of what the built
environment could be but we were doing
very little to affect the vast majority
of people's experience of their everyday
environment of every day in ordinary
places so I was interested in in
creating a form of practice that would
that would operate at the other end of
the scale and they would see what we
could do to bring up the bottom to deal
with not exceptions to the norm but
normality itself so that's why together
with Fuji Agra well we founded public
practice so public practice is a
independent not-for-profit social
enterprise we spun it out of the GLA
just over a year ago now and I'll
explain a bit about how it works and and
who we are as a collective so what we do
at the minute every year is we run a
national recruitment round for built
environment practitioners so yes
architects but also urban designers
planners surveyors regeneration
practitioners conservation experts and
and ideally for people who don't fit
into any one of those categories and we
call them associates they have a minimum
three years practical experience there's
no maximum so we've got people in their
forties running practices we've got
people in their 60s coming towards the
end of their career at the same time we
run around have expressions of interest
for local authorities public
organizations that are desperately in
need of this kind of expertise but can't
find ways whatever they do of attracting
people to come and work in in local
government we ask for those roles to be
additional to allow councils to do
things they never they haven't been
doing before to introduce new ways of
working so they're really fascinating
roles and then we place those associates
in those authorities for one year and
they work on those roles for 90% of the
time it's a minimum of one year and I
should say that we're just over halfway
through the program now and I'm pleased
to say that every single Authority we
were working with and wants to keep on
their associate whether the associates
who want to stay is another matter but
definitely over half of them will the
associate spend the remaining 10% of the
time taking part in the program of of
research and development collective
research and development that we run and
that takes the form of an induction week
and getting together as a cohort every
other Friday to reflect on the realities
and and hardships frustrations of work
in the public sector negotiating
bureaucracy but also to share new models
of practice the authorities pay us a
placement fee we're not-for-profit so is
that it's less than half the cost of
going out through private agencies or
consultants and they pay the salaries of
the associates and at the minute it's
it's bracketed at 30 to 60 thousand
pounds and the reason it's so much
cheaper for authorities is that we're
cross subsidized by a group of
supporters like the mayor of London
Local Government Association historic
England who see public practice is a
platform to invest in building the
public sectors capacity for proactive
planning over the longer term and
planning I should say in the broadest
sense so right now about a year in about
seven months into the first cohort and
we're working with 17 different
authorities in and around at London and
we've got a really extraordinary group
of practitioners people like Hannah
Loftus who is a
Director hat projects and working
part-time in South Cambridgeshire where
she's piloting community-led design
codes in parish councils across the
region people like Achilles gave Smith
really talented young urban designer has
been running his own design collective
called resolve and we've placed him in
Croydon he grew up in Croydon and and he
spent his teenage years there and he's
really passionate about working with
that community that he grew up in and
giving something back and he's
initiating a program of civic and
cultural meanwhile projects is kind of
precursors to longer-term development
people like Kathy McEwan so Kathy very
experienced planner one who wanted to
give something back towards the end of
her career and we've placed her in
Hounslow where she's got a role as the
kind of designs are building a design
culture across all the different
departments of the council
Rachel Hearn architect formerly at
Staunton Williams who's working as the
first in-house designer in living memory
in in Havering and convincing the
council to take a design ed approach to
planning for the future of this amazing
place run for Town Centre
Hannah Lambert so Hanna one of a few
people who had actually been in the
public sector before Yorkshire Ford and
London legacy Development Corporation
she's now at Neum and where she's
pioneering new first council LED estate
regeneration project at Canning Town
Custom House and but designing that in
collaboration with local residents and
Sophie Palmer familiar hmm
who's now placed in Bexley where she's
grounding the project for industrial
intensification a Bexley Riverside and
Aerith in a really detailed
understanding of the local economy you
can see fragments of their work their
kind of bureaucratic output upstairs in
the exhibition
I think what's quite quite shocking for
us in a way for me and puja now standing
back and seeing what this group are
doing is to think of
I suppose the difference from from what
would have happened if we decided to set
up our own private practice in a year's
time right I think more than likely we
would have had you know we would have
been lucky to have a new have an
employee to be honest the majority of
our work would probably have been
extensions for rich friends of my
parents we might have been lucky and got
a competition but somehow through this
model we've now got 17 people working
with us embedded in really meaningful
needed roles working on nearly 25,000
homes over 220,000 square meters of
public realm accelerating the delivery
of big infrastructure projects over 370
million pounds engaging all kinds of
people all around the London the
southeast in East of England in planning
so we're now seeing well where we can go
next we've got this research and
development programme which is starting
to develop some really interesting
outputs that you'll hopefully hear more
about by the end of the first cohort in
in March and the kind of questions
they're looking into hopefully have
far-reaching implications not just for
their individual placements but for the
public sector as a whole we see that R&D
program as a as an RD a shared R&D
platform for local government and we're
a really exciting stage now for
recruiting the next cohort and so these
are the two prospectuses that are out
there right now for any new authorities
but also any new associates who want to
join the program and and as a slight
plug applications are doing by the end
of November if you are at all interested
and we've got some amazing rolls coming
up we're currently operating on the
southeast and I think where this program
is really useful is having this kind of
opportunity to be part of this this
group but also to have that support with
scaling beyond just the southeast and
we're looking we're in conversations now
with government about other regions and
we won't get to world domination
straight away but we're hoping that
we're in the next two years we'll get to
at least one of these other regions and
start to develop a network of cohorts
across the country potentially even
beyond and so I just wanted to
by reading out what's kind of a
manifesto a series of observations that
we've we've had from doing this kind of
work that hopefully explains a bit more
ways about so planning has the power to
build better everyday environments for
everyone rather than creating exceptions
to the norm we work to raise the
standards of normality itself there's no
point in designing the right answer to
the wrong brief we work upstream to
influence the decisions which have the
greatest impact on places bureaucracy
isn't a constraint on creativity it's a
field for creativity in its own right
even meeting minutes procurement
processes or legal clauses or
opportunities for better design there's
a proud history of the public sector
driving innovation and excellence the
state is not only about maintaining the
status quo the job of the planner is
about more than saying yes or no we
create the conditions for change places
and their populations are complex and
don't benefit from being simplified we
value the diversity of the place places
we plan and reflect the diversity of the
people we plan for
every citizen should have a say in how
their city changes good planning gives a
voice to the silent majority by
advocating for broader communities wider
geographies and longer horizons that's
it okay so I'm playing master of
ceremonies at the moment so that's Finn
and Finn's practice obviously is
definitely engaged with public sector
and proactive planning our next speaker
is Holly Henry and one thing that's kind
of important to sort of speak about is
that the prize didn't make a sort of
distinction about architect vers artists
vers designer and so you'll see that in
terms of the nature of the practices a
lot of the practices are very much
hybrid and Holly in some sense I don't
know if she'll agree with me but you'll
have the opportunity to have a platform
to disagree with me exploits the
language of architecture and building I
think very much in terms of a lot of the
materiality and the symbolic nature of
maybe of some of the interventions and
it's very much about situated practice
which I think resonated with some of us
quite a lot so with that please
thanks Theo I agree with you and also to
echo and Finn's words it's great to be
here at the architectural Association
and be nominated and be showing with
such amazing people and learning about
their works as well yes so in my work I
look at edges emptiness flatness fakes
and forgeries but my sculptures are
usually weighty difficult cumbersome and
occupying or altering the same space as
we do my research making and thinking
looks at edges architectural edges body
edges the meeting of edges the puncture
of edges for me the edge defines or
outlines where something is or isn't so
in that way they're about absence and
presence through borders I'm interested
in questioning how sculpture can
represent and engage with bodies also
talk about space and creative space or
occupy space and I wanted to show you a
series of works and this first one being
show I did last year at Baltic in
Gateshead in Newcastle so the show is
called rot
it's about wrot which references term in
the building trades but also has
connotations of decay and breakdown and
things happening under the surface and
to rot as the decomposed offering an
opportunity to reassemble um so was this
literal kind of cutting of the gallery
space where I raised part of the floor
up to kind of chest height we're really
in the kind of cross-sections I was
interested in this kind of idea of a
cross-section as a cut and slice to
learn and reveal as cross-section gives
up an edge to the inside and so it
brought people up to face face up to
these kind of forms of spoke of the
underneath but there was also these kind
of larger elements which towered above
which sort of kind of lumping awkward
sections that defied the fact the
flatness are being buried below
I cast layers I do a lot of casting and
the layers in this work were made from
materials such as plaster and jasmine I
mixed with weird aggregates of cat
litter charcoal ash dog chew chewing gum
that kind of relate to the work
conceptually so despite the sugary
appearance and they dealt with quite
compost the ideas of the work going back
to its material origins and becoming
stuff again the work also kind of
borrows from the language of cartoons or
advertising where line is exaggerated
and color is simplified to kind of give
depth or full-bodied sensation but I
guess it kind of refers to this cartoon
world because in a cartoon world life
exists in objects and the inorganic is
freed from real world rules so it kind
of gives us this chance to kind of
escape her in reality because in the
cartoon world pain is fleeting and death
is reversible but then I also use
objects like word or rock that kind of
bring us back to our own kind of
environment and reality with the kind of
dumb thud the only kind of human body
can do I like to kind of talk about the
way I think and make one of the examples
of this is fossils and particularly
under cost and endow cost being the
internal form of a hollow object natural
under cast like the one on the left here
are formed when an organism dies in the
ground and that organism shaped hole is
later filled with sediments minerals
that create reproduction so Nate should
be in this kind of original forger so I
think it's a good way to talk about
these kind of ideas of positive and
negative spaces and this kind of
membrane that surrounds us and other
things and points where these contours
kind of shift and morph and turn inside
of themselves so I thought as well like
a making is a really big important
process for me so it's important to show
kind of these processes well actually
part of this sculpture is upstairs and
so yeah I see these kind of flipping of
boundaries in line with kind of casting
processes
and the way I kind of defy that idea of
replication of class casting so the
materials are kind of in these works are
kind of poured layer by layer and then
there's this kind of excavation process
where the sides are taken off and the
skins ripped off and they kind of
excavated out so they kind of made
backwards or thinking and kind of inside
out way and in a similar way these this
inorder work but it's made from
measurements of storage spaces that are
then made into inflatables and cast and
then I get inside the kind of mold
itself and paste on plaster so these
final works and this final kind of form
is made for a very thin layer of plaster
that looks kind of dense and weighty but
it has a lightness to it and up close
you can kind of see those holes and
those those imperfections as well
they're supported by kind of structures
that relate to like the inside of houses
or buildings these kind of dialect call
architectures of needing support and so
I kind of looked for this kind of like
formal formal beauty or ugliness Ness or
something
so I guess within that kind of brings me
to the idea of cognitive supports and
structures as well and to go back to the
work at Baltic and these frameworks of
support kind of clamped the architecture
like retainers a teeth kind of almost
trying to pull the walls into the
succulents of the work itself there were
also a lot of holes in the work holes in
the building holes cut in the walls that
for me relate to kind of dug out volumes
and carved forms and I think the cavity
in the work relate the kind of mental
removal of materials like digging in
quarries and burial on an architectural
scale also in a smaller scale like when
you lose a tooth and these kind of holes
and uh broken bodies and the fact that
you kind of need gaps to help us realize
that something's missing in the first
place and that's the gap that then the
bone is the corresponding size oops um
oh God
this is a work titled Cenotaph that was
in the liberal manual this summer
Liverpool and Cenotaph means a monument
to a Borah body bury buried elsewhere so
the work is meant to look like kind of
sections of a mold that could fit
together in some kind of impossible
configurations but also maybe like drain
pipes or kind of quite quite kind of
modular parts of the building
I kind of would hope that they were
these kind of sarcophagus skins that
speak of their positive gut like
counterpart that could be made if they
were put together in casts as a thing
they were situated in a square with so
much kind of architectural dominance
it's used for filming kind of sets in
New York and things so I think it kind
of reflects this kind of Western
architecture that's usually about kind
of existence and dominance not absence
or lack so I wanted to kind of speak
about these spaces in-between and so
through the ideas of absence the
sculptural mold became something really
important to me to deal with the
articulation of negative space through
solid mass kind of conceptually and
physically so look at the anatomy of
architecture of our surroundings the
kind of
innards and plumbing of the city itself
and these kind of clandestine undersides
so this work in particular developed
from spending a lot of time in Liverpool
and kind of learning about the history
of Liverpool and the history of the site
having completely hollow foundations
underneath it's now kind of a car park
but they had history of kind of
tunneling in World War 2 where it was a
means of communication between building
and so the top right the top right image
is a picture of the kind of undersides
of that and I think Liverpool kind of
extends that kind of history of like the
Mersey tunnels and the women Williamson
tunnels and these kind of stories around
tunneling itself so I'm interesting it's
kind of behind the scene spaces and such
as like the chorale marble quarries or
kind of places where sites of production
that almost feel like they're kind of
gritty reality in a peek into the
underside that feels kind of real in a
way
so I spent a lot of time in Liverpool
and I spent time at shipbuilding company
as well who had loads of archive
pictures of wooden forms that they used
to test into the voids of the ships
before they made the actual metal
machinery for it as well I love this
kind of idea of the the actual kind of
voids of the spaces so I wanted the
works to have this look that they could
have could they had a very individual
quality to them where each one was
sculpted and molded and cast
individually but then they also could
look like maybe slightly they could have
dropped off the back of a lorry and be
going into Sun of something in in the
drain pipe as well and this is the work
called homeostasis which was made in
Sharjah United Arab Emirates and charges
the emirate next to Dubai and from
spending time there kind of realized the
kind of vast difference of it and how do
by was kind of building up and all about
the shine and charge is kind of looking
for this trying to find this history and
so one thing that became apparent was
this the barge eel or wind tower that
was in the center of the square the was
it was historically used as a kind of
center of the home and as a form of kind
of air conditioning as a way to cool
cool that space as well but now is real
decorative functioning kind of marks
that kind of history that Charlotte
seems to be trying to find so I wanted
to feed these em ducting
kind of through the wind tower and
around the courtyard and running a
stream of air through it as well so
there was like a low buzzing noise and
there was as a really kind of important
material for me in that it's kind of
it's synonymous in kind of bodies and
buildings and connects them both and I
thought this was an important work for
me that's actually a really old work now
but it's got it's called are 255 G 145
be 175 which is a color code number
because at the time I was interested in
the kind of institutional effects of
color on the body and this one has a lot
of scientific research behind it that I
won't go into now but I think the
importance for me here is to
looking about the kind of the idea of
air something Van Loon voluminous and
ridiculous but also make you think about
insides and that kind of idea of scale
as well where something becomes bigger
than your body and so you start to
consider it internally as well air as
well it's something that we're all kind
of immersed in and is a symbol of life
in that we breathe it but as well can be
a symbol of kind of lack or a void in
the face like you disappear into thin
air so the inflatable became this kind
of way to capture this and also create
something kind of ludicrous or absurd
that kind of become squashed into these
architectural spaces and the
architecture forms a framework that then
supports the work it became like a
pattern making on a large-scale way you
kind of squash it into the work so to go
back to the duck scene pieces and this
is a work that I've actually just
finished this in in France and is using
the same idea and I wanted to show it
because it feels like such a different
work in the site as well it kind of
transformed it in clearly different
place it's considering and so it sits in
a chalk quarry that's now used as a
champagne cellar that was dug in the
19th century to store the champagne
bottles because it has a very particular
temperature and level of humidity so
there's 8 t kilometers of these tunnels
and there's all these amazing reliefs as
well because of the talk is the kind of
sculptural quality of the chalk and but
there I think the work feels so
different because of the kind of
awareness as well of the the weight of
your surroundings and what the pipe work
is doing in that and the last work I
wanted to talk about is Phyllis which
was made for a commission that was with
your Scotch park and Selfridges for the
new entrance of Selfridges on Duke
Street and she was formerly based in one
of the digging machines used to dig the
Crossrail and named Phyllis who dug from
Ferrand in under Bond Street and but
then
was left underground due to her size and
cost to exhume so in in kind of she in
effect she kind of dug her own grave and
so I kind of wanted to make a sculpture
or a form that kind of was a reference
to that axe and that void almost like a
kind of relic we of this so the
sculpture itself contains rubble from
the site but also the the cross road dig
itself was kind of giant archaeological
and process and so there's lots of kind
of elements that I looked at the objects
and then copied them and kind of created
them in materials that relate to it so
such as there's an image of a flattened
cow bone and there were once used as
kind of medieval ice case so as well as
referencing these kind of precious or
symbolic archaeological finds it also
contains things we kind of produce or
shed and clothing plastics cans packets
and things that were kind of outlive us
there's bits of chewing gum in there as
well
and so it references its kind of
conglomerate of layers of stuff these
dug out sites which are kind of where
our peripheries and physically kind of
morph and break down into soil and
sustenance of kind of vegetables or
animals
[Applause]
okay Thank You Holly
um okay speaker number three as Chris
Hillary and Chris I think in some way is
one of those characters who is an
architect by training but at the same
time is kind of trying to expand the
remit of what architecture is and in a
certain way to speak to I guess a
certain kind of vulnerable community I
think in the project specifically that
he's showing here that potentially
doesn't have a voice so with that Chris
thank you do we go okay doesn't quite
show all the words well thanks so much
and yeah again just to echo the early
statements it's a great honor to be here
and speak tonight as well as to be in
such an amazing company as well for the
shortlist I thought I'd speak mainly
today about the project that I'm
exhibiting upstairs but in order to do
that I thought it might be useful to
actually speak about bare the background
as well both of my own studio which I
established this year but also of the
project itself so similar to what Finn
was saying I myself too started off as a
practicing architect so I worked around
generally working quite large buildings
this one in Spain one in France and more
recently as of the beginning of this
year actually I was working at neo
McLaughlin's as a project architect on
the Natural History Museum and what I
tended to find is every time I was
working at the same time I already
always had other projects on the side
whether it be research or side project
so I was doing with people and for me it
seems that you know practicing as an
architect that you tend to get more
questions coming up than you can ever
answer so you actually have to take this
time away to ask these questions and
there are two particular ones that I
thought we were quite useful to explain
how I got where I am at the moment the
first was a research degree post-grad
research I'd done at the Bartlett after
part
- into the causes and effects of unpaid
overtime in architecture which always
went down well and job interviews as you
can imagine working in certain practices
there's a very big culture in a lot of
these places of working long hours and I
was really fascinated about how why was
it that this architectural profession
got to a point where there almost seems
like there is a dependency on this kind
of artificial inflation of our
productive ability as a profession in
order to survive what does that actually
say about us as a profession and I I
will spare you the thesis itself but
ultimately the conclusion was along the
lines of basically architects the role
of it as we know is being marginalized
but it's pretty much inevitable within
any kind of technology-based profession
and actually what architects should be
doing is looking not to you know fight
and resist something that's already been
done but to try and diversify and use
the skills that we get through
architectural education which is such a
broad range of skills and apply it to
not necessarily just buildings you know
the buildings aren't always the answer
often they're the most expensive and
time-consuming consuming answer to any
given problems so sometimes we should be
looking to apply our skills in different
places another project that I think
helped get me to where I am today is
this one this is well it was a complete
failure but in a sense it was because it
was a failure that it helped shape where
I am where I am today
it was a project that I did with a in
collaboration with Narciso Matthew
Derbyshire and it was around 2010 I
think so the credit crisis was still
fresh and affecting people in the
construction industry and he's an artist
but he's an artist based around he does
a lot of speculation about architecture
and he had this residency and we were
speaking we were both getting quite
frustrated about the amount of buildings
that were going up in the credit crunch
of questionable quality because it
seemed the first thing to go when you
know people really need a building
there's not very much money was quality
rather than you know questioning the
assumptions under which the building was
originally commissioned so we thought
that there should be more conversation
about about this but rather than you
know write columns and things what we
thought we'd do is use this residency
the
in this gallery and they'll bet on green
it's called the Harold Street gallery
what usually happens is you have three
months residency and you get a
commissioning fee and you build new
works using old works and you fill the
fill the gallery what we did instead was
we decided to close the gallery for
three months and give everyone who
worked there paid leave and put up
hoarding instead and pretend that we
were going to make the most ugly
building we could possibly design in
order to get the community shocked into
thinking about the actual issue
now when I say ugly building had me very
quite ugly um we tried to scrape off
every trope from sort of caveman rules
and that kind of thing that we could
find and on the opening night we went
along and we were hoping that people
would you know come up and grab us by
our lapels and scream at us in the end
everyone was just really excited to be
getting a new Tesco so in a sense it was
a complete disaster but what I took away
from this was I this kind of you know
took the carpet underneath my feet a bit
you know through architectural education
you extol how important architecture is
and it slightly becomes a you know
obviously it is but it becomes a bit of
an echo chamber whereby you're only
surrounded by other people who
understand it to the same degree so when
I presented something incredibly ugly to
people they didn't actually mind and so
it made me think about it and it made me
think about what it is that I see as
being important about architecture
impaired with also trying to think about
how architecture could diversify it
struck me that what I what I thought
about the reason why architecture was so
important was unlike a lot of other
design disciplines that I knew people
who worked in whether your product
design or fashion design for example you
know if you can choose what phone to buy
you can choose what clothes to wear most
people don't get a choice about what
environment they actually live in
especially in the public realm it's very
much it's something that's imposed upon
people and with that comes a duty I
think it's all responsibilities that you
need to design to make sure that you
actually don't marginalize people so
that leads me on to the main project
which is proxy address now proxy address
came out of designs of residence schema
the Design Museum which every year picks
for people from different disciplines to
basically take about a year about eight
months of work for months of exhibition
away from the general sort of day-to-day
it gives people time to think it's a
fantastic program and okay missing
basically every year there's a one-word
brief and this year's that year's brief
was support this is last year and so
with the background Otis explained I I
wanted to look at the marginalization
that happens of people in the built
environment how can architects actually
work to support this and how can they
apply their skills in a way that can do
that and so I want to look at the the
most marginalised group I'd say in the
built environment which is people who
are homeless now not only they're the
most marginalized but the generally the
most remote from any kind of direct
dialogue with architects because they're
never clients right so actually it's
very rare that you end up speaking to
people so I want to look at this this
issue and I went around the country
speaking to people so I spoke to people
who were homeless from minority workers
I spoke to mp's people from finance
people from Royal Mail anyone who might
have a sliver of you know an idea about
it and what I learned was I mean to me
very shocking I thought you know I went
into this thinking I knew a fair bit
about homelessness but I thought you
know I didn't know what I didn't know
essentially so in terms of like rough
sleeping alone the the amount of rough
sleepers since 2010 has gone up by 169
percent and that there's generally three
types of homelessness in the UK there's
rough sleeping sofa surfing where people
moving from friends sofa it's a fence
sofa and there's temporary accommodation
where if you can get housed you get put
into temper accommodation but the risk
there is you're moved incredibly
incredible short notice
and you generally put in a private
bed-and-breakfast because the temporary
accommodation is largely run out across
the country row ceilings gone up by a
hundred and sixty nine percent as you
can see wonderfully illustrated here and
the the life expectancy of are asleep in
the UK as well is just 47 right that's
30 years lower than the UK average and
it's three years lower than the world's
lowest national life expectancy of
Sierra Leone
and it's you know we walk past it every
day so as I say the number of rough
sleepers going up is is you know
spiraling out of control the life
expectancy is shocking because of the
environment in which people are living
like that but also there's this kind of
assumption about the behavior of
homelessness that I was guilty as well
going in which is that it basically fall
this is kind of bell curve distribution
the most people who are homeless have
most of the problem right that actually
people have gone homeless because they
can't maintain a stable life because of
mental health or substance abuse issues
well actually that's not really a case
most people who become homeless do so
perfectly capable of recovering but they
don't get the support that they need and
therefore they don't recover and they
get entrenched and a good way to
illustrate this is the fact that the
number one cause of homelessness in the
UK today is the end of a tenancy it's
not mental health it's not substance
abuse the end of a tendency is a trigger
so people to get entrenched and then
develop these issues later down the line
and that's really the point that I want
to my project to look at which was that
very point when people become homeless
or just before they do why is it that
they are getting the support that they
need and what can you do to actually
make sure that they do so what I'd
learned from that is something that will
remain an enigma it it was the role of
the address when you lose your home you
also lose your address and though you
can't see it there you can see some of
them or you can see this upstairs later
actually the by losing an address
there's a huge problem that the address
which was invented to classify and
define location in the city today has
become a kind of de facto ID so without
an address you can't actually get ID you
can't open a bank account you can't
apply for jobs you can't get appeal
books can't be on the electoral roll
can't get national showing somebody any
of these things it's suddenly the very
point when you need support the most
you're completely severed from it
because of the very reason why you need
it's this ridiculous catch-22 at the
same time the homelessness reduction
that came in to force now this this puts
a lot of additional duties on local
authorities seduced me about
homelessness but
the problem is or form is a local
authority funding in 2010 we had a
certain model you can see wonderful on
the left by 2020 ultimately there's a
thing called the revenue support grant
that comes from the central government
funding to local authorities and it
counts about a third of all local
authorities Ingram as of 2020 that's
gone 100% gone and so what on that
sliding scale at the moment and what you
found is that since 2010 when I think
when it began being phased out no matter
what your reliance on the revenue
Support Grant you all fade to zero by
2020 so the people who are most reliant
on that grant get cut get it cut much
more steeply than areas that are not
reliant on it so actually the poorest
areas are getting hit the hardest by
these cuts so there was a problem with
more duties and less money how do you
actually get local authorities to be
able to do for more for less what
resources do they have and what recess
could they use and one resource that
they do have is addresses and there's a
few sources of these um first of all you
have empty homes now you know people
will never in in you know a short period
of time get to the point where we're
requisitioning homes because they're
empty but we can use their addresses the
dresses don't require consent if you buy
a house you don't actually buy the
address it's actually made by the local
authority and the role my opening
information together but also you have
things like empty retail at one in ten
retail establishments in the UK are
empty today but also you get bizarre
little things like the number 13 so I
worked with the Vomero quite early on
this project and I got access to their
database of addresses and what I found
it was every street in the UK with
number 14 34 % don't have a 13 just
because of superstition in Birmingham
it's 74 percent to councils have
actually banned the use of number 13
it's beside they generally self about 3
to 4 percent less than the houses either
side as well there's a 160,000 number 13
out there that are just missing so this
massive pool of addresses that you know
if you can find a way to use and
address and give it to somebody so that
them yeah let's let them access these
services then you know that's the kind
of essence of the project ultimately
what what proxy address does is it takes
these addresses that aren't being used
it assigns them to people who are
entering into a period of instability
and it allows that to act as a proxy as
a proxy address and what it does it's
essentially a database it sits as an
intermediary so if you imagine that you
are a sofa surfer and you move every two
weeks now we all know what it's like
even my own flood I get post when people
used to live there years ago right every
time you move you have to tell like 20
different people in order to keep your
correspondents up now trying to do that
when you move every two weeks at the
most vulnerable point in your life is
incredibly difficult so it doesn't
happen now if you miss a letter from the
Department of Work and Pensions about a
job centre meeting you'll miss the
meeting you missed the meeting you get
sanctions and sanctions under the
universe of credit means that you get
cut off from any bit of financial
support from the government for anywhere
between one month and three years I was
meeting people who had been sanctioned
for you know three months for missing a
part I met one guy who had a heart
attack in the queue to see his
appointment and was sanctioned for two
months as well so actually getting these
data streams connected and making sure
that people can actually stay in touch
is really really key and in some cases
almost life and death but there's also
other aspects to it from part from just
post I would say there's three there's
the postal side of things there's a
financial side of things like opening
bank accounts and there's a popular
public sector side of things as well
helping local authorities meet their
duties and getting things like benefits
now the financial sector side is what we
are doing first because of the
requirements of regulations the bars are
highest for anti-fraud regulations and
as you can imagine when you go into the
room and say you're going to let all the
homeless people use addresses they don't
live up suddenly the lawyers in the room
and you start to have different
conversations we've had those
conversations and so what we're gonna do
is do a live trial in Lewisham starting
next year working with the financial
conduct authority a couple of banks
which I can't declare just yet and a
cohort of around 2 to 3 hundred homeless
people and we're gonna you
these empty addresses sign them up get
them to open bank accounts and as a
result be able to you know get them
hopefully starting to get back off back
on their feet thank you okay so we
apologize Chris for not having your
visuals but I think you communicated
more than well and you guys are see all
of that stuff upstairs speaker number
four is lawrence lawrence luck who is
also a graduate from this place which is
kind of interesting but he communicates
himself as a multimedia artist and
filmmaker and he's very much working
within the domain of the virtual in
terms of virtual reality in terms of
simulation in terms of exploring sort of
frameworks like game engines and yeah we
look forward to Lawrence's presentation
Lawrence please
[Applause]
thanks and it's great to be here as well
I hope there's no more technical issues
because I'm going to be playing some
videos that illustrate the kind of very
vague concepts I'm dealing with
so I guess my main interest is in this
idea of a world or world building and my
kind of conception of I guess
architecture and other kind of art forms
is that technology evolves throughout
time in order to convey different ideas
of how a world is built so for example
like part of the kind of primal power of
architecture stems from the fact that I
feel like your first experience of the
world is through space you know I mean
from the womb into the increasingly
large boundaries that everyone finds
himself into and then I think different
art forms kind of complement this later
on like for example like the you know
the written novel was in the 19th
century or filmmaking was in the 20th
century or let's say virtual worlds and
video games for some are now and so this
idea that architecture is like the both
the container of narrative and is also
symbolic of larger that's a geopolitical
issues or different ways that we see the
world is really um integral to my work
and I'm gonna just you know show some
slides hopefully going the opposite way
there we are
that kind of talk about my you know just
my idea of how these things are
entangled together in this
I guess science fiction is the closest
idea I have it but also how essentially
I felt with architects you're always
working with this timeline you're
promising the future based on evidence
of the virtual in order to arrive at a
material object in the future which is
exactly you know the speculative
narrative is exactly how different art
forms like science fiction have very
much embedded in it
and different I guess different trains
of Thor in in let's say design was
speculative design or in kind of arts
and philosophy like speculative realism
deal with this idea of the future
existing in the present and so in a few
of my my videos I'm explicitly kind of
playing with this idea I created this
fictional company called Farsight
actually first in a film last year and
Farsight is an AI corporation that's
really good at big data and they use
this essentially to to automate creative
enterprise so what is playing on the
screen at the moment even though there
is no audio is basically a trailer for
this for this company called Farsight
it's very much modeled on you know what
you would see whether it's you know
wicks we will build your website or you
know google AI analytics ads but it's
the starting point of me thinking about
the automation of human creativity of
course you know in in architecture at
least when I was a student there was
very much this paradigm that technology
is a tool that allows more sophisticated
material forms to be built and it's
generally frowned upon at least when I
was in here to do something really
cheesy like kind of fly through virtual
model of your building and show how
amazing it is kind of like you know with
the Tesco or rebranding the city so
anyway I kind of took this at face value
and created a company that was
explicitly for creating these dream
workplaces that you might see it with
you know we work or different creative
enterprises like second home where the
the company has kind of brought together
this domestic environment bean bags
coffee tables together with what is
essentially just a very low-rent
temporary workspace and of course we see
those kind of works places I'm popping
up all around London this you know this
trailer for Farsight is
advertising basically their latest
rebranding of an existing building in
Whitechapel into their you know Farsight
job simulator we're modeled on different
ideas of you know a kind of post
employment world essentially people come
to be trained in jobs where they're
actually not required for the labor
itself but it's more kind of corporate
social responsibility so that people
feel engaged with their work even though
they're not actually necessary in terms
of the labor that they're providing um
and again it is not too far-fetched a
scenario and in some senses so different
um different tones of kind of what I'm
playing with have a lot to do
is there any audio by the way that's a
question
maybe not anyway in this glorious
trailer that goes on about the the
workplace that people can visit it's
rendering essentially this combination
of theme park or entertainment space
with with a workplace to give this you
know hybridized form of environment and
in these various kind of projects which
go from you know dealing with this idea
of the corporate workplace I delve with
different ideas of what a kind of post
work economy looks like this project
here which is called a no-tell which is
being shown upstairs is a it's a video
game and VR simulation for this fully
automated luxury hotel chain kind of if
you imagine the Hilton got together with
Airbnb and let's say the editors of
Monaco to create this ideal five-star
hotel it's 500 meters across I mean its
massive but it it only has 12 rooms so
it's kind of this celebration and also
critique about this idea of hyper luxury
but whereas I guess there's a version of
luxury where you have you know like 200
servants and you know Butler's for
everything there's another version of
luxury where you actually it's like do
not disturb permanently and in the
design of this hotel because it's it is
fully surveyed so you are being under
constant surveillance while you're there
so the idea is the hotel builds up a
perfect database about user behavior and
so you never have to ask for anything
which again is you know one paradigm of
the height of luxury you can so for
example you know the drone workforce
goes around making sure security is okay
and at the same time various stock
monitors go on showing about how you're
you know Nasdaq stock index is doing and
things like that so you know very much
taking what I remember seeing at the
Hilton
projecting forward you know what the
design of this place would actually be
and actually I think I saw you know
there was some market report about about
you know predicting that for the
concierge of a hotel in the future will
be automated and I think you know that
is not too far-fetched notion and of
course it's it's always because of a
economic basis whether it's you know
self checkout or self check-in self
checkout Tesco or whatever there's very
much this transference obviously of
labor from from the service provider to
the individual and of course that's very
much entrenched in the in the gig
economy and things like that but anyway
this the no-tell is it's a simulation
where you can you know walk around the
hotel and at the same time the CEO of
the no-tell corporation is telling it's
basically trying to sell you the
building itself so in a sense like this
is it's kind of like it's a meta
site-specific project where the
marketing for the building is within the
way that the space is being presented to
you as well so here there we go through
the architecture showroom in in the same
place so part of the idea for and the
scope of building virtual worlds is that
I see it as this is this like collage
medium where you can't where it's not
just about putting in these like virtual
set designs or references to other
places but you can actually like for
example here I am you can actually
inject references to how you built the
place itself so for example here's the
architecture studio in the know tell
where the in-house design team is
designing games that run in the hotel
itself and so for me this is a way to
literally embed the way I have created
and worked on these on these projects
within the within the space of the
building itself and that is a kind of
sectional was a sectional model of part
of the no-tell itself actually you can
see that basically the it has like a
clear atrium going all the way through
and references these ideas of you know
like a defensive bunker bunker
archeology kind of defense
of structure there's an aerial view on
the right that is both I guess mirrors
the design of buildings like the apple
loop headquarters in in California but
also this idea of a defensive
architecture where where luxury and
paranoia and security kind of coexist
next to each other so just a quick note
on the way I exhibit these I don't have
any images here but for me the notion of
what is site-specific is really
interesting and I guess for a couple of
years after I finished my studies I
thought of site-specific as like the
site is a static object in space that
things happen and then the viewer
departs I kind of had this both a
realization and born out of economic
necessity a few years after that that
actually when I saw people navigate
these buildings these because it is a
building they go around and navigate the
space and remember it in exactly the
same way as they would an actual
building you know so you know quite
often two people go and someone says
like I want to have a go first and the
other person's like Oh like we've really
been here why don't you go along that
corridor on the left and see what's
there so I realized that there is
actually no difference in the the memory
of a place and of course you know
there's film sets that are more
memorable than because of the narrative
that happened there these things are
more memorable because actions have
occurred within them and of course you
know as the student of architecture most
of the buildings I love I've never been
to and it's such a bleeding Lee obvious
fact that I felt kind of gets lost with
them when the primacy of construction or
the material is there so basically I
realized that in this future projection
of architecture if you create that I
guess that phenomenon of the space
without building anything that's enough
and then that is that's where the
architecture I have
itself and so this this project
no-tell was exhibited in a few different
places each of which kind of referenced
the the place where there exhibited this
is the trailer to my film geomancer I
made last year and it's essentially a
portrait of the artist as an AI so the
idea is that a satyr a surveillance
satellite a AI comes down to Singapore
in order to kind of escape its
obsolescence essentially and here
architecture this is um it's all set in
Marina Bay in Singapore which if anyone
knows it's basically this Moshe Safdie
designed like gambling and entertainment
and art and culture and basically
shopping complex but I use that hybrid
like natural artificial environment in
order to like embody these ideas about
this emerging self conscious of of this
AI essentially because again I started
thinking like my work is about you know
automating creativity essentially how
far does that go in the you know
eventual in the event reality where you
know like you press a button and it's
called generate building or even
generate film generate script generate
music as well so in this case while the
site-specific thing was really about you
know talking about architecture as a
symbolic spacial container some of my
work also branches out into thinking
about just the the you know the notion
of of creativity as well um and the way
I work as well is kind of because of the
way the virtual world works as well it's
quite additive as well this is a the
last video I'll show and just talk over
is a video for 2065 and 2065 is both the
name of a show I had in this place
called k-11 in Hong Kong but it's also
the year in which geomancer is set so in
this video which is a trailer for a
video game which could be played in the
exhibition
I basically looked at geomancer the last
film from the opposite angle and in this
film so this is like a walkthrough of of
the gallery space itself which is which
it one might say this is a walkthrough
of the gallery space itself which is
also the entrance portal in the game and
so I was making an installation in the
gallery of what what say like Sony
Playstation would install if it if they
were to advertise a game that was about
being an AI and so there are various
references to Farsight corporation here
but in this basically the idea is that
you rather than being a spectator
wandering through the world you are you
are basically a drone wandering through
the world in which your interaction with
the architecture and the world is
actually predicated on the virtual world
itself so there is essentially one
saying is this is no longer the idea of
virtual reality or anything like that
being a technologically driven medium
but is something that is that is in its
most kind of clear sense like an
immersive world where you no longer
notice the kind of the medium itself and
so I mean actually this so the games in
the game the yes the games in the game
also represent I guess I guess the
contradictions and complexities of the
medium of the virtual world itself and
that is the kind of weird paradox I feel
that any form of spatial practice takes
thank you
[Applause]
okay so with that just going to just
quickly introduce Justin who has spoken
here and has been very much a part of
the larger community in London who's a
writer a critic and a curator and chief
curator at the moment at the Design
Museum who's going to help me sort of
construct a conversation so if that's
the okay with everybody - I could ask
everybody to come to the table and then
we'll just open it up for a quick
discussion if anybody wants to engage in
that and then afterwards drinks and
reception upstairs for the show okay
thanks can you hear me good well thank
you Thea for the introduction it was a
real pleasure to be part of a jury with
Amanda Levine with Theo and Shelley and
we had a project on our hands really
with this term experimental architecture
and I think that's what made it
interesting for us what does that term
mean I think we established pretty
quickly that it didn't mean what it
might once have meant if we think about
the kind of 1970s understanding of
experimental architecture a kind of
paper architecture possibly formal
experimentation as some kind of preamble
to a future career building things
rather it seemed to be much more about
other possibilities and I would say in a
way despite how uncomfortable
been for you Chris to have her a
presentation disappear before your eyes
I think it was quite a good metaphor for
the way that some of the practitioners
were working particularly Chris and Finn
and I think that's lit of practitioners
that we have around this table is super
interesting because we've got two people
who are thinking really at the level of
the system and if architecture is going
to be experimental then that is
certainly one way to rethink it and and
I think what they both demonstrated both
Chris and Finn in their work is that
sense that the true potential really of
thinking about architecture as not a
building but thinking about it as a
system or piece of bureaucracy something
that you can intervene in the kind of
scale at the level of bureaucracy which
sounds unappealing on the face of it but
can be incredibly impactful and I think
Finn made the point very well with his
slide about how the number of square
feet that you have kind of influenced
just through a small practice by placing
people in positions of potential power
Finn I mean or Chris you know giving
homeless people access to the necessary
bureaucracy to have a life you know on
the other side we've got two people
practicing one as artists and I think
it's it's impossible to compare these
things but I think we understood the
quality of what we were seeing and we
understood how Hollies work for example
might influence a way an architect could
think about their practice we understood
it more maybe at a gut level just by
looking at
you can kind of see the potential of
space-making in placemaking and in
Lawrence's work you know this is this
whole world opening up which are
starting to explore this and I can't
tell how much I mean I sense there's
quite a lot of irony in what you're
doing and your aesthetic which on one
level makes me kind of almost
uncomfortable you know I never want to
go there when I think oh my god so I
mean I think that gives us a sense of
maybe a beginnings of what we were
thinking about when we brought these
four people together and I think tonight
we showed how frankly talented and I
talked about it five men to the weekend
in some way but and fear you can steer
this I mean I I agree they were very
articulate no I I think the
conversations around experimentation
were fundamentally a kind of open and
discursive primarily to see
experimentation beyond the sake of
experimentation I think in some way it's
- and I think in a very spirited way
kind of continuous or an attitude
towards design art and architecture
which was actually fundamentally trying
to demand more
I guess if one takes a definition about
experimentation as now sort of seeing
things actually in a way where one can
sort of intervene in the world where
certain kind of technological
apparatuses now start to enable a kind
of conversation that maybe in the
sixties and seventies could only be
speculated about but without direct
access to it and so in some way I mean
because I know that I I sort of operate
in this domain in this house and
experimentation are always meant a
certain
have attitude towards an avant-garde or
a certain kind of attitude towards a
kind of group of people that sort of
thought about architecture in a certain
way and an unapologetic way sort of kind
of plowed forward I think maybe the
things that we're starting to see at the
moment this may be a more nuanced way of
actually how to action on those ideas
because I think realistically speaking
like in my background that worked with
artists I crashed off what did skull who
worked with homeless vehicles of War
veterans and when I see Chris's work I
see a certain synergy of people
operating particularly within
architecture but offering a sort of
mandate that goes beyond building in a
traditional sense so this isn't like an
anti architecture a group of people
actually I would make the argument that
they sort of an embrace architecture
from the idea that architecture is
fundamentally spatial and that somehow
that world of discovery actually isn't
necessarily privileged in a certain kind
of approach that sort of speculates on a
world as is but I think sometimes this
is as it should be like when it comes to
certain issues about planning and
participation when it goes to certain
issues about you know public sector
about the paradoxes of our kind of
contemporary condition when we start to
look at sort of mandates that sort of
entrapped people and these kind of
cyclical kind of in the worlds that they
can never possibly escape without giving
license and they think in the same way
when we go to sort of ideas of what
material practices today and actually
what speculation about ideas not
necessarily about virtuality in a
certain way but there's more like in
some way also a kind of cultural
critique like using kind of game engine
environments but by nature are kind of
experience driven and sort of enabling
that to be
Wow explored an assertive way so I think
for us the conversation was very
expanded and quite open but I think it
would be kind of interesting to see how
you guys maybe saw each other's work
because in some way like you guys from
our perspective somehow set up a certain
kind of conversation but I've been
talking quite a lot but I was just gonna
so say you pick up on Justin's point as
well and just expanded in terms of this
a shared so a technological aspect of
you know some of the works because I
think when when we're talking about this
the experimental side of architecture
and and the fact is not buildings yeah I
mean for me I see my project as an
architectural one and it for me then it
comes back to the early research project
which is all about framing architecture
as essentially attack an act of
technology in in in the most base sense
of taking something that is a concept
and making it a reality like humans and
I I think from my point of view that's
always going to be a struggle for
architects really because again my point
is I thought was very interesting see
overlaps with what what you were saying
Lawrence about the speculative nature
about architecture and about what
happens if you actually separate these
because architecture is very different
from other you know business models for
instance of design because you know I
wouldn't have thought ten years ago that
people would spend a thousand pounds on
a phone but then you put it in their
hand and they're seduced by the thing by
the actual experience of holding the
thing and I think with architects they
always have to yeah try and try and get
some kind of impression of a speculative
event that is promising a future down
the line I think I think mieze build a
one-to-one model of the crawler house I
think for climbing one side of Hessian
but you know short of every architect
building a one-to-one model you can't
experience the space and I think
diluting architecture as well with you
know seeing architecture
digitally more as well experiencing it's
over in a two-dimensional digital
dimension I think is interesting so I I
was really interested by Lawrence in
terms of the overlap this idea of like
architecture sort of split out into
something that is experienced entirely
digitally I think was that it was really
interesting for me direction where we I
think where we'd all agree you don't
necessarily get a bit better built
environment just by all trying to come
up with the best building in response to
any made brief but everyone's going
beyond and a fixed idea of architectural
fixed the idea of role of producers to
go back to the back of house so whether
it's police work production the air
ducts the relationship between
technology and reflexive impact that has
on the way we experience the world or
like in various ways you look at the
architecture of systemic architecture
and homelessness when we look at no
policy with fujian the rest of our
associates I think there's this kind of
willingness to delve deeper and ask
questions about what's going on behind
what we see immediately which feels to
me
sorry we've all talked about the word
experience a lot and I think that it's
like completely rooted in what everybody
says in like completely different ways
but that's the word that seems to kind
of rizal in like with Chris's work as
well
where it's like the experience of
everything and living and that kind of
problem of being embodied in a space and
how if you don't have a space this
you're slipping
that is the problem all the address then
that becomes a problem for everything
else as well and mine like my reaction
to that is always very physical in the
kind of experience of things and that
connection with emotion but then it's
amazing seeing it from your kind of in
your work when it's the opposite of that
but also for me so physical still in in
the way but it kind of it's quite
terrifying and we were talking yesterday
and you were talking about lifts in VR
and that kind of you be able to talk
about it better but the fact that they
can't because of the kind of physical
response and I think I was just thinking
about that I can't really go to you yeah
I mean it's I think that's about the you
know the visceral reaction to any kind
of sensory input and it basically in
virtual reality if you if you move
downwards you basically feel nauseous
because what your vestibular system is
is detecting is not matching up with
what your eyes are seeing but I think
yeah this idea of actually going back to
what you know Justin was saying about
you wouldn't necessarily want to go to
these places but um it's it's hard to
detect but one thing I'm always
interested in in in narrative terms is
my work either for it's either like
comedy or tragedy basically right and
it's very very quite often both of them
and very those two things are incredibly
interconnected not just in the narrative
but actually Chris when
I saw your project I was thinking about
this there's a Russian novel called dead
souls Nikolai Gogol and in that it's
kind of the protagonist goes around
Russia buying the rights to dead serfs
basically because he can get money
basically he can take loans out against
the collateral of these dead slaves
basically and of course it's you know a
pastiche on that that feudal system of
ownership essentially but this idea of
resource management basically of course
in that sense it's like it's tragicomic
but this idea of using what resources
whether that's like tools or skills or
unused addresses or you know untapped
planning potential or like old materials
it's I think for our generation
basically a necessity right because we
all started practicing or whatever in
like the early 21st century when the
boom times that I think weeks kind of we
were fed with digital architecture
experimental architecture was over so
that creates this weird disconnect where
like what you hope to achieve is very
different and you can't build it so
maybe it's a systemic thing or you know
it kind of moves into other dimensions
which is you know interesting and
necessary I guess yeah I think I think
if you if you want to almost guarantee
having comedy in charge in the same
place look at bureaucracy okay it's
always always there but ya know I think
I think now is a really exciting time
it's a really interesting point that you
know maybe it's all forged in the flames
of credit crisis type errors because I
think what I found is the the deserts
were kind of growing margin at the
moment in so architectural practice and
things where by the traditional model is
is becoming a less appealing I think to
some but I but I think there's also more
opportunities to go off and start to
question these you know the the
previously siloed
areas of expertise that were you know
not mixed and I think as we're starting
to mix these things it's it's proving to
be like real first I'll ground for
experimentation and and that's where I
see the most exciting area for the
profession at the moment is its kind of
hybrid business models and things or
hybrid practitioner practices and areas
where you know the winners talking
earlier about architecture being
essentially an act of technology not
focusing on actual you know typically
understood act of technology of you know
building a brick wall but as in what is
involved from getting idea to a thing
and you know infants work you know at
the very core of it is people have to
have an environment where there is an
interest and a desire to make something
and make it work well and you need to
have those doors open by people and I
think actually it's still a very
architectural thing to go in and enable
that work to happen so mindful of time
but I don't know just and if you have
something that you like to ask the guys
yeah I mean I'm really interested in
different kinds of discourse I mean I
can see connections here I could we
could probably make a case that there's
something infrastructural about
everything that you do whether its
bureaucratic infrastructure or real
pieces of infrastructure in your case
holy you know ducting and so on but I'm
interested in how you speak about what
you do so I was very taken with your
talk Holly because it was it was very
personal and kind of embodied but also
poetic I've learned and you know I'm
curious how before if you can talk to
each other you know and whether they're
whether in the day in the 48 hours or
whatever it is since you've been
installing your exhibition upstairs
whether you've encountered any entry
kind of dissonance in your in the way
you talk or weird parallels in the way
you you talk about what you do we
haven't every night it sounds I think
when they go upstairs have a couple of
years I would say this and maybe maybe I
think this is a really good point to
kind of segue to the exhibition in some
way but strangely enough from my
perspective like if we could sort of
marry you to not literally not just you
guys and you guys across I think would
be interesting like so for example like
for me like Chris and Lawrence's work up
so many kind of technological apparatus
is and are so much about scenario and
strategic kind of interventions at a
certain level but there's a very human
element to that the scale of one you use
the word experience hauling it would be
interesting like was so for example like
a byproduct of all of these things it's
just like we just said you guys should
just do something together just state it
like that
and then I would take it from the same
perspective with Finn and Holley because
the conversations around planning and
you mentioned Neve Braun and on so forth
also had a certain kind of attitude that
one architects really felt a certain
social responsibility but that was
married also with a certain kind of I'm
gonna use the word again unapologetic
belief that architecture somehow
fundamentally and profoundly influenced
people spatial organizations matter then
you got some of these like super brutal
social housing projects and nobody loved
at the time but everybody loves now and
it's been sold off and lalala what would
happen if you took that world and sort
of use they think that sensitivity they
Justin spoke to and that kind of like
what you did in Sharjah and this kind of
a way of almost like intuitive and
informal kind of strategies which is
kind of against master plan
and blueprints and so forth and thought
about potentially thinking about that
kind of model where a spatial practice
in terms of spatial practice takes
different kinds of models of actually
how one thinks about the strategies of
implementing and thinking about the city
which resonate a lot with me when there
are thought about more adaptive and much
more about creatively thinking of those
synergies that are evolving over time
that fundamentally think that latency
and uncertainty is so much a part of our
world where I think like the four of you
guys I don't know I mean this is like
this kind of stuff that I would say at
the end of this he's kind of like you
guys are at the table together it's an
opportunity to have a conversation and
maybe you guys respectfully and your own
practices won't have so I would say that
it would be great that we go upstairs
and continue the conversation it is an
award and technically nobody has been
announced yet as the winner so
everybody's got I think a thousand
pounds but one of you gets a little bit
more and that's gonna be announced on
the 29th of January 28th of January so I
stand corrected at the ICA which I think
would be great for everybody to go if
they can before we finish I just want to
echo that cuz it was really weird during
the talks I was thinking this would be a
really interesting practice what they do
as a practice but future
an interesting model for how you know
architects my practice and future
without thinking about making buildings
okay so if that's okay with everybody
else so that the building is still open
until 9:30 and there's a bar upstairs
with some drinks and we're gonna wrap
this thing up and invite everybody just
to walk one flight of stairs up and what
we're calling the front members room
which is their exhibition of their four
practices so thanks everybody for your
attention thank you guys for
participating and for just for Shelley
[Applause]
