we're pushing on towards the end of the
series on the face does this and one
more I think in two weeks time than the
series stops in the following week I
will give like a final freestanding
lecture actually on this neglected
object in front of me the lectern so I
guess there may be some demand before
tickets the AAA will announce I guess
somewhere on its website when when and
how to get them so this afternoon I want
to talk about some aspects of the
relationship between the face and the
facade I have to say I don't think one
gains a lot from most discussions
architectural discussions about the
relationship between the face and the
facade and for in a way polemical
reasons I'll take a fairly negative view
of that it seems to me that the closer
the issue of the face to the facade the
worst of facade is I mean in a sense
architects aren't
best governed by the sort of
anthropomorphism
which converts or seeks to convert the
facade into some kind of face and I'll
try and say something about that I mean
it seems to be part of a larger question
of the idea of mimesis in architecture
not that it has great purchase now but
for centuries did the idea that in some
sense architecture should mimic and
mimic in this case nature and in this
case nature man in this case the face
doesn't seem to me
consistent with the more interesting
line in architecture which is and we try
to establish it last time based on the
triumphant transgression made certainly
during the Ice Age of the pleasure of
someone drawing the straight line the
straight line here being as it were not
what you find
normally in nature if you wanted you
know one single object which would come
to symbolize human culture I suppose it
would be the straight line
they're in this intended exhibition at
the British Museum by four years ago
could art in the Ice Age extremely here
attended I think I would say any person
there you saw the effects of this deep
pleasure that some people took in just
inscribing
a straight line the it conveyed
something of the drama something of the
constitutive disobedience that created
an interest in the straight line one
which in a sense is in many ways the
proudest possession of architecture it
doesn't mean the one becomes makes a
fetish the straight I know is wrong with
any other kind of line but there is
something which speaks more about
culture than any sort of illustrative
material symbols whatever
now the now discussions of which
essentially plenty in architecture which
sort of treats the facade as a face
often in fact I discovered goes to
children's drawings of a house there's
always kind of banal remarks about how
extraordinarily powerful the stereotype
over houses so lots of people in the
sixties kind of we're marking upon
children who live in high-rise buildings
still at school are drawing house to
windows like eyes front door so this
looks like a nose mouth etc and the the
enduring consequence for some whereas
that is how houses then ought to be to
look friendly
I don't why they ever go a godly idea
that faces were friendly
I mean it's it'd be an odd thing to get
out do something friendly oh I'll do a
face really I wouldn't doesn't leave me
intuitive at all indeed I mean I think
it's the other way around
this kind of facial ization of
architecture is part of the law and
larger thing that we can call
anthropomorphism we used in architecture
to discussing anthropocentrism meaning
something like vitruvian man but of
course you know since the 19th century
we have anthropomorphism which is not
the figure and its proportions and
whatever but a strange kind of figure
and Trump amorphous them it's kind of
odd to gokul's a transcendental
empirical doublet it's it's like the
figure of man in the 19th century
and in which there is a curious
reformulation of all the problems of
Aristotle like the relationship between
a whole and parts into a new version of
that where parts are like essences of
the whole not thoughts of a whole but
holes of a part you can see this it
seems to me and this is not part of the
formal discussion I don't know why not
this way in which if you ask what is the
relation between the whole and a part in
the building you start creating zooms of
competence which lead to architects
designing buildings and then calling in
space consultants as to what to do with
the space I mean in that sense I take
something like space syntax to be the
[Music]
attribute to the despair of Architects
that architects can no longer design is
based what the architect is building
like saying that of his flock is
emptiness I mean there are various forms
of space but there's also just emptiness
and it's that emptiness which we face a
lot of the time now
but I drug in a way you get back to the
child
what's important it's not the stereotype
that's involved in drawing the house
what child is trying to do is use the
house to draw the face it's the other
way around because the face is kind of
what the child cannot yet grasped and
does not yet grasped the adult point
that we will never understand the face
that it will be a thing as a place it
will be a permanent site of enigma and
it's worth just kind of finding a way to
try and think that through a bit why
that's the case
we know and it's repeated in a certain
way but it's not original in Lacombe
that the baby is simply not a coherent
object to the baby indeed there's no
baby for it to be coherent ooh but at a
certain point the point of which Lacan
would really think that psychic life
begins the baby who's never never had
the notion of what his or her body is I
mean in a young Indian age up to about
nine months or something the baby and
the world are not differentiated
therefore everything seems to be parts
to put it crudely at certain points as
little the baby sees itself he uses
almost what is the metaphor of seeing
him or herself in the mirror this is a
stupendous eight important moment
because the child is now able to
recognize that he or she is a coherent
thing uh
but it's also a kind of for humans a
tragic moment because the evidence of
the child being a hole comes from
outside the child comes in the form of
an image of the child now on what we
might call the positive side from a kind
of function point of view the child is
able now to operate as an object in the
world amongst objects or at least to be
in that it now has or has the beginnings
of what we might call a body image now a
body image is to be distinguished very
carefully from your body a body image
which is not itself an entirely
successful
kind of phrase though it's stuck is what
neurologists began to call in the late
19th century the sixth sense or as it
became known in Neurology generally
proprioception that is the sense you
have of being a sort of whole which in
some sense however however you choose to
put it is under the direction of your
will like or not
I remember thinking about this when I
had an operation of cancer and because
I'm strongly averse to general
anesthetics they tried to give what they
gave me an effect worldwide she was an
epidural but didn't function as a local
and I said and I felt a bit like I was
kind of putting lots of sheets in a kind
of airline seat I felt a bit like a sort
of daft handle my own version of
Socrates taking hemlock and I thought I
must keep a watch out so what happens as
you lose sensation after a while I
thought I'm going to try and wiggle my
toes
so I mean because this is a very
conscious act of willing
you could almost it was almost a
sensation that you know my brain is now
sending a message to my toes saying
waggle themselves and I couldn't and the
description of I couldn't is quite
interesting it wasn't some vague you
know somewhere the message got lost and
by the thighs it absolutely got there it
was like delivered and you felt as if
you could move your toes so then when
you try to actually waggle them when
you'd said waggle it was as if your toes
were encased
in concrete and I very soon thought I
must stop doing this normally it's other
people who say I must stop doing
whatever it is because I'm going to get
some kind of claustrophobia
it seemed to me exactly what I would
imagine it felt like if you had your
feet encased in wet cement like victims
on Manhattan water side by the Mafia you
know it would set and then you try and
it's as if you came up against something
something that wouldn't let you it's
like you was still doing it you were
fully in control of your will but your
will is like encased now you know in
that sense there's no impairment of the
body image the body image is allows you
to stand to even feel if you attend to
it how you're standing
anyone who does something like Pilates
has to have some sort of consequent
philosophical reflection on you know
what exactly you're doing when you're
breathing the the kind of attention
which is required of you actually
produces an extremely detailed and very
secure route into understanding
proprioception this sense which is
absolutely invaluable is not yet
available to the young baby there is a
long period of kind of tottering
together
I mean the family experiences of
watching an infant crawl watching an
infant stand watching an infant these
become so immediately absorbed into the
kind of family group there's very little
space to speculate on what's happening
let's also go back to the mirror for a
moment wouldn't it depend on what kind
of mirror I mean after all you wouldn't
want lakhan's tiny baby condemned to the
sole possession in its bedroom of a
distorting mirror and not very much
attention is paid to the mirror itself
is just average mirrors but you have to
imagine that in the question of the body
image the mirror matters because the
mirror is other people it's the other
person you know it's not really a mirror
I mean there wasn't vogue in the
seventies Lacanian readers to sort of
dump their might in front of the mirror
and then be disappointed because nothing
seemed to happen as if he was gonna
suddenly say oh it's me I've got
proprioception
once we have like distorting mirrors or
once you realize that all mirrors are
just rotating the problem becomes a bit
kind of gray brother I'll try and just
explain that by a kind of vignette which
came to me as being doing a child
observation a baby observation as part
of a psychoanalytic training I would go
once a week to see a baby I'd seen the
baby
I'd seemed mother for the first time but
the week before she gave birth so I was
there at the beginning of the baby's
life the the mother was extremely hectic
and worried she was a filmmaker and it's
all like Oh in this business you know if
you're not there tomorrow you know
you're have you finished the moment
she'd had the baby
Oh anxiety just completely vanished and
she was set on a course of months of
blissful happy physical life with the
baby
I mean her best you know why did they
ever bother to get out of bed it was
amazing
and rarely her husband knew exactly how
to step back
we used to have been present papers at a
seminar group every week discussing our
baby I mean mine was so triumphantly
great - it's a totally spectacularly
happy
everything went incredibly well you know
what other people say it's not going so
well my baby
wonderful cases of like sibling rivalry
I remember indeed one person giving out
paper
she'd seen the mother before the birth
mother said it's gonna be fine I can
tell the boy five-year-old boy he
doesn't suffer from any jealousy at all
he's completely with it we've done it
you know told him talk him through it
she said well you know maybe but I'm
looking at the five-year-old boy who's
standing behind him to detach to the
mother sitting on and the boy has one of
those sheep which have a zip in the
bottom and you take lambs
episode and he was progressively any out
of lamb and throwing it out of 6-foot
window so you know within the quarter of
an hour we got rid of about six lands
forever
so I hip it's all gone well it cursed me
the person must have left University by
now one of the problems with and within
this for image one of the problems is
it's not how your body feels you know
you have this proprioception but there
is always something actually wrong
I mean that sense of mild malaise is as
good an account I've ever heard of the
birth of subjectivity it's like the
morning when someone says how are you
and they are not so great that's the
moment when subjectivity is hit you
because of course nothing can be great
but there's also an idealization in this
body image and it informed much of what
we talked about in terms of automatic
surgery earlier on the problem is that
when the baby looks at his or her face I
think it's the case that the the baby's
not clear what it sees in a sense my
point would be the baby is never clear
what it sees in the face you know the
best examples of the body image and how
well it works are things like limbs you
know send simple instructions children
they do something they're by and large
okay but the baby has a very sense that
the face is a kind of maze and it
doesn't really know 40 kids
let's hold that and just move back to
the mother for a moment the mother when
I got there about 6 o'clock would say to
me oh he's fantastic he lies on the
floor he doesn't need anything doesn't
want anything is completely independent
I can just stand over here cooking daddy
funny thing is if he rolls one way on
the carpet it's fine but if you roll up
the other way on the carpet he starts
crying so you could see this was like
this was the issue to be addressed like
the symptom what her accounts did not
include image that she said I don't
bother to look at him
not quite right she was looking at least
every 10 20 seconds
she created a kind of I would say
material canopy over him and I Jack
actually worked out geometrically that
if heroes one way he's still happy
because he's within that kind of mere
sight
if heroes the other way I mean she was
all something to do with where you on
the carpet or off the carpet it actually
had nothing to do with that it had to do
with whether the baby was still or not
in under the canopy of her sight so then
the mirror here has turned into
something much more active the birth of
subjectivity here then is more about
what aspect of the forms of the mirror
effect in the subject for example I've
long thought that families have
characteristic ways of seeing things now
any ago made Freud defend defines the
ego as the graveyard of previous loves
that is to say I mean who your ego is is
dependent on a kind of certain synthesis
of all those who have loved you and
which must be included like mirroring
you in some important sense
indeed I went on through the year I mean
if you read all the books on a child
sort of psychology in the first year
now there's certainly no wrong I mean it
takes a while physically for the baby's
sight to mature but at the moment of
maturation that's not in my view what
allows the baby to see the baby what we
call see is or perhaps has vision would
be more correctly a putting any because
of the previous experience of being seen
that it's a seeing is not just some
autonomous individual character of the
human being though it has aspect so bad
but the quality the nature the form of
its site in some sense will repeat the
identification which has been made by
the mother or whoever else in seeing the
child so even sight is a product of
identification if you introduce that
thought into the way in which
identification is used including in
architecture you'll find that you have a
very different kind of terrain
[Applause]
so the second problem about the facade
the face is that you know we have this
intense difficulty about the face we say
we're trying to read someone's
expression of their face that's probably
right but we never do it we never do it
unequivocally we're never usefully as it
were right or wrong and much of what
differentiates us as indeed the people
we look at are the different ways in
which we interpret what we see now this
leads to does a further case of this
which is culturally perhaps like fraud
is distinguished
appearance I mean if we imagine now that
we're concerned with facade has
appearance appearance has a very
devilish word because it has somewhat
the the antithetical sense what Freud
called primal words there are examples
in English of words which seem to mean
both themselves and their opposite so
for example though it's a rather obscure
word the word cleave in English means
both to top something into two but it
also means to passionately come together
so you cleave to something in the same
way that you cling to it but at the same
time cleaving is what a butcher does
with a cleaver
the Latin word outers is interesting
including foreign architecture for you
because outers means both high and deep
screen it's and you can censored in the
opposition there's a single term which
is being kind of invoked and saying word
appearance of something of that
character it means in a sense or it's
often used to mean what appears to us
what what we see what is to use dynamo
philosophical language what is given to
us
but you can almost see in you know if
it's a what secret dialogues between
Plato and Socrates where they planned
out how to have these larger meetings
you could imagine later saying the good
way to get your philosophy known is
always to attack the category of
appearance can we agree on that do we
you know and so out comes Socrates
always attacking appearance appearance
is not like what you see or rather it's
only what you see the justification
philosopher philosophy is we don't do
appearances we do essences we as
philosophers are able to dispense with
the illusions of experience central to
which would be the idea of appearance
think of Plato's cave it's all about the
illusions of experience we do essences I
mean I are not well I'm not terribly
impressed by the arguments and I think
it's the product of basically Plato and
Socrates having these kind of marketing
discussions
the problem is that everyone afterwards
takes this to heart if you want to prove
yourself to be a serious philosopher
denounced like what's obvious what we
see what we hear in cetera unless you're
actually an empiricist and you kind of
you actually believe in it all so we
find the same distinction being used by
Marx as not being concerned with the
superficial appearances of life which
can get called ideology but dealing with
what occasionally in Newtonian terms he
puts as the laws of motion of capital or
the essence of this I mean what he even
apologizes for in the preface my sort of
recently Riefler tation with Hegel so at
this point appearances also get to have
a negative term a negative sense they
are things like mere appearances
maybe true to sensory experience but not
really of any value at a conceptual or
intellectual level that's the world of
essences forms whatever you want to call
it and of course it's sort of somewhat
witless Lee gets incorporated into the
cosmetic through the injunction of
improve your appearance there's somewhat
paradoxical sense you've got your
appearance in it you know now let's
improve it and indeed improve your
appearance it's not at all
rhetorically impossible in the world of
cosmetics to say let us improve your
appearance by making you look more
natural I mean
this would have so revolted burglar
whose love and praise of cosmetics was
entirely on the basis that they were
totally artificial that what human what
intelligent human being should always
strive to do is to get rid of anything
natural you know the beauty of artifice
is what they're less concerned with
including both painting and architecture
so to say let's make you look more
natural is for Bellaire a sort of
extreme version so appearance here is
has become very kind of malleable and
very very strange
[Music]
another third problem that's right
number about the face hand and the
facade is the question essentially which
is known to people who philosophize
partly about maps is the problem of
directionality let's ask the ridiculous
question which way does the face face
but the even more reserved answer is the
front but the front of what I mean you
know front is not a kind of ontological
category well you say that because it is
an ontological category in our story you
see that occasionally with architects
some of you may remember bamm-bamm
Burkle's Mobius house whose design is
you know at least intended as the name
would tell you so I said Ben you have to
have a frontman which is yet to come
well it's nothing to do with Matthias
it's topological
directionality and I need front and back
our categories of enormous consequence
which we don't often think about the
directionality we can get into it
fire can't cancer is quite rightly you
can have a map but you can't use it to
guide yourself unless you know there's a
lot an alignment between you and the
direction you're holding the map you've
got to be in the right direction I used
to think that that found a touching
outcome in the prison subway where the
following drama used to be enacted as
you got up into the last staircase
before the street there used to be these
quite beautiful plaster of Paris maps of
the erroneous mall even contoured and
you could see by the tube by the metro
station there would be a red circle and
an arrow and it would say was it easy to
reach the problem is yes budhwa hair and
he would see people live up to the
ground try and take in some landmark and
then go back down again
and match it to the map so thirdly they
could get out their guide and sort of
hopefully go off in the right direction
but it was a peculiarly sort of witchy
indistinct I mean if you think
everything in the world is there do
to something he was a very elegant
little Leslie so the question of you
know we've we've somewhat confused
frontality and direction I think part of
the direction implied in the face is the
subject is going somewhere and that
therefore is the front but there's a
very real limit to that I'm first of all
where is it that you're going it bears
first of all on the definition of the
face the face is in the front but of
course if you look at a building
it has frontage and frontage doesn't
have to be like where you would expect
the front
I mean various changes I would remember
like when in the States in movies must
mean sometime in the 50s relatively
upwardly mobile families would move from
a house foods frontage sort of comes
straight at you towards turning the
house around on the side so that you
drove into somewhere that way you parked
and got out and saw the frontage at what
would have been the side the idea
obviously is that since you arrived
there by car the car were you pocket now
becomes the front and therefore
that side of the house has a facade I
mean this is really one reason many but
it became you know a noticeable and a
feature of everyday architecture the
face the human face
we can't one of the problems is we can't
define we can't live it we can't even
physically define it quite what the face
is what's included in the face what's
not included in face is just sort of ad
hoc you know how do you describe the
ears how do you describe on a bald
person you know the head it's not at all
it's a very mobile it seems to resist
description and the ears and of course
the question is different for buildings
that the buildings would have sides
which would be just as much candidates
for being frontage
in a sense the recognition when we bring
recognition to bear on buildings as to
which is the facade which is back
well it's normally you know very
straightforward to use like the facade
is where the money goes the back is kind
of on blindingly obvious where the back
is but it you know it that doesn't mean
that it has a logical kind of status I
mean if we want to decide if we if we're
in general asked to define what is the
back of anything most plausible answer
is is the cheap it's not a then there
are houses which whose frontage seems to
go the wrong way I mean who's whose
facades if you'd seen a row of suburban
high me remembered being struck by this
in South London somewhere which was
quite hilly with one of those really
long streets of suburban houses
their fronts were in front and they love
the street but it kind of looks wrong
because you had these two lines of
houses going up the street and when he
wants themselves in ask yourself what
are they doing it seemed to me the
inevitable answer is that they were
queuing I mean indeed since queuing is
such a powerful contemporary stereotype
of lining things up it really had an
incredibly powerful effect so what are
they doing kind of seeking to go this
way when they should be waiting for
their turn when their number comes up
and they know it's their turn to try and
get a visa or somewhere I'm trying to
point out here the directionality front
back are very very complex issues
they're the kind of issue which doesn't
get looked at these are not you know
some popular discussions if you took a
proposal to the publisher to say you
know I'd like to book on Macan front
they'd want lots of pictures of axes
[Music]
and yet it's so embedded it's the kind
of relationship in many ways that I
think you know is incredibly suitable
the AAA to investigate because you know
there isn't the pressure to make sure
that it's ID fashionable or marketable
it's just very interesting and very
complicated
[Music]
[Applause]
so the problem with the face is when it
becomes a model for something else like
a house in the child's drawing it
introduces a sort of vaporous enigma
over things because the house above all
even like technically the face cannot be
a stereotype for something our problem
in our culture is that we are trying
desperately to get rid of certain
stereotypical statements
characterizations classifications
without saying that actually we oppose
the mechanism of stereotyping you know
it's just bad way of thinking it's
presented usually as being kind of
wicked and so you have when I did the
lecture on cosmetic surgery I mean a
student came and showed me a picture and
please never say the game of someone who
would obviously said to their doctor I'm
a lizard trapped in the body of a man
and quite wondered what he was doing but
he obviously decided out in me and
they'd gone a long way facially believe
me he didn't know like a lizard he
looked like a real mess
I deliberately take the extreme case of
the lizard because I didn't want to get
into arguments about some of the other
versions of it that's around us but
above all the imaginary bit is speaking
as they're speaking as a lizard it's not
because of the exotic bizarre array of
it being a lizard it is the lack of
identity well the lack of a compelling
identity in all of us I'll leave it with
this sort of brief anecdote some of you
may have read it stuff I've written it
concerns a tribe in the Amazon who were
visited by someone I'm bound on here no
something else but a german russian
explorer in late I essentially to get to
this tribe it's a tribe that's never
spoken to an outsider before they
communicate and the guy writes up is
note saying they're very strange people
they say we are red parakeets so I
explained to them this was not possible
but they continued we are red parakeets
many obviously kind of tried to educate
them in anthropology so he says look you
know lots of different peoples have like
jojo's describe the function potato is
it like that no not like that we just
rip their teats
I mean he exhausted the late 19th
century kind of range of series they
insisted that they were red parakeets
since and strangely I just noticed in my
reading every famous anthropologists
almost like a rite of passage has to add
some surreal moment come back to this
incident and say what the real meaning
is it's like the test case in
anthropology of how you get to say
something about identity levy brutal
beginning of the 20th century does it in
primitives mentalities he says
characteristic of primitive people is
they don't have the syllogism you know
they just they're just missing a bit of
Greek philosophy good time very nice
thing and it goes on all the way up they
be stressed of it happier does it they
all gotta tell you and that kind of it
so it says what do you how do you
interpret this when they say I'm a red
pirate eat he said well it's probably
quite difficult though it's not as
difficult as someone who says I'm a man
I mean which is indeed the course would
go on saying we are men we are women but
at an ultimate level these terms
collapse now the argument being really
that the face is actually the disruption
of the stereotype for the stereotypical
it's not only that there are only
singular many individual faces it's it
even then you can't work it out you
could be pretty sure you can be highly
suspicious you can think you know but
it's not like bringing a stereotype to
bear saying it must be something about
to face speaks of its fundamental
indecision it's not knowing quite who it
is it's not knowing who to be now let me
just kind of it advertise the next
lecture if it's all those things then it
has perhaps a problem a privileged role
in the exchanges of looks between each
other
we would never look at each other if we
were concerned with hard information and
indeed I fear that some people in stock
the Fiat each other because they want
something harder but it may well be then
that the organ I mean everyone agrees
the point is the face is never an organ
it's a kind of synthesis of certain
organs but it's never an oven in which
case it may well be that the obscurity
of the face the undefined ultimately
undefinable character of the vase lies
in its capacity to support the exchange
of looks which is in a sense the
argument which I'll look at next time of
Lavina and kind of morality of the face
but which in a sense is enshrined in one
of the last rather desperate notes by a
bee bobble we said the purpose of doing
cultural history is one can look at the
other and say you exist and I do not
fear you it sixth in fact I think you
know it sounds very simple but it's an
incredibly exacting rigor thank you very
much
[Music]
