Thanks thanks everybody for coming in a
fantastic turnout for or what I know
it's going to be a great pop-up event
this afternoon over the next hour or so
first things first if you could grab
your version of this and turn it into
the airplane version of itself for the
next hour thank you in fact today's
today's pop-up event whose title is on
the screen
dedicated to lebbeus woods I think maybe
the first thing to say about it is it's
a kind of perfect example of what a few
years ago we tried to create with an
open week sort of halfway through the
term where in fact people can teachers
and students can deliberately step
outside for a few hours maybe even just
one hour the year-long worth developing
upstairs and the units in back when the
studios in the school and during that
time come together for an event like
this that brings together people from
across the school around a topic or an
interest or a theme that might might
give us a chance to not just see the
current work in the school in different
ways but to see it in relation to
different frames you could say for
imminent other than the obvious ones of
unit agendas parts of the a a school and
and the spaces that you all inhabit all
year and in fact I think today's topic
and interest is an inspired one that
Ricardo and Annette have been working on
for some time that we'll look at the
work from three different parts of the
school in relation to a renowned figure
a lifelong friend and fanatic of this
school and a few other key experimental
of Libya swindle a grave Mobius woods
who passed away two years ago sadly
incredibly sadly for many of us the new
Mobius at a time of his life and I think
we all thought there were many many more
years indeed decades of further visions
of what the world might become that he
could contribute to architecture which
he did in many ways over his long career
Livius is a figure that isn't sure
regarding the netwo introduced in a
minute it was a frequent visitor of this
place over the years he told me once
when I first met him after graduating
from the end of the BS first came here
in 1970s although he was kind of vague
on the exact decade or a year that he
walked into this building and was in
fact going through a profound
transformation of his own career which
is in and of itself a startling walk
libya's many people don't know began
life as a great modernist renderer in
the city of Manhattan and he was
ineffective professional artist
commissioned by renowned architects to
make glossy renderings of late modernist
icon buildings which he did like few
other people of his time he made piles
of money he said doing that loved making
drawings and images but the key point in
his own life realized that in fact his
talent was such that he didn't need to
try and illustrate the known ideas of
other architectural figures which he was
well compensated for but in fact was a
talent for him imagining worlds that
hadn't yet been realized or received
that he could in in the closing thirty
years of his life focuses attention and
energy on he did that to spectacular
effect making the drawing selecting many
people here already very well
Libya's was last with us here in this
lectern via a very large screen and a
Skype connection
that was fading in and out about three
years ago a little bit longer to two and
a half years ago very near the end of
his life and with all of the kind of
energy and fervor that he brought to any
architectural discussion or debate about
the work of students or teachers or any
other kind of figure in the
architectural world it was an incredibly
moving moment and-and-and afternoon
where he was quite happy to try and
animate this office via a little fifteen
inch rectangular version of himself
which he did with convincing language
and hand gestures I I had the great
pleasure and honor of meeting him 25
years ago exactly as I graduated from
the AAA and went back to New York and in
an elevator in Manhattan was introduced
to him as we were going up to a party in
one of Zaha still dings in New York at
the time he was curious that I had just
come back from London to New York made a
joke or two about the similarities
between the two cities and another
person joined us in the elevator levius
legatus turned to this person and said
I'd like you to meet Brett glass which
uh turley confounded by and and of
course when he was playing a game with
his glass and steel and his kind of
capacity for a turn of language or words
or thinking is I think one of his great
gifts and I would argue
one of the things that explains why his
images are of the incredible kind of
depth and potency that they are with
that as a kind of setup for the
afternoon I think I'll turn it over to
Nanette and Ricardo say thank you again
for the two of you for organizing events
to be a good one thank you all for
coming in and for our guests that are
going to present the work of some of you
in the audience and some of their other
students and collaborators as part of
the event thanks and good afternoon to
you as well thank you for coming
and just to add to its introduction
about this event today this is the first
of a series of events that we will be
doing the next one the next term and
this has to do not all about levees
woods but all about subjects or people
who inspire and influence our work not
just our personal work in the office but
also mainly here to discuss the the work
we do with the unit here and there will
be here
the whole series is called scavengers
and other creatures this is also the
title of the forthcoming of publication
there will be an interest free book
coming out in spring and yes the all the
events will be alongside vacation and so
as it was said already this Wednesday is
about remembering lady's words and to
celebrate quite unique work so remember
is not only to recapitulate but it was
to create to make it your own and to
give new meanings while he
integrity and sharing our values so the
way how we set it out today is I think
you could you know talk endless about
like this would work like we divided
today into three themes or three
questions as we see that Larissa's work
ways before we come to these questions I
just want to give you a very very short
overview of his life Larissa was born in
1940 in Lansing Michigan and he was
educated at Fordham University School of
Engineering and University of a noise or
architecture later after studying
architecture he joined the firm of Kevin
Roche joined Inc Lewis associates in
1964 he served there as a coordinator of
designing instruction for the court
foundation headquarters building in New
York City until 67 in 1973 he won the
P&A Award for applied research in
architecture and then since 76 after the
end of his life he lived in New York
City where he was concentrating on
architecture theory experimental
projects and teaching so as the next
sense we divided this event in three key
points in a way that we can maybe not
just break actually the idea and their
works of Linda's words but I started
raising questions about how is his work
aging or how can we start interpreting
and utilizing that work and his legacies
a departure point from the few points
that we collaborated with LEGOs he was
always very keen of this
utilization of ideas and sometimes even
sort of correct instance we
the word his strategy he always said he
prefer the word preschool because less
to do with strategic military operations
of organizations and he was more keen of
this potential fluid and one person
utilizing they take the the each other's
word or word so today we have three
fantastic speakers from within the
school doing a cross-section through the
whole or a big part of the academic
faculty which best printer million in
the unit diploma in the post grad we're
going to be introducing them very soon
but we also we decided to do this event
in a way in a slightly different fashion
we asked the guests to speak about their
work so how their work is not relatable
reacts to a few positions that could
kick start for rethinking some of their
ideas so that many ideas the Liberals
word liberals boots has his many
projects so we're divided in three
questions and we ask the guests to speak
about it in their own way utilizing
their own work which in a way many of us
an interview that study here the school
might not know their work as a practice
as an office in either work mine under
work as great educator so on that
threshold we start the first question of
cybernetics the first question where to
post today will be about the branching
of our relationship to information
limits work is sometimes understood as a
pencil and paper of aeration or a basin
of paper it is indeed however we
articulate notions of communication
between humans humans and machines lives
had a deep interesting for cybernetics
especially for the work of pies were
posted in projects like centricity and
also underground Berlin the concept of
time
people interweave with machines
communities and machines extend
perceptions creating networks of
communication and ways of experience
each father in the environment
differently in one of his Dakota
Facebook world fight for he says the
vertical structures are axis around
which turn activities requiring the
making of elements increasing human
sensitivity to the continual flux of the
physical oscilloscopes refractors his
moment errs interferometers and others
as he had done no instruments measurable
metric measuring life moment force
change tools to extend perception
present ability to all skeins of nature
are very spontaneous playful playfully
experimentally continuously modified
in-home laboratories in laboratories
there are holes one of the questions or
queries would be about fiction in
England is related to its relationship
to this his or her own as profession so
collectors to attend collective and
individual queries what are the possible
relations between the architect and his
work and his primary motivation will
cost you his own interests what is
literature so my search for a world on
what is literature it was writing about
that for him after the second
research shows a way for you to situate
yourself there is no other way in during
the invasion than to be situated there's
no way to go for a McDonald's or go to
the cinema so we will do that work that
you are a brutally situated and that
notion of literature is how we interpret
and use the building fictions as the
idea of situating yourself within a
certain scenario you might know the
architecture publication series called
pamphlet architecture in comfortable
architecture number six 1980 Larry's
published Iceland or in his own words
per vessel journey outward on a beam
light emitted from the project sees as
much about Einstein as a frames
motivation of the architect why create
such a project
who would before who is the audience the
drawings display basic volume entering
across in an outward mandala trajectory
the silence of the construct mirrors the
power of the proposal its power opens
many questions like in fiction where
ambiguity cuts for the office and
another quote from levers the tool is a
vessel joining outward on an image light
emitted from following an immense and
subtle arc through the Stars in a third
question in order to compress what is a
lunch time event
event there is the question of nature
and technology to what extent these two
are interval even to what extent we can
start looking as when it's 20 or so
strategic moments in his own work or as
I said some principles in his own work
so star investigating a few ideas that
might be branching to some of these
speakers on interest so one of the
questions is the nature of technology I
just said terms like ecology global
warming smart or preservation becomes so
important today they might they need to
be buried altogether they might have
lost any sort of potential revolutionary
radical meaning that his words had 200
men 30 years ago in projects like
centricity and underground burning
levels proposed or scripted a city
beneath the city in the case of other
ground seeds they're burning when
existing human subway lines but the
narrative here is in fact deeply
environmental what is happening these
sieges is it is much more than political
unification from the cell phone
vibrating planetary mass of the earth
from cystic force is directed towers and
bridges in equally subtle vibrations the
inhabitants of the city field as perhaps
in a way we will call subliminal because
these structures they build are of metal
sheets is still one aluminium erode and
bronze and copper these living and
working places vibrate and resonate in a
great Civic space of the light like
musical instruments they vibrate in
shifting diverse frequencies in
resonance within the earth and also with
one another he wrote about underground
burger
so with this three questions we hope to
start to introduce the guest today which
far has nation three educators
architects from within the school with
an amazing career inside and outside I
can
Theo is parabolas as many of you know is
an architect and educator based in
London is co-founder and director of
minima forms an experimental
architecture and design practice his
word has received an international
attention which has included nominations
for the churning of price if you don't
know this prizes should definitely check
in architecture named one of the top ten
international public art installations
by The Telegraph for his work
memorycloud that we hope or wish that he
can presented today and most recently
minimum forms was awarded best idea
created work in the fifth Chinese
international Beijing the annales we
also have from diploma su Didier
Faustino Didier leaves their words
between paris Leesville and i think he's
probably missing here Londo now for the
last three four years his work
reciprocally summons up an art from
architecture and architecture from art
indistinct music genres in a way to
summarize an ethical and political
attitude about conditions for
constructing a place in a social
cultural fabric of the city its basis
buildings and objects show themselves to
be platforms for the intersection of the
individual body and the collective body
in their own use and the third speaker
today is lee yong-ki with master of
diploma 6 lee myung is an architect
operates and spaces between design
fiction and futures his project develop
efficient fictional speculations as
critical instruments to survey the
consequence of emergen environment and
technological futures
his fatherly think tank to motorsports
today a group who explores the
possibility of fantastic speculative and
imaginary urbanism encourage the unknown
field division
no ear problems in schools a nomadic
studio that travels on expeditions to
the ends of the earth to investigate in
Forgotten landscapes alien terrains and
in destroyed colleges so thanks very
much for life - best song for our first
speaker see you thank you thanks and
then that to Ricardo for giving me the
chance to speak today I've been given
the opportunity or the fortune
misfortune if you'd like to call it to
somehow bring together
levius woods cybernetics and my own sort
of interests which i think is a really
interesting and challenging task and in
a strange way certainly often some
strange self-reflection month levius
woods taught for many years at the
Cooper Union and Pratt School of
Architecture which I studied across the
river at a school called the New Jersey
Institute of Technology I've always had
a great deal of respect in terms of a
much larger project and a conversation
which I hope I can share with you in
terms of an affinity between some of the
experiments that were going on at that
time a Cooper Union and in particular
some of the experiments that were going
on here remembering levius Woods I think
it's also important that we lost also a
couple of
let's say Giants among experimentation
in architecture one of them is Hans
Holbein who mentioned that all is
architecture another one was Raymond
Abraham who also had a very strong let's
call it attitude and affinity towards
experimentation and actually the whole
act of drawing and constructing in
particular to Livius woods his
conversations about cybernetics was
actually a strangely personal journey as
well so his interest or his conversation
through cybernetics happened to a man
named hans von forester who used to run
something called the biological
computation lab in illinois at the iit
and part of that they were unfolds a
conversation that I'd like to share
about his kind of influences of people
like Gordon asked ARCA gram group and a
certain kind of attitude that he saw
that was very important to him which was
the act of construction which is a very
cybernetic or radical constructivist
kind of idea which is our understanding
of the world is personal and it's a
construction and that construction goes
through different attitudes of feedback
and circularity within a way we all
create and invent our own understanding
of things and in particular I try to see
what kind of conversation he had here
and in 84 and an invitation from zaha
hadid
and an exhibition and a publication that
was put on by the a a was a show called
origins and in that show were
interesting drawings from the late 70s
to mid 80s which were really his kind of
piecing out of this kind of transition I
think that Brett was talking about from
being someone who was illustrating ideas
for others to being one who started to
construct his own consequences through
the act of draw
and so early renditions of these start
to construct these ideas of cities in
nature more common in terms of his
understanding are his relationships to
war and one of the things that maybe is
important for him to understand about
Livius was is that his father was a
military man he grew up in the time of
the Second World War he moved around
quite a lot in the States and was very
much part of this kind of knowledge
economy that was revolving around
machines and in a strange way that plays
a very important part I guess in the way
that I understand certain aspects of
thinking about not only biologies but
machines but ideas of organization and
tried to explore more conversational
practice the challenges that I've had to
explore certain things I think also
resonate with some of the things that he
would speak about he saw himself
strangely as a solitary figure but
mostly because he said he was a
pessimist not necessarily a pessimist
probably completely the other but there
is a kind of idea and a certain kind of
attitude towards reality that he shared
and sort of opening yourself up to that
I think affords a very different kind of
perspective about the nature of how one
goes about their own practice and he
will speak and have a short video that
he'll speak a little bit about but his
relationship was Sarajevo was not
because he had an interest in wars of
war somehow found him within the archive
of the AAA we have certain drawings
which were called figures which he
titled which were drawings that I had
never seen before but there were really
drawings that had almost this cyborg Ian
kind of wrestling of kind of man-machine
and cybernetics and in the
fundamental sense is really about
communication between man and machine
animal and machine those drawings at the
AAA also had these kinds of very
postmodern tendencies where you see
these kind of primitives of circles and
pyramids and triangles ideas of sort of
refactoring I think some of the things
that his colleagues were looking at and
the act of drawing became a very
important and discursive way of
rendering kind of his constructions and
at the same time working through I think
a series of these kind of cities and
foundations that he was looking at when
I was a student at the New Jersey
Institute of Technology I guess in my
own world I was trying to work through
these things I'd never i think drew very
well i had an affinity to painting i was
very much influenced by people that were
teaching at cooper union like john hey
Doug
not literally trying to copy them but
really trying to forge a kind of
relationship with the way that one
starts to deal with surface how one
starts to explore painting and drawing
the ideas of models have always been
very important to me and a kind of
attitude towards developing sketching
two models is something that was really
important for a host of different
reasons but it was a certain way of kind
of working through some of these
challenges and in a host of kind of
different experiments was my interest in
eruption berg and other people trying to
find a way that i could sort of work
through my own interests and in a
certain time kind of fast forward maybe
fifteen years twenty years now
come to terms of what those machines and
the mediums that we used to explore
actually means so when i mentioned that
it was very much influenced by his
military life it was a kind of idea of
sort of constructions that were in a
certain sense of ephemeral we believed
in a certain way that architecture had
fundamentally a very interesting role to
construct space but without meaning and
like cybernetic
Sybil's everyone brings their meaning
towards these things when he looked at
the machine see in a certain way was not
looking at a literal machine it was not
looking at the kind of superficial
organization of things like was titled
deconstruction he basically says that
that was a marketing ploy but really he
was trying to look at that a deep
meaning when he was looking at some of
the things like he constructed this
literary theory that there was a certain
attitude towards that construction that
was really important with my students
were always trying to explore different
things in the DRL and part of that is
some way of developing a very active
dialogue between machines between the
challenges of humanity and developing a
certain kind of social infrastructure
that enables a certain attitudes for
space making when you see his response
you'll see that she basically was also
responding to people like me switch was
the environment in which he was sort of
operating within this is Hans van
Forrester who was basically trying to
tease out these relationships between
biology and computation and there was a
very strong root of a conversation that
was born out of the late 40s early 50s
and were manifested in different ideas
of trying to construct what an
architecture machine could be
challenging let's say prescriptive ideas
of what a computer was and sort of
unfolding a kind of conversation I think
which enabled a very different and rich
kind of idea of how to bring forth in a
police's kind of way a certain kind of
project or a maverick machine within the
DRL within some of the things that they
do with my brother we are always trying
to explore certain kind of tendencies
about how computing
and in particular animalistic kind of
tendencies within the natural world a
sort of operating in a way is trying to
develop a deeper understanding of
resolution and the interaction between
things
the Macy's conference I think is a very
important moment because there was a
time when people actually understood
that they didn't know what they were
doing and to open up kind of thought
experiments and speculative ways of
bringing together a much more
interdisciplinary kind of conversation
so you had people like Margaret Mead or
he had Heinz Mon Forrester you had a
whole series of thinkers in the world
that were coming together to really
discuss and try to forge together a very
particular interest which was something
about the project that was actually
being constructed in the present on the
right is an illustration that's also in
the a archives of livius woods which
starts to sort of tease out this kind of
hybrid mechanical surrealistic phase in
his own work on the left is a project by
Nam June Paik who was working with a
cellist and a performance artist to
develop a kind of attitude towards a
robot performance robotics human kind of
interfaces and interactions are very
much at the heart of certain things this
is another illustration by this was done
in the mid-80s where he's trying in
strange way to somehow negotiate between
these geometric primitives this kind of
almost Neuromancer like kind of attitude
towards the body in my own kind of
earlier work when I was working with a
colleague bacillus from Paco's and David
Green is sitting in the back gave us an
opportunity what
literally kids to rethink the whole idea
of the city and to rethink the idea of
Audion technology we developed a project
called the face breeder where we tried
to take apart the constructions of the
physical machine and reconstituted as a
kind of interface to allow people to
communicate through it it was our simple
attempt I guess to talk about London as
a city that is really a cultural hybrid
machine and through portraiture creates
a way that people can contribute
themselves to this machine and generate
something else a lot of the work that
I've done particularly with my brother
and my colleagues has very much revolved
around these kinds of questions of
technology but without foregrounding
technology in any sense and they sort of
tease out certain kinds of conversations
about the nature of interaction and the
construction of knowledge and
understanding that's not necessarily
tied to people but between people and
other people people and machines and
machines with other machines and Gordon
Pasque is a very important figure within
that world and strangely enough is how
lobbyists would saw his connection to a
conversation which influenced him very
much
which was tied to this place and the
work of ARCA Graham and the influences
of people like Cedric price through the
world of Gordon pass and Hannes mind
Forrester at the IIT this world is
something that kind of evolves was a
whole series of other kind of
experiments within cybernetic discourse
of projects like the sensor that was
developed down the street at UCL by
Edward and not a [ __ ] we're all
building up on a certain legacy of how
information and communication really
resonated through things so someone like
Claude Shannon who had a deep interest
in maze solving problems was in the
mechanical world but also with juggling
is also the father of information theory
that
much highlights a lot of the work and
the things that we sort of relate with
in everyday practice in our own work
with projects like the petting zoo that
was at the Bartok and we've tried to
explore certain ideas of the kind of
analog intelligence building on some of
those things that Claude Shannon was
doing but also trying to explore that
through gesture and emotive response and
these things are very important to me
because I think primarily a lot of the
work that we're trying to do in the
similar fashion in terms of how the
obvious woods would speak about how we
construct worlds is through our
experience and that's why he saw things
in a very personal way in terms of his
approach not very interested in
stylistic sort of affinities towards
things but I think in terms of a
statement of purpose
he saw his work and at times I see my
work as a way of actually constructing a
conversation between people and I think
that's very important and that doesn't
tie itself towards mediums and ways of
bringing these things forth some other
of these drawings of libya's have done
that was on show here were really
constructing this notion of the city and
what's interesting about the city was
basically a stage set for certain kinds
of ideas of conversation once again
there is this kind of humanoid kind of
capacity to look at things which i think
is interesting but for the work that he
is very famous for from the 90s onwards
you'll see that the human in all forms
is completely let's say not present and
part of that I think is a realization in
his own work that the human was
unnecessary that architecture could
exist beyond let's say the perceptual
devices of any one person and that's why
he had a certain attitude towards the
destruction and the necessity to
actually reconsider those things as
scabs and other aspects in which the
city could sort of respond to that
notion of constructing too
and visual perspective is something that
we at minima forums really try to find a
way to sort of work through a more of a
sensorial attitude and these attitudes
that you can see in terms of these
strange scenarios that are sort of
captured within the drawings are things
that we try in some way to sort of
enable within the instruments that we
create for people a photo capture device
that we developed to allow people in the
face reader to be sort of captured
within the machine the idea of
constructing theatre basically through
human interaction by using masks as a
device to sort of enable a much more
complex series of relationships these
are all part of kind of ideas that had
been influenced my brother through work
of Cedric price board and past arca
Graham all of the radical guys from the
50s 60s and 70s when it comes to the
issue of war Livius woods had a very
particular kind of response to those
things and he developed a whole series
of projects that were really around
Sarajevo in particular and was a release
of absolute architecture in the 90s when
I was a student on war in architecture
which was really important to me mostly
because of his statements of purpose he
basically said that we are architects
and constructors of the world they are
sort of responding to not only let's say
building as practice but there's a deep
intellectual and philosophical sort of
project and problem within the kind of
social and the cultural interplay and he
had a certain attitude towards politics
which had nothing to
with Republicans and Democrats but the
idea of art of bringing forth the
possible which politics somehow
resonates with he saw his work as art of
bringing forth the impossible and with
war in particular I've had a strange
tangential relationship with with my
work with Christopher disco where we've
been working with War veterans and
constructing a certain kind of cultural
prosthetic which is meant as a way to
address certain aspects of trauma and in
a way there are drawings and there are
models but most importantly is a kind of
relationship that one sort of develops
and a sensitivity to a problem when one
is actually faced with actually speaking
with people in a way using design
creative processes to somehow enable a
conversation that language sometimes
doesn't necessarily fully fulfill I'd
like to play a short little video of
Libya's woods speaking about his
relationship to cybernetics that's okay
because you don't have to take my word
for it I think his words resonate more
very technical papers gradually and I I
absorbed that never had him as a teacher
that I absorbed things for working with
him speaking about Heinz that again I
didn't realize so many years later I
didn't realize how much they impacted my
view of the world my way of thinking
about things my idea of knowledge
because science is very much an
epistemology was he's very much
interested in what is knowledge I don't
how do we know what we know and why
completing we know exactly there's a lot
of different ways to phrase so there's
only many years later that I began to
realize how much the said impacted by
thinking as an archetype and
well heist what he thinks of my work is
has always been a matter of interest in
frustration to me because he very much
believes that you know this isn't haha
highest one first er a view of the world
it's mine
it's not the same as his and it's very
important to him that each individual
develop their own interpretation of
ideas their own way of seeing things so
I've never quite understood what he
really thought of my work he said that
he considered it very endemic whoever
but I knew there were certainly things
he didn't agree with or that I had
interpreted differently than maybe he
had intended but he respects my right to
interpret his ideas in the way that I do
but I think he was a decisive influence
but it only became to me over time over
many years the question of whether
there's a reversion between him memory
and desire between the president what we
want to do and yet what we bring from
the past with us almost certainly there
is in cybernetics of course there is the
beliefs that we are in a closed system
neurologically with our environment so
we don't really have access to so-called
objective knowledge we only have access
to the knowledge that we have within
this closed system that whether you take
that rigid of view or not
either way around there is this
interactive feedback quality we are
constantly recycling your own material
I mean maybe this is most clear in
literature writers who draw on the
material of their experience and keep
reworking that experience over and over
again and each time they write novel of
course it changes their memory of the
experience this is one of the key things
is that when we do have this recursion
it doesn't just it's not the same old
stuff going round and round and round we
keep transforming it we make it into
something new every time we we
reinterpret it and I think that's an
important aspect of our reuse of our own
experience because that's all we have at
the end we don't really have Universal
truth we don't have knowledge of the
absolute we only have what we've
experienced and that's got to be the
basis of our work and by the way our
communication with each other our social
existent has to be based just on our
individual experiences and how we're
able to exchange those think with that
I'll probably bring it to a close thanks
[Applause]
Thank You captain the net or this
invitation the exercise for me it's not
an easy let's say exercising the point
of view of my work is not related
directly to Labour's work but strangely
when you invite me to speak about of my
work related to the topic of fiction I
start to think why I should speak how
Eiffel Tower
can speak about strangely levels good
for me is I have a very strong
relationship not on my work I don't feel
this strong relationship but more strong
relationship about what is made from my
generation for this period architecture
made possible for me is there is two
figures well now disappeared is Lesbos
hood and the other one is teachable art
strangely two figures who start who grow
up during the Second World War who is
this big change on the history of
humanity where let's say world became an
industry ization the kind of moment
where will became
I will start about my homework to
present my one work and probably too
cold Labor's food with something funny
became really important in the
architecture he's also to reveal our
home our current trajectory of
fragilities so the code is very simple
his high declare world on holy cons and
finalities on whole histories that who
chained me with my home falseness my
home pitiful fears probably I didn't
know about his coat when I start
architecture but I make it mine after
probably also that's why my work is
related in a big to heart is because
some people these guys before me claim
the fragility of the practice so my work
is related to most of reference our
fictional come from fictions two of my
favorite ones are turned and done of the
dead zombie for the most people knows
about it's about trajectories it's about
bodies it's about space and occupation
of territory my practice start with few
years ago with a company a small firm
called
miss architecture who talk about who was
less a claim and an expectant and a new
event I'm based in Paris I work with a
series of person since all these years
and I will show you a series of projects
I think most of the time I come from
France and usually as Peter Cook used to
say French are boring with philosophy so
I will not make the Philosopher's I will
just show you some of my small things
and we will make the connections one of
my recent work just finished completed
last work is on the park of Andre blog
had strange figure also an interesting
French figure of architecture was the
former director of the review
architecture of rotary he was an art not
an architect but an engineer but he
claims this freedom to build
architecture in this park with near
Paris his house is in this park and he
decided to build this kind of strange
sculptures is what's called a Bataclan
structural sketch of a Bataclan I was
invited by the today owner to do
something on here on this part and how
can we how can we do something after
this history : so important things I
propose to declare out the world - on
the block as liebe said architecture and
work are not incompatible architectures
were were his architecture so I just try
in a way to be irrelevant to be not
polite with Andre and I just use the
forget space of the park to put this
explosion this destruction this missing
object for event for
[Music]
a place to act to react to be political
to be engaged and to express ourself
main thing and then I will stop for the
codes just concluding with one coat of
woods but this one is really important
for me the translation is construction
of Islands is the inversion of habitat
there is no more time to put objects in
an environment in architectural itself
but to put environment in the
construction that's what we try at our
office from the brutal fragility of the
country world to the brutal reality and
to play in between playing in between
with many times nothing with only what
we find this is basically my first
project in architecture and professional
life it was my first Commission for
these kids in Portugal the destructed
kind of small I rise for five years old
seven years old kids about fertility
producing vortex with the most ambiguous
material with super high technology
using in satellites but also using by
homeless people to be just protected
from the the thing and help them to
survive about conditions producing
architecture environment putting
environment inside the buildings to
generate new situations Possible's
usually I like to see architecture
in the space between the spectator and
the actor what he trust me is the in
between is the trajectory is blurring
the line is also studying the point
order contacts for bodies to move inside
the situation as Wood was saying my
furnace is also what I used to play and
the dubbed in architecture and probably
what interests me the most when I study
Labor's wood drawings is his
possibilities of this infinity of
possibilities of interpretation that's
the relief for me the point who gives me
this legacy on my work this is not a cop
disease
my first manifesto my first engage let's
say yeah position as a young
practitioner about the things most of
the project I'm showing to you this one
is called in the suitability flight it's
from Kandahar book and some other things
like this but in transit architecture of
shelter to protect migrants traveling
from one point to the other one a linker
to some let's say in between or
conflictual situation I claim I would
like I try to climb I am an architect of
the in-between I am the architect of
limit points such the things I try to do
exploring situation exploring situations
who most of the time can be real or
unreal
I can loan that you asked me to talk
about fiction in fact most of the works
I join you are based on fictional
situations this one is an interpretation
of the jump of the underworld / if claw
and you know this is a fictional picture
it never happens actually this picture
is not real it's not and I try to do it
more other things like one square meter
house objects for today or tomorrow I
don't know but climbing and art saying
forget individual body go back to a kind
of exchange between bodies and
architecture is about the exchange is
about finding the way to connect each
one to the other ones I produce a lot of
device lot of sense I mean architecture
and it's also probably the thing
interest me and was to be contribution
by labors is the fact architecture is
everywhere one object to the other one
the scale is not the big problem you can
go from small purchases to a big
proposal a big analyze in these cases
the manipulation of the most known
object to contain the trajectories the
barriers for the police to transform it
in a kind of absurd and decorative
object and to change the use of it in
this case for a performance jail or a
garden fake garden all the things is
about producing from the garbage of our
society is something sometimes difficult
to say but architecture for me is also
coming from the misunderstanding
and probably what I learn what I
understand from Labour's will work
predictions were the fact we can do
architecture with everything in this
case was to produce can not want one
body protection home suit own
architecture made with the carpet of our
interiors but also something for me is
important is also to see the words
relieved and the possibility of an
catastrophic situation and this case is
another thing we are working on is a
tower somewhere in the world and some
elements of interiors I will conclude
with a smoke film doesn't work
[Music]
I think
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
sorry I have to be different and use my
laptop
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
okay
Ricardo initially suggested that I talk
a little bit about Libya sin this idea
of sprawling the relationship between
nature and technology I was struck by
Jeff Manor and a few guys know hopefully
you know building blog he wrote an
extraordinary a victory for Libya's very
talked about the idea of Libya's and all
senses of the word destabilizing the
ground since idea of that architecture
in the broadest sense augment augments
the earth so in a way I wanted to talk
about that kind of augmented or in my 15
minutes and take us a tour along the
pipeline's of technology to sort of
follow the fiber of our network
landscape along an Internet
infrastructure or a technological
infrastructure the scale of the planet
explore its consequences and
implications so I've been I've been
writing this this storytelling piece
called baby baby Justin Bieber in the
shadows of technology and I thought I
would take a little piece of that today
to try and tease out this relationship
that architects architecture and culture
might have with technology and landscape
because anyway
this is where we should start right to
this little bastard Oh sad for me out of
here
this little bastard he is Justin Bieber
and somehow in some way he says
everything we need to know about
technology and nature if you can't just
think of him as some ordinary everyday
kid right it's not just this kind of 18
year old sensation he's a dick he's a
kind of a media cyborg right like to
understand him and increasingly people
like us you've got to think not just
about us our bodies our flesh selves but
about the media we create and the media
that's created around us and by us
because at most fears auras or
environments of Technology beyond the
physical spectrum Justin Bieber
so we begin our tour here warmed by the
goal of the luminous screen we we stare
out at our place in the world so at the
resolution of Google Earth a pixel is
just a bit bigger than the width of our
body 0.41 meters at this resolution we
are just a kind of a discoloration
thoroughly embedded in the grain of
Technology and indistinguishable from
the city and landscape that surrounds us
we developed this little animation of a
near-future skyline this is based on a
series of tower blocks that we serve
emerging in Korea that were branded and
built by Samsung the technology company
working with Tim mourn a science fiction
author we described this very intimate
relationship that we start to have with
technology
he's written a short story to accompany
this panorama I'll quote a little bit
from it
Juri drops the Samson
galaxy SX phone on to the kitchen table
is it chime softly as it makes contact
with that paper thing Samsung Qi smart
power charging mat it says honey what's
the cardboard tube in the hallway sang
voice comes back from the lounge ruffled
by the low hum of our Samsung
air-conditioner that's a TV come and see
what she says
it's the packaging the new TV came in
I've just hung it come here and see
three pushes open the door to an
explosion of pixels the width of the
room an ultra high def orgy of the throw
and paint and 4k rainbow ejaculate
soiling pristine white space nice huh
he says yeah it's great but but but why
does it say LG on it because it's made
by LG move it now she says Tseng looks
confused almost hurt you mean the TV the
packaging first get it out of the
hallway bring it in here in here now get
it out of here before anyone sees it
baby he says don't baby me you trying to
get us thrown out at least further it up
for review in three months and you
bought an lg tv and this into the
Samsung housing block what the hell
would the neighbors say so we're
starting to develop these extraordinary
and intimate cultural relationships with
technology and the physical city as we
know it around us is starting to
dissolve the traditional infrastructure
of pipes roads buildings and public
squares are starting to give away to
ephemeral global supply chains logistics
infrastructure digital networks fire
technologies and cloud computing
connections the physical city as we know
it is is starting to erode and we need
to understand it in multiple ways just
like Justin Bieber we like we
start to locate ourselves in cities not
through sight lines orientation points
but glowing rectangles and and dancing
fits trick fingers but it's not kind of
dissolving into the cloud it's it's
internet it's not a cloud of ephemeral
webs or connections as we think about it
here in this it both exists nowhere but
also everywhere it's a physical city
that is in fact atomized and stretched
across
planet briefly we're going to follow
these fiber tendrils across the planet
exploring the communities and
infrastructures they generate from the
ocean floor to the shore where the
Internet is think thought of as both a
profoundly ephemeral thing sixty grams
is the weight of electrons if you
measure the internet in those terms one
hundred eighty two thousand five hundred
tons if you measure it by the weight of
servers that power it it's an internet
with shadows and black spots managed by
companies and nation states in who owns
this pipe is is is critical where a
Georgian woman can cut off Internet to
the whole of Armenia when she's
scavenging for copper and cuts the cable
where three men are arrested off the
coast of Alexandra who's too trying to
cut the Internet to Egypt by sabotaging
an undersea cable and these new forms of
infrastructure along this augmented
earth services suggests new forms of
community at a time when the cities
itself in question we're much closer to
our virtual community than we are to our
neighbors where the Egyptian revolution
for example was a was a revolution
formed through a network spam Hamersley
the former editor of Wired says al Qaeda
is just a mailing list with a weapons
budget the US military of Devoy deployed
aerial systems to force the internet on
dictators who have closed down or sense
of the network the it's kind of an
instant Internet city of the form of
weaponized connectivity and it's the
same tech is not just in the hand of the
military in the skies we see flocks of
bird and singh but with them we might
begin to see a strange new set of
internet creatures
terminals so here we see the electronic
countermeasures project that we
developed which is a flickering flock of
pirate internet drones that drift across
the skyline broadcasting their own place
specific Wi-Fi network
[Music]
so on this augmented earth we might
start to imagine the drone jockeys
conducting this flock of interactive
drones that that form their own place
specific local Wi-Fi community and
pirate file-sharing Network as a kind of
a an aerial master they perform this
balletic aerial choreography as their
soft blow reflects in the glass of the
city
[Music]
we start to imagine that these new
geographically specific data cultures
may emerge in this landscape like
particular areas or neighborhoods and
cities that defined by their own
qualities and atmospheres we imagine
data suburbs where you might go to this
particular part of London not because
that's where the best libraries are kids
but because that's where the hottest
music downloads are or above the
suburban picket fences drift porn caches
or revolutionary discussion boards
create new public forums in the spaces
of the city where this new type of
infrastructure this new type of
architecture drifts into formation and
then disperses only to refirm everywhere
part technological creature part
architecture living amongst the rooftops
we imagine drones becoming kind of
cultural creatures where technology is
no longer just a tool but something
intimate we've got through and here
above the audience have a recent
performance we did at the Barbican a
just just one about tribal drones fresh
from the music festival or the glam rock
drone dancing in tune or the Mirrorball
felt caught in the spotlight I'm an add
jury of drones drifting I'm an Adria of
drones drifting through the world where
technology becomes we call traded in a
machine a strange kind of pet this was a
collaboration with John Cale at the
Velvet Underground and it's about to be
a film released by their creators
predicted this is a rough cut off I'm
not really allowed to show open as we
want so from the drones we trip the
light fantastic and follow the
fiber-optic cables out of the sea
through the city where we arrive at the
data center infrastructure it is the
landscape of everything all other
messages
in Chadha hopes dreams desires and
darkest fears is here when our
collective history is is digital this is
our generations cultural repository
these are the halls of the Facebook data
center in in Prineville Oregon that we
visited last year and here we stand on
the roof of the data center and look out
across this new kind of periphery and
here in this anonymous shed behind the
Facebook data center is where they keep
the photos all the photos every photo
that was ever taken every photograph
that ever will be taken is here behind
the corrugated walls not in the
cathedral not the Great Library the
Facebook share and then belong the
horizon this nameless black building
just down the road is Apple's top-secret
data center there is no logo here no
flashing Apple just a kind of a
disappearance through banality and just
up the road we get as far as the the
gate of Google on our trip and this is
as close as we get before a white SUV
with a colorful Google logo comes to
tell us we have to leave this is it the
public face of Google this is the public
face of this new kind of architecture
but here we look through the OHS behind
the playful idents and we see racks and
racks have search histories Gmail books
in the history of everything by
playgroup colors and candy cane services
create this kind of air of frivolity
accessibility and play but in reality
this is probably the most secure site on
the planet these photographs are not
ours but are just a peek we get in
through a lot of door of 16 photographs
that exist of it online which are taken
by a google sanction photographer so
this landscape this architecture is
augmented terrain is similar teams we
both the side of the most surveillance
on the planet but at the same time the
least in all the world's darkness and
Sun to the infrastructure all of these
buildings sit here in Prineville Oregon
at the confluence of cheap hydro energy
and toxins
these no wet streets this new periphery
contains everything about that who we
are our cultural legacy our collective
history now sits kind of behind the
thrift way drenched in the sense of
stench of diner pancakes and simulation
maple syrup and for this is in a way how
we see our new world we see the world
through the eyes of these machines the
algorithmic gaze of the digital eye and
this is how these systems read the
architecture of the city identifying
markers reducing detail and complexity a
space organized for machines this is the
the Amazon Fulfillment Center based on
sorting algorithms the space is
organized not through the logic of
something like the Dewey Decimal System
that you might kind of know through a
library but based on proximity and sales
frequency so without the machine that
Amazon navigated this space with the
space is entirely illegible to the
people that occupy it I like to start to
think about a kind of fiducial arkad
also like QR codes and barcodes things
that are only designed to be read by the
machine what does that mean for an
architecture an architecture that's
fiducial it's designed to be experienced
not by our ID but the machines where
calibration markers must be used to read
a wall we've been taking these markers
out into the city creating a form of
calibration graffiti imagining where
these cultures might emerge where we
might start to hack the algorithms of
drone vision for instance or the
algorithms of the of the traffic cameras
to spoof or create mischief and
misdirection because these faithful
algorithm scanners they reduce identity
to two proportions markers and shades of
black or white we start to imagine new
way it's a bit of new aesthetic for you
okay new fashioned cultures emerge to
counter recognition algorithms this is a
product by Adam Harvey
behind the pixel glitches actually a
series of makeup patterns designed to
confuse the facial recognition
algorithms we start to imagine new
fashion seasons not based on the time of
the year but based on Moore's law or the
latest Apple launched the Google used
the same algorithm to blur out at faces
in Street View could be imagined an
architecture designed for these systems
where perhaps a building that has the
same proportions of a face starts to be
identified as a strange kind of stealth
object within the visions of Google so
we imagine a kind of this fiducial
architecture in this online WebGL
project that we developed where we're
exploring what the city might be through
the eyes of a lone drone drifting
through the landscape so through this
web WebGL app you can pilot a drone and
experience the city reduced to geometry
a city of calibration markers surfaces
points where the life of the city
dissolves into the computational
algorithms of machine vision the cities
in landscape to the scale of the planet
become kind of compressed to the
control-room this is this idea of
discarded cities got a sense of
supervisory control and data acquisition
these are the brains that exist behind
our urban spaces that that run our tube
network our buses where the complexity
of urban culture life and wonder become
reduced to management protocols and
these kind of low res systems diagrams
and they start to shape and make
technology there's an amber commentary
on this that I won't try and play
through my laptop here but this is
described this traffic system of the
city actually starts to mediate nature
with this bird this crow is evolved to
become depend
on a species of nut that it's that is be
hasn't evolved to crack so it perches
above the traffic pedestrians toppings
waits for the light to turn red and then
walks out with everyone else to pick up
the nut and safety or here in San
Francisco where a group of raccoons have
memorized the number 18 bus timetable
because every Friday night the driver
brings some tins of dog food so the
mechanisms and technology of the city
you start to regulate nature culture and
all aspects of our lives to the point
where just like beaver it's difficult to
start to distinguish them and moths
flock to the street light stars and
unofficial moons of the city and these
buzzards in Sao Paulo laze around in the
heat generated by a conditioning exhaust
vents and to finish this project
what Silent Spring was written each
sound in this project I released 80
Canaries into a sealed gallery space and
slowly I increased the levels of co2 in
the gallery in line with predicted
increases in global climate change
imagining what would happen to the
atmosphere of our culture continues
without change it was kind of an
interior model of an accelerated climate
change and against the rise in co2 I
narrate the predicted developments in
technology that one lives a possible
progress nothing across the core for the
performance what we hear is the birdsong
starting to change
in 50 years the birds and the longest
singing if we listen we are with
strolling toward the Silent Spring kind
of a augmented earth the landscapes of
technology and the technologies of
landscape Thanks
[Music]
thanks very much Liam see you and ddr4
the fantastic lectures now we have a
half an hour Andy for the event which is
going to be a roundtable with Q&A and
hopefully very soon opening questions
and there's an answer is actually for
you as well
so I'd like to invite all the guests we
can leave the canvas the project in
canvas and I would write the guests
please to come over to the front
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
so before there's a mass exodus in
search for triangle Sanders upstairs of
the local Bret ammaji I like to first
thank the guests again for the for
taking the challenge to discuss their
work by labels works of course it's
always a great challenge that you don't
want to pigeonhole your own work and
also as hosts you don't want to force
connections which are potentially not
there
but there is sulfur that is really
strikes me on the presentation of all
three and that might be a commonality
it's also a point of divergence is that
it looks like all three of you tackle or
have projects which are larger in terms
of scale and interest than the work
produce itself and their work in terms
of scale of the rice so I think many of
you use installations or use certain
principles of robotics or tests and
experimentation to discuss those larger
subjects sometimes the poetic of the
relationship between the body and human
or the notion of communication and
information between man machine or
animals machines and humans and also the
whole idea of the digital world which
transforming one of the glitches of
today however as shown on the
presentation is just far from mapped and
recognized as we think so
so the first questions probably for all
three if you can discuss a little bit
more about this relationship between the
medium do you work and also the thematic
because of labels was interesting that
he had a series of drawings and a few
installations but the thematics that he
discussed were large in epidemiological
sense and also in a conceptual sense so
the question is the relationship between
the ideas and the media that you
explored yeah I mean I mean we use in
our work
a number of tools but really I think
what we're trying to do in playing with
different mediums is something that I
think is in common with Libya's work is
that we're trying to take the discourse
about architecture and the spaces that
we inhabit outside of the traditional
realms of architecture itself right and
so to move beyond traditional floor plan
or section and to start to explore modes
of storytelling performance installation
suggests the possibility for alternative
audience spend a lot of time in rooms
like this generally with the blinds down
to each other PowerPoint presentations
but to take it the work outside of these
contexts no longer start to talk about
the unbuilt competition project that we
could have wood or wood should have one
and start to create a film about our
work or to create a performance that
people can go and watch the public might
engage with in different ways I think
that's certainly for for us at the heart
of why we engage in these different kind
of mediums the projection of ideas right
is to have a really critical part of Lee
versus project is to talk about the
world and our and our role within it and
the politics implicit in it and it's
such an important conversation that
architects can start to have it's so
critical that we find other vehicles and
mediums through which we can project it
as loud as possible as far as possible
to difficult to as many different
audiences as possible
[Music]
yeah I guess when it comes to the work
that that I do in particular with Steven
my colleagues were not really very
concerned about mediums I think what
we're trying to do is make things more
shared and collective and to be honest
we don't really have an approach towards
style but we try to explore a certain
sense of dated sensibility which
actually facilitates a certain form of
communication so the way that we use
projects if it's a cloud if it's an
interface if it's a piece of machinery
if it's a building and urbanism is as a
way to actually try to construct maybe
more informed ways of asking questions I
think that's really important and I
think that's something that the lecture
or the interview that I showed was an
interview that this gave at Sayaka and I
think that that's how he sort of thought
about things is that he's working
through and his contribution for the
conversation as his work I think there
are a lot of people that talk a lot but
actually projects resonate and have a
very deep kind of rooted history and
some of the things that are important to
us our projects that of maybe have
become forgotten but actually have a
very strong affinity towards some of
those kind of methods and means of
exploring kind of interaction between
people so I like the way that DDA
expressed the idea then betweenness I
think that's a very important facility
to have when you're actually
constructing models of interaction and
when you're trying to enable other
people to participate so a lot of the
things that we do are not medium
specific but they're very much engaged
of allowing other people to sort of make
use of that with a particular interest
in the general public as a way of really
kind of demystifying how all of these
things are and to just make it something
that people actually understand their
participation
within an event or whatever the
manifestation maybe it's your turn now
the question of the medium is not for me
it's not really important I mean most of
the installation of device we produce
our linker to the let's say the timeline
it's something if I take architecture
with the aim is to build something the
timeline is so big we need to find other
situations to express to analyze to work
on and to develop ideas and I will say
to try to understand and to try to to
ask questions is the way to produce
question so the medium himself is
depending the question we are working on
or the answer we want to do but most of
the time is not question it's not
answers it's more questions we produce I
will just give an example for example
I'm working since two years on a project
with a big building not a big but it's a
building I mean for real and I have a
closed something I sign him in in the
end of the contract who is confidential
and I'm not supposed to show the
building until it will be built so
basically I'm working in a kind of
totally strange situation where I cannot
show my work since two years on this
specific thing so at the same time I
produce some
me Hajj I don't know the word in English
I think it's me harsh to talk about so
probably on some stuff I show you
probably for for the one with the the
bricks and the roughness and the
explosion is linked to the other project
so we find ways to it's a media I built
it it's the thing I have produced but
now it's really about this question of
showing something discussing about
something we go to find different what
is well pers I mean but what is the most
efficient in terms of explaining what we
want to say and maybe that's I want to
do a question actually not for the guys
on the table but for the audience which
is to what extent through the work
presented or what's the level that in
your interpretation there there is not
not in the sense of commonality here but
it seems that there is an element of
provocation the heart of the work here
is to satisfy harder the work here seems
to be about doing a manifesto about
words or about some sort of retro Genda
but it seems to be a forward
investigation so actually there is a
generic question to start a conversation
between the audience and the panelists
and guest speakers about your impression
about this relationship between the
dialogue of the work and the dialogue of
the architect as producer anyone wants
to start it's a very moment and that it
can lead into a question as well
silence okay I'll lead to another
question maybe you guys can break and
maybe do a Q&A later it's quite
interesting that answers because it
seems to be that because there is a need
for a conversation through the work and
Liam you were saying about showing each
other's PowerPoint but somehow the work
needs an audience and the work in search
of an audience or to connect for now
this it needs to provoke that audience
and I think in everyone here and in your
case there is definitely a sense of
provocation the work a sense that estar
dealing with questions of the the web or
why should the questions of digital
technology so to what extent that
provocation is also not just part of the
producer but also part of the the
conversation with the audience yeah I
mean I was saying in the discussion of
mediums the the relationship of
engagement within all different kinds of
audience is critical to the to the way
that we make work I mean we use the tool
of fiction and storytelling is a way to
start to create that dialogue right like
that now this is many ways the way our
culture shares ideas like we all fall
asleep reading a novel or spend a Friday
night watching some movie it's it's
it's the currency with which we we talk
to one another through through stories
so we think that's a really interesting
way to think about the architect is
provocateur the architect of storyteller
it's a way to present quite complex
ideas about spaces the city in
architecture in a way that actually
engages in elicits response right also
speculation is a similar kind of tool
where you put forward
a suggestion about a possible future
whether that's some kind of productive
dystopia some sort of idealist vision
and you asked the what you present it in
such a way that that that generates a
response or reaction you know it's
really easy to and kind of
counterproductive to sit watching a
bunch of talking heads on BBC news
debating you know the latest discoveries
in biotechnology but it's not until you
put those new technologies within a
context to tell a story about their
possible implications and then present
that back to an audience that you
actually generate an emotive response
you know that we start to engage in a
cultural way as opposed to an abstract
way
so fiction is for us a really critical
act in in in the mode of publication I
think the same kind of you know the
ladies uses the drawing as a way to draw
people into that world in a similar sort
of way to elicit emotional intuitive
responses from its audience if you use
liam8 on the notion of emotion here in
the the necessity or how you actually
filter their response or utilize that
response as not a one directional line
between work and and the user or let's
call I think was mentioned here instead
of user general public by some of you so
to what extent your work in minimum
forms and potentially here even at the
school is a hundred plus students that
you develop that idea of the
conversation where the idea of the
conversation through the notions
potentially through cybernetics
between machine and human yeah I don't
know I think let's say fight if I use
Hans van Forrester as as a as a strategy
for the answer I mean gee he was very
much a figure who was trying to
construct the framework for
understanding so in many cybernetic kind
of principles they would speak like how
do I understand understanding do i
construct constructions these kind of
radical constructivist ideas about the
nature of how one situates what they're
observing and so in many ways I think
were particularly in the work that and
let's say the kinds of discussions that
I try to enable or foster is one that is
trying to explore curiosity understand
that there is latency and unknown and to
shift I think from the conventions of
fixed and finite comforts attitudes
towards things and really try to open
oneself to really try to understand I
think it's really important to
understand the role of experimentation
today because I mentioned people like
whole line and levius Woods and Raymond
Abraham and the drawing maybe was enough
I don't think it's enough anymore today
so if long has the situate the practice
of today one has to be very much enabled
to make things happen by making them and
without necessarily having to describe
what their function is but to sort of
give it over to people and to see how
that somehow gets enabling kind of
things that potentially may be our forms
of communication today somehow miss like
for example when I say that I'm
interested in putting things in the
public space a public space today let
say Trafalgar Square where we did memory
club that you mentioned it's a space of
communication historically but it's a
protest celebration and for example a
project like memory cloud doesn't
foreground any technology at action
dematerializes that and if the
conversation happens then the project
continues but if there is no
conversation and silence is probably
just a strong communication device and
that is also part of the project so I'm
not necessarily interested in
constructing audiences I'm actually
trying to construct and situate things
in a way that the Ford's a certain kind
of response but without me actually
trying to offer that which i think is
very important so for me design and
architecture has this kind of critical
engagement without of having to state it
animation experimentation change and the
critical engagement socially and also
mentioned so did you I think the
question here this notion of
experimentation yes he has shifted he
has changed from in fact if you look in
a publication up at the library
published on the early nights it's
called theory + experimentation where a
lot of these guys actually meet up and
discuss is there any difference between
that is some of us and there was Peter
cuckoo perhaps or a Cupido Blau both
both bricks labels bernard tschumi you
can sort of a big point the the sort of
the top publish architects if you like
so there is seems to be a changing
notion of experimentation and
potentially the validity or the
alienation of so what extent
experimentation become a comfortable -
and I think in your work if I maybe do a
constructive parallel with levels work
somehow or let's say modes of practice
there seems to be this constant query
this constant luring along let's say
your role or the role of the architect
and the work you know this in between or
disestablishment of the work and what
you produce I guess it don't wake up on
Monday knowing what you're gonna do
for design I think potentially there is
a certain element of surprise so to what
extent experimentation in your work or
in Europe you as a teacher and an
architect has shifted in this during
your career experience or your art
thanks for experience the thing is about
the practice I don't know if it's
experimentation I mean we are looking
each day in a kind of possibility of do
things the thing is about curiosity and
know we're kind of Situationist point of
view with this drifting we're
experimentation for me seems to be if I
use the word seems to be for me kind of
too clear objective kind of thing I will
say it's a kind of but it's into
experimentation that I prefer the word
dubbed with this kind of like of an
establish or undef innate research so we
our research sometimes it can be called
experimentation but we don't know
exactly I mean I prefer the idea of
navigating neat elements where we have a
lot of new and each time new situations
appears and we would try and we we we
use it as elements of a kind of
[Music]
objective ways like having a kind of
corpus of situations more than
experimentation of my practice let's say
scientific scientific Oh
[Music]
structure to call it experimentation I'm
a bit afraid about this word I prefer to
say this we try on everyone we try and
then the thing is maybe time after time
we're like moments where we have the
possibility to make a kind of conclusion
or a new introduction to another see
that's why I prefer the thing of
drifting we do if we are like exploring
things Situationists point maybe the no
but I think the the for me is because
you mentioned let's say another period
we are in that kind of new period it's
the context change I think at this time
experimentation was a kind of manifesto
of generation were saying we experiment
to have the possibility of freedom to
say don't do feed us with say the the
main way of building things and practice
the the architecture I think today the
things are blurred and we are
reinventing things where the things are
really porous between us basically one
point between us is this thing of
navigating in a kind of obscure we take
media's are interesting at one moment we
use it
that's my yeah I mean I know I mean to
to a large extent and architects skills
are often wasted making a building right
like like I am studied in Australia I
grew up in a very traditional constable
architecture was Glen Merc touch the
earth lightly timber detailing
residential houses and Lee versus Works
was something that kind of all would
read like a kid in a comic under the
covers with the firm as an alternative
way of operating I think what you got
experimentation but you know what what I
saw possible in that that work at the
time was the ability to launch a
speculation with such force that it had
beyond any act of ultimate realization
you know like like that that the
speculation was an act in an endpoint in
itself
it wasn't an unbuilt project his works
of projects you know not judge success
or failure of any kind of built work or
the lack of it in the case of his career
but but more judged in the context of
the questions opened in the debates
raised you know I think that's a really
fundamental all for what the architect
can start to do is that kind of
experimentation that that exists beyond
the act of making a building but it's
actually far more crucial and
fundamental in the act of making city or
making space is speculative forces is
definitely a interesting expression they
use on labels and I do remember Brazil
being getting introduced we actually
want this book that you guys can
actually see if it's on the screens -
[Music]
okay almost which is a book which is
very precious to us because at a few
students gave it to us three years ago
yeah three or four years ago as a as a
present and it's a very expensive
present because it's out of catalog but
it's interesting that these books also
start up imagination which seems
essential question today in high school
so with that notion of the imagination
or like to open questions for the
audience if you have any questions for
any of the speakers or
the whole event they're recording it
anyways i'm shinee's hi um what the
presentations I think it's it's quite a
tall order actually just to try and set
your work against Libya's water and I
found all the presentations really
interesting there's one thing for me
that kind of ran as the threads wrap em
its kind of the disappearance of the
body or of the human or people I'm not
even sure how to call us but also um I
don't want to say purpose of
architecture but we're building for
human humans and then throughout the the
presentations I think the CEO mentions
that inventions is cause about
perception and perception is our own
invention so it starts very much from
the premise of our own experience of
space and architecture and then you
mentioned you're kind of diverted from
fiction but there was something that I
really liked is the work to do with
fragility and that kind of grounds and I
think a lot of Libby this is where a
case to do with this kind of fertility
and perception even when there's no
figures in this work when there's no
human presence in the draw is it can
still feel this kind of fragile they
kind of the falling down when when
you're in that distance from Hyde
Stein's Tom and the tomb in in French is
tombe is too full and and you can fill
it in the drawings even though there's
no figurative kind of and then then Liam
you kind of concluded with the
disappearance altogether of the human so
I was kind of wondering you how you felt
about the link and yeah even with with
the drawings come
being there without any and and you
mentioned that maybe will be will be
meter we go because of certain data but
how do we perceive that how does that
change our own perception so it's kind
of an open question to also review this
kind of disappearance of us or whatever
yeah I mean I guess with if we think
about the believers right like that's
right my point about the baton starting
with Justin is really trying to problem
sublet eyes the body for problematize
the human to say that it sufficiently
understand the subject in that in this
context you need to look at kind of you
know the media space around it and
generated by it you know magnet term
said it's fundamental to think about you
can't technology doesn't exist with that
culture right so that the separation and
the two shall be inextricably linked I
suppose and to to understand the two
together is really critical 20 active
Scientifics baseball like we in you know
the extended version of of that talk I
refer to places like Chernobyl where
this extraordinary condition where once
very physical context but the context
been scanned meticulously reconstructed
and created into a game space that they
will play detached online game space is
kind of percolated back into the
physical space where local fanboys from
surrounding towns come back into the
landscape and recreate their characters
in the game so what is that nature of is
what is the nature of them as people
within that site which kind of sites are
they operating in that they operating in
the media constructive site of the game
or the physical construction site post
nuclear catastrophe so to talk about
this kind of parallel conditions I think
is is really really critical I don't
know if it's the disappearance of the
body or the problematizing of the body
or those like you know rain in the city
you know it's just one more kind of
layer on top of space that means big we
can fit it right from my perspective
anyway yeah the issue is a little bit
different from like the 70s mind-body
problem stuff the conversation I think
that by necessity and particularly try
to work is to really enable much more
emotive and much more engaged kind of
forms of interaction and the reason that
we think that that's very important like
let's say in my own practice was my
studio that's around me technology plays
a really strong part of what we do but
we never really talk about it from a
literal foregrounding this is how we did
it these are the tools that we use this
is us is not just constructing these
things but actually allowing these
things to perform using installation as
a way as a litmus test to test our own
preoccupations in a world that actually
is for other example technology from me
is a very human pursuit so if it's
really about machines interacting with
people or people interacting with
machines other people machines and
machines all of that this part of a
which I think is very much accessible
you can say is distributed but I
wouldn't say that it's shared I think
the way that we sort of veil our forms
of NT make it even that much more
important for us to make things in the
world and to put them out there
I really believe that there is a kind of
facility in sort of working through
things that kind of opens up a wholesome
soul the body is one aspect and sort of
rien gauging with what that really means
is very important like with DDA the way
that I actually learned about his work
was from an Krishna food--it skull I've
had the pleasure of working with is a
very important person to me in terms of
trying to create a voice for people that
are part of our everyday world and
socially and culturally I think that's
important I think design plays a role in
that I think that's what Leon does with
his films without stating that is sort
of bringing that into a kind of
discursive way that sort of enables a
conversation to be had instead of
generalized levius Woods is pretty
interesting and that interview because
I've tried to find what was available
and there's really not very much the
interesting for him is that when he
started that Sayaka interview he
basically said that were in this kind of
strange perceptual perpetual machine
where were constantly really have been
done and he talked about the necessity
to keep doing that because he basically
said and if you take a cybernetic
approach to things in this world we all
construct our world Aaronic have worked
and maybe this is where I have a slight
difference that everything exists online
a lot of this work doesn't and it's
important to revisited Li re articulate
maybe our position today to understand
what's different so you know if Hans
whole line says all we need everything
is architecture I just take a pill
reconstruct my city that's a very
different generation than today and
Bieber this kind of conversation and
to be honest with you I'm not here to
judge one person or the other but I
think it's very important to us as
active participants and that's a very
important you mentioned about perception
it's a very big cybernetic principle ISM
and from moving from something that's a
passive observer to an active
participant means that you're engaged
and that's a start but I don't think
that there's any finite aspect of that
and the questions that we're sort of
interested in are only part of a much
bigger project so architecture
particularly they think makes certain
demands and and I'm interested in that
and that's why sometimes it leads us
away sometimes it could be an instrument
sometimes it could be something else
projects I think set the terms of our
engagement no I just want to say about
the body of the thing but I think it's
linker to the question of the individual
body who was the topic Archer this topic
slightly changed and today I think the
disappointment is the situation is not
anymore
the individual body but the collective
body and mutation
I believe of obliged us to think
differently too so the exploration is
it's not I mean the body if I take a
metaphor of history of architecture for
me the big shift is Gordon matta-clark
who cut the house and that architecture
is not anymore
one in the case of Labour's this idea of
instability and they produce an
architecture with not anymore
solid so this point is a metaphor for
our society and are we considered about
it the body now is not anymore
we tip is totally in a way different
level so are we approach that I can tell
ok I do a performance to engage one
individual to a situation
take distance of that I start to think
about what will be the the answer or the
question I'm putting on the on the table
so then from the answer are now I put
the word when you ask disciple is that
pointless disappoint in situation with
like defining today
that's the any further questions at the
back David
Sukhoi there knowing everything and
everyone in the room so do with the mic
I went to the Bartlett because I heard
they got big workshops where they showed
you the workshop at tempera buildings
but we can do better than that new one
isn't it
and so then as a way of preparation for
coming here I thought I got here what
these young guns take their view on
libres words are they see and I went to
the ICA they've got a very modest little
exhibition celebrating the 1968
cybernetics serendipity exhibition and
it's sort of manages to drain all the
interest and excitement that that
exhibition has a medivac stay the fate
think so maybe it's definitively be
assimilated as all I didn't I just
wanted to ask you something because it's
been a bit of a sort of lovin for
Libya's and but I was glad that Sierra
shared the him talking because I always
thought the thing and as a highly
intelligent more interesting than his
work you know I mean I think if critic
might say that he was a victim of this
as a draftsman and in the end he wasn't
able to go beyond these drawings I don't
know what you think about that whether
that's because there's no doubt it had
tremendous influence and his imitators I
mean know whether I should say this I
mean I think probably the barkos more to
leave than to you it would be any other
schools if ghost still haunts the
Bartlett and words cybernetic still
haunts us and you wonder war where is it
gotta since 68 maybe I'm interested it
was interested in the three of you that
you're sort of quite different different
take on the character reality so I a
good experiences of tourists and
consumers consumers aren't supposed to
say anything I'm sorry about that
thanks yeah I would that lobbyists was a
much more interesting thinker and I
think part of that is I mean when you
and I were to actually see his interview
and on Sci arcs media archive because I
think in some way it just basically
gives a bit of a window into ye now the
drawings I think I mean they're
beautiful but they're somehow irrelevant
at some point I think they do become
triggers for I think a very personal and
I think the way he situates what he says
and what he does
I thought that that was very important
to kind of communicate his conversation
though the origins catalog that Boyarsky
put together here he he does a very
short introduction where he basically
just sankt Zaha and boy the opportunity
which I think many people didn't as a
kind of platform to speak and he's a
very important educator was his value
most I guess growing up across the river
that was very apparent because he was
part of that group of Cooper Union guys
like ik and Abraham Scofidio that were
basically working between each other in
a very very kind of intimate way where
one project was creative friction for
someone else and I think that's quite
important so in one sense I think this
event what's what I've felt quite close
to was basically probably for a lot of
people that don't know lebbeus it's an
introduction but how they choose to use
him or misuse him like some people were
saying I think it's up to them but their
place in the 50s 60s and 70s but without
nostalgia I mean I believe in some of
the things that they were doing but that
was their time your time and to be
honest with you when I showed face
breeder I was like 23 24 years old and
then David Greene had seen me and Vasily
give a talk and the University of
Westminster and and to be honest with
you he just basically said would you
like an opportunity to do something we
did that piece and Selfridges and David
didn't know once he had no connection to
us but he gave us a chance in a platform
and the framework and till this day and
deaded to him for that mostly because he
actually just challenged us he basically
said if you want it he took us to a
basement and basically said here's a lot
of shitty computers ten years old five
years old and we it's junk do something
with it and
I think sometimes this idea of
provocation is important to understand
where that's coming from so it yes it
did mean something that this was our
grams David Greene who gave us a chance
to do something and I think that
accountability for a young person today
is really important because I really do
think that we're sort of evolving a
discourse and if we choose
experimentation or research or whatever
we want to call it today it's part of a
lineage of projects that enable us to
kind of keep this thing going and to
reinstate I think why architecture
matters today why design matters and you
know we don't have to always state Korb
and Mises the orthodoxy some of these
people were actually trying to break
that orthodoxy through their work and I
think some of us today are trying to
understand our role within this larger
milieu that DeeDee is talking about I
[Music]
think I just want to bring up one point
that I think came up several times in
the conversation today is and that's how
we started actually our introduction
almost two hours ago
is how important it is to tweak rate and
to keep keep going keep doing the things
that we are doing even though they have
been done in the past just to carry on a
conversation and I just would like to
almost give that question to the
students today that study today how how
they feel about that because we
constantly in the units argue about what
research is it's not just about reading
a book and looking at Google images it
is about making it yourself recreating
it and by making by doing it making it
your own version and and that's
I think what we are talking here about
Oswald lab is talked about in interview
so I would like to ask the students how
do you feel about it you know it doesn't
make sense to you to look at something
that has been done before but to we do
it why should I redraw it why should I
we make it in models
[Music]
shouldn't be so shy
first of all everybody is speaking here
our teachers wouldn't be so sure if it
was a studio so I guess thank you for
everything you said during the lecture
as well um I mean I totally agree with
this thing about them constantly and I
mean because we read so many things and
we look at so many references I guess
this idea of owning up to them and
making them your own
um ties in with what you were saying
about and what labios was saying about
perception and I guess because all of us
individually perceive architectural
perceivable we read or perceive
different things in our own way and it's
always the way that we're going to
express what we've read what we've seen
through our work is like our individual
construction of of everything we
perceive in our lives from memory and
it's like a recreation of references and
I totally agree with the fact that you
know anyway all the most secure thing
that I personally think that we have to
look at is the past I mean we don't
really nobody really knows what's going
to come next so the the idea of
speculating or what's going to come next
is always based on what I have what we
know of what has passed so I totally
agree with the fact that our
speculations and our creations of
stories through our projects and the
different narratives all stemmed from
our perception of everything that has
passed so I guess I mean it's my opinion
as well
[Music]
that history that history should be an
enabling thing so that you could find
your friends and your enemies and
understand that there were other people
that potentially were working on some of
these ideas and where did they stop and
it's not that you literally take their
project because you're living in a time
and you have to address your own project
today right
so even if you took those ideas
literally and tried to situate them
today a lot of it would be nonsense
quite naive but to be honest with you
maybe as a starting point that's not so
bad to actually have a little bit of
optimism and to actually think that some
of this stuff could actually have an
influence before you get too jaded by
the so-called reality of things I think
it's really important to understand that
even if there is no audience that this
is so important to you that you're gonna
do it and to be honest with you when you
do that and when you start to see that
these figures from New York Japan UK
were communicating through their
projects even if they didn't know each
other that's amazingly powerful stuff
and maybe having some sensitivity to
projects and less to what's on the zine
today and what's on Sucker Punch and you
know an idea of sort of completely
disregarding the 50s till now with an
idea that somehow the 20s had it better
I think it's really important to situate
where you are with all of this you
yourself as an architect who's gonna
contribute and participate it's your
obligation that's what's really nice
about it if you want to call yourself an
architect I think you have an
accountability because saying that means
that there is something that you believe
in that you think it's a spatial problem
there is something to it we could
disagree and I think that's important
that we do and I think today's event is
also about just sort of giving some
people an understanding I don't know if
everybody in the audience knew who
Livius woods once and if so if it was
because your teacher is basically told
you he's an interesting guy you should
check them out it's important to try to
come to terms with what
is the things that are basically part of
your own construction so if you're going
to construct yourself like it's
forward-thinking its living today and
I'm trying to understand a bit of the
past to enable you so you don't feel
burdened by it but you're somehow
empowered by the fact that some of these
ideas have mattered do matter and will
matter in the future so we're still kind
of coming to terms with Buckminster
Fuller that guy was a rock star way
before rock stars were born then he's
probably influenced pretty much
everybody in the AAA in one way or
another
people trying to discredit him or people
trying to really be empowered by a lot
of the conversations that he sort of put
forth on the table so some people test
the time and other people to be honest
with you fade away in resume that wasn't
to interrupt no it's okay interrupter
smooches laughing any other questions a
final question perhaps okay so someone
really wants to talk there is a there is
a certain there's a big crowd there okay
so I think it's time to end this
fantastic event that we put it together
I think we've a to refer to directional
as it was already very clear explained
by the guest critics or the guest
speakers in the sense that we can
remember so long that it's very dear to
our own universe but also to set up a
challenge to see how architects which
are David Green called young guns are
starts to establish I can react against
another architects work without
necessarily pigeonhole II he's or the
Liberals would work so I really want to
first thank all the guest speakers for
accepting the invitation and ask the
audience to hanging around during a
lunch time for a couple of hours with
other black
our triangle sandwich so thanks very
much for all of you so please help me to
welcome and say bye for the guests
critics
