the afternoon I want to do something
which I don't normally do I'm going to
like present an argument which
unfortunately is not mine I thought in
the summer about how to how to sort of
control a lecture on the mask but really
found the material like so disparate so
you know I didn't want to kind of
summarize it I'm going to give a nod
which is really about what you might
call the preconditions of the mask and
the argument is actually was published
long time ago by the French writer Tyga
and in a sense I'm going to kind of
present it may be sort of inflecting it
to war where I want to go it's that the
book is called made user and the mask I
mean it's not on anyone's reading list
it's not but I hope you will see it's to
my mind and astonishingly imaginative
text I'm not all together in a position
to kind of judge it I mean it has a lot
of references to kind of theories of
evolution but overall in intellectual
terms it's
to me to be amazing Tyrod stance this
book in order to kind of clear the
territory for him to argue in in
pronouncing himself kind of interested
in diag what he calls diagonal sciences
what that in fact means is that is where
the science proceeds by building up a
kind of corpus of classification which
it then kind of theorizes in some sense
[Music]
and the classification system is somehow
internal to the science how can I put it
I mean in biology lizards and have four
legs but they don't count as mammals
bats can fly but they don't count as
birds you know we're not this is not
just an empirical classification like as
some extent it was in Linnaeus where you
had like species classified simply by
visible characteristics there's more to
it than that
and he's where the people don't light
kind of moving across domains in a
science they tend to deepen but in some
sense narrow their focus
so he gazes example crystals crystals
actually if they're broken repair
themselves but you know what are we to
make it I mean does that put them
together with animals that have systems
of repairing themselves or in a way is a
de force metaphor think of the
significance of the difference between
left and right across the natural world
think of shells or something the
significant but he done really can't as
a systematic kind of study basically
there are what he calls diagonal
relations relations between phenomena
that sort of cross the classifications I
mean just think of it we can say you
know a back and fly a bird can fly
they're quite different but it's
possible to identify fly you know the
problems of flying and wings which cross
species particularly anyway
unsympathetic to what he's calling a
diagonal science because we're terribly
afraid of and concerned with
anthropomorphism you know we tend to
regard it as an error to attribute human
sentiment
to other species I mean I am but
actually in a there comes a point when
you have to say there's a certain kind
of systematic thing that well used to be
called nature which in some senses of
passed away now
which gives permission for a certain
kind of diagonal science which he's
going to kind of base it himself on in
the argument he starts with the it's an
insect which is particularly kind of
it's like an intellectuals insect for
obvious reasons it's the praying mantis
or rather that aspect in the life of a
praying mantis where the praying mantis
female has sex with a male and kills the
male at the moment of sort of
culmination it's a particularly gripping
incident in the natural world on my
observation especially two men indeed I
remember her the first it's quite a
coincidence the first evening I spent in
Australia in 1982 and I went there for
sure while and strangely enough my
sponsor is sitting at the back of the
room
before I went to bed while I was in bed
with before I went to sleep I was
reading a famous book called the social
life of innocent insects which has a
quite gripping chapter on the praying
mantis I went to sleep I woke up
convinced that there was a praying
mantis on my chest I kept my eyes shut I
told myself I have a sort of certain
hysterical tendency this is really very
easy to explain you know I was reading
about praying mantis you know I've
hysterically dreamt this praying mantis
lying on my chest
gradually gingerly I kind of educated
myself into opening my eyes and on my
chest I saw a praying mantis it's very
easy to dispel itself I mean I disposed
of it before I'd even become fully aware
I was right I mean I you know it had a
real shock not far off Tara Tara is one
word to keep in mind this afternoon as
we go that because the sort of
trans-species terror is what he's kind
of after so
human beings are obviously fairly
obsessed with the praying mantis and
with analogues of the brain mantis will
we'll get to that later on he makes an
apparently very strange association it's
between the praying mantis herself and
people's fear humans fear and what are
you going to see in the argument is him
saying that once what had been a kind of
instinctual reflex had survived but in
the form of fear and the forms of fear
will include things like the Medusa that
will sort of get there
let me quote you a short passage from
him it seemed to be that in man the
terror released by this dark fantasy
replaced an implacable fatal reflex
action it's sort of the idea that you
know we're still sort of connected in
some sense to the real praying mantis
but in this form of a fear he says this
happens because we know that evolution
tends to make the species more complex
and his I mean almost kind of biological
claim is that the this makes obviously
you know as is non-controversial the
size of life more separated and in a
sense incompatible and he says you know
it creates an enormous gulf between man
and insects but he argues that
complexity itself creates like a
dimension of new sets of relationships
including across species it's as though
there are certain evolutionary
developments which have which happen in
a sense because of the increasing
complexity now it's not that this
reduces the difference between the
species indeed it doesn't I mean here we
get to the anthropomorphism bit what
he's trying to say is I am NOT being
anthropomorphic
so for example you know he takes where
do you know humans sometimes allege
relationships I mean a lot of people
kind of say things like the the tapping
of bees is a sort of primitive form of
language nonsense you know it's a
strictly mechanical utterly coded I mean
it's coded genetically it's just signals
that they're kind of programmed to make
human language can't possibly be
compared with that humans
human language is above all confused
that's in a sense right language can be
an instrument of freedom because in a
sense properly understood freedom is the
tolerance of confusion you share me a
tyranny that doesn't want to simplify
tyranny is the enemy of complexity the
difference is that in insects this is
entirely kind of mechanical or
instinctual but it comes a certain point
when instinct doesn't work like that
with a human it's not that we don't have
instincts but they don't have a common
period they don't have a necessary and
unequivocal outcome or another way of
saying that is instinct always go
through the mind and instincts require
you to have some sort of image in your
mind in order to know what or where to
whom to act I mean it'd be did the
discharge of the instinct
it is really very like the distinction
drawn in Freud between an instinct and
what he calls a drive I mean the
instinct kind of provides energy in some
sense which has to be discharged its
discharged as a drive but the drive has
gone through some sort of translation
process if you see what I mean so that
if you were to say there's an instinct
some sort of instinct for sex that
doesn't mean it just has to discharge
itself as it might do with an insect it
means you're going to have a sort of
image I don't know if something's
something like I mean it it immediately
is translated in something quite
different which is desire so to him it
doesn't work in humans without an
interposed image in which in some sense
the instinctual energy works not through
mechanical discharge it works
essentially through mental figures like
reminiscence
what sort of person do I like oh I mean
through fantasy or reminiscence
and those are as it were the the
conditions for a human there's this
intellection
it's about Inhumans it's not just my
personal feeling who would I choose like
choosing lead to love I mean probably
don't choose but nonetheless it's a
question of mental representation and
that can be followed for atewa in like
four humans the translation of
instinctual mechanical discharge into
things like the making of myths I mean
one way of expressing the nature of
myths insofar as were subject to them
and people debate that but is that
really they function as they sorry a
function as ways of dealing with what
would initially have been an instinctual
action in the sense that I've I've lined
it
l√©vi-strauss says at a certain point the
whole of our culture in so far as we can
see is a giant metaphor for eating and
having sex I mean it's like either
everything you know architecture it's
all a kind of metaphor for eating and
having sex that's why of course I mean
this is not kind words with me if you
ask what can a novel not represent there
are several things which a novel cannot
represent it cannot represent eating
though novels are full of meals it
cannot represent and it can't
represent actually having sex or
attempts to do so to my mind our comic
it can say a whole lot about meals it
could say a great deal about the
lavatory but it doesn't even now you
know architects don't seem to enjoy
drains and it can't do that really
I mean psychically in Freudian turns it
conduct because the experience of those
things predates real language
I mean if you accept as you would fry
him that babies are perfectly sexual
beings but a certain point at about
three and they eat and they then
you want to find the words to describe
exactly what it was like you
can't do it I mean it's you could have
as many literary competitions as you
wanted to and I tell you who you won't
get any good entries it's really rather
extraordinary okay now the next thing is
we move rather briskly to butterfly
wings this is all an attempt to make the
same argument what
Tiwa is concerned to follow is the a
kind of literal sense
the pattern and colors of butterfly
wings are what he calls the insects
painting now you know that could even
sound like silly ridiculous but listen
for a moment to the argument
after all and I don't want to go into it
but following through the detailed kind
of texts they go through like on the
biology butterfly so didn't get really
is they need wings and they probably
need color but that color could be just
you know a simple surface of color to
partly disguise themselves there no
one's agreed on what you might call the
evolutionary reason for the spots and
patents on a butterfly now of course it
sounds ludicrous to to compare them with
paintings and indeed you know good in
that way it would be but they're both
suffered they're both services forming a
whole they're also totally useless I
mean yeah certainly in the case of
butterfly they're not like the product
of consciousness they don't reveal the
personality of the butterfly you're
talking you know but they are for him
and he insists this is point about
diagonal they are what he calls homologs
you know he's not trying to say they
share the same essence they don't share
anything except they are color pattern
useless
what he wants to make is that everything
has like a tendency a tendency to
produce colored designs I mean it's
really a fairly remarkable proposition I
mean humans and what we're school nature
have this
now if that's the case you know I mean
let's go back to the anthropomorphism
thing what exactly is the singularity of
man one of the problems of opposing
anthropomorphism is precisely to
reinstall man at the apex of creation
the master of all he surveys etc
normally most kind of biologically
informed accounts the evolution man
can't stress bipedalism in humans and
the opposition between the thumb and
forefingers chi-wai reckons that's not
terribly useful I mean standing up on
two feet never seem to do a lot so the
kangaroo who sorry about the Australian
reference yeah never does a lot for the
penguin either when you read about the
advantages of bipedalism maybe they're
not quite so great indeed you know I
don't see the monkeys suffered a great
deal by forgoing bipedalism
he thinks that the what used to be
called as the ascendant man while the
Descent of Man really comes from
something else it's almost as if all the
so-called advantages in evolution are
actually more like a sacrifice on the
part of man I mean bipedalism yes only
giving up like the possibility of who's
and whatever the hand you know it's made
it doesn't do as much for you as all
these things what it does is to create
in this emerging man an incapacity to do
things solely in their body they need in
a sense to turn outside themselves I
mean a lot of insects have the most
astonishing internal mechanisms of
complete transformation but it's only
mechanical repetitive whatever it does
the job I can't remember someone called
insects as sort of
technicians of kind of internal
structures I mean you know that it's not
that nothing happens I mean a vast man
happens but it's essentially an internal
mechanism which leaves somehow the body
of the insect capable of controlling
what the instinctual field I mean they
couldn't get killed but I mean there you
go
man in a curious way becomes bereft of
certain possibilities in and of the body
and is forced to begin to exterior eyes
things like as a tool as whatever and
becomes a sort of what Freud calls in a
very sarcastic remark a prosthetic God
so let's imagine the man that we're
talking about is what we might call a
prosthetic god
let's go back to the to the point for
painting and men or humans rather
obviously the artist is an individual
person who paints but he just sort of
deals with that calmly by saying in the
case of the butterfly
it's the species that does it I mean he
doesn't anthropomorphize of the species
and make it an agent but it's a sort of
a certain system of cause and effect of
which this painting so it really depends
on like where the analysis is gonna go
with this patterning chi-wah now turns
you know we've done the praying mantis
we've done the butterfly the next stage
of the argument and it's very carefully
argued is to deal with the question of
mimicry and then we'll come to mask the
normal distinctions about color or
rather I mean he takes this obviously
authoritative book by someone who caught
called adaptive coloration in animals
where the function of color is sort of
normally that color in the animal or
patterns of color are to either mislead
to warn to deceive or what's called
pseudo somatic it's - it's difficult to
put it's like to warn falsely I mean I
think the what's the plant that eats
insects the Venus flytrap that couldn't
sort of conceal itself as if it's a
benign leaf thereby in a sense say it's
alright but it's not there are colours
which concealed which are either what
are called to encrypt it like a
grasshopper which takes on the color of
grass and is thought to be you know less
vulnerable or anti cryptic where like
you know the the Mantis also resembles a
leaf so that its victim is not afraid
what I mean Tiwa tries to distinguish
these features into
[Music]
disguise intimidation and camouflage so
there's a general tendency through the
diagonal science to suddenly see that
everything insects to humans have a
tendency to disguise themselves I mean
for him it exceeds what you might call a
functional account where you know I
perceive a danger I disguise myself I
mean they're always on it disguising
themselves and he's too many species you
know we're clearly this disguising goes
on and on long now to disguise yourself
you either have to emerge yourself in
the pattern of the environment or to
search for some other form of
invisibility an animal must in a sense
lose its identity if it's to
successfully conceal itself
you don't move I mean it's almost that a
certain stillness seems to be the kind
of spatial analogue of invisibility or
rather you didn't move unless the
environment moves in which case you must
move in the same way that the
environment moves so we'd see in most
insects color change shape change think
of stick insects and at the level of man
he detects a powerful you know one of
these things coming like the threat
praying mantis comes from something we
call myths the unconscious whatever but
the space which has replaced a reflex
action that's the important point and so
he pays attention to human wishes to be
invisible
something that I've experienced quite
strongly avaa this week not with any
success think of you know military
camouflage there was a very good show at
the Imperial War Museum about ten years
ago I think and actually a rather good
catalog being invisible it is one of the
most powerful scenes of folk tales of
losing visibility and gaining visibility
and I can remember nine we used to spend
a lot of time wishing we could be
invisible now in a sense such as
camouflage as we turn now to
intimidation intimidation for Taiwan
often follows from camouflage I mean
it's the moment when you know you've
you've hidden yourself and then you
suddenly erupt now what is crucial in
his account of intimidation is the role
of Chile of eyes of eyes or the shape of
some eyes
indeed to go back to the praying mantis
the female will kind of become almost
she's known erect and in her legs as
these huge black or chili which
presumably terrify the male just before
the moment of what froth or castration
these eyes which again are incredibly
populated across nature and which are
obviously at the basis of an incredible
number of myths and stories and notions
of the evil eye
the ocelli are always in some sense like
suggesting that they are monstrously
large they're not actually just like a
replica of an eye
it's more in some sense an eye is the
replica of an arch le of the ocelli when
I say they suggest themselves I mean
they come with a kind of aura of terror
they're what frighten people and what
frighten insects they were frightened
animals and of course one can't go any
further without talking about Medusa the
figure
I mean Medusa comes in many fictional
and poetic kind of conditions I think
firstly and the most elaborately in
Hesiod and I think it's the OG&E device
it say the Gorgon Medusa I can't
remember now it was they were three
daughters there were three daughters of
the old man of the sea
at a certain point in one I mean in the
standard myth Perseus is kind of sent
off to kill Medusa in order to get to
Medusa he has to go through remember who
they are but they only have one tooth
and one eye between the three of them so
he manages to get it and whatever that
gets him through the Medusa and then he
mustn't look past the Medusa's head
which is covered in snakes if they look
at you you turn as I recall cast stone
Perseus has been given gifts to help him
carry out this kind of difficult task he
has a mirror so he reflects the Medusa's
head and judges were to cut you know
from working out from the mirror and
does it and kills her
somehow this is embedded itself in myth
but also as it were the appearance of
endless numbers of Medusa's who are kind
of feared because it's feared that they
put the eye on him what are we to make
every story I think it's interesting
I've never seen anything about Medusa
killing a woman it seems to be
remarkably you know I mean a female
practice on a man I'm not entirely
surprising me I mean I think that kind
of alerts us to go back to the praying
mantis I was interpretation of all this
is that the Perseus myth it is actually
a sort of mythical reworking of a kind
of practice we would so say a
coming-of-age practice or an initiation
rite in which he has to do something but
not actually we've made you to do
something which fulfills the rites
at which point he can join the sort of
patriarchal elders and be given a mask
right
the mask in a sense of the kind of
privileged statement is what permits him
to be defensive and aggressive but it
has it sort of origin in something like
this you can see there's an interesting
parallel to be made between they didn't
exactly touch or coordinate but there's
a considerable proximity between him and
Freud who obviously held very centrally
to the idea of castration anxiety
although therapists often nod their
heads and say well Freud was long time
ago and we've like thought it through by
now as actually it's a rough a stronger
and kind of cruder thing and it's not so
easily dispensed with
and it's very central to fire and Freud
would be quite happy I think to accept
the idea that myths and versions of
certain dreams and stories a kind of
survival from the the moment when in a
sense humans stopped having reflex
actions
I mean if by reflex action you mean a
kind of an immediate mechanical response
to an instinct what we call animals
so they don't go through the medium of
painting communities by well terms but
he's concerned to sort of late the
insect with the human
in this kind of diagonal way I think
it's a remarkable achievement it
actually isn't in as far as I can make
out it's not in any conflict
fundamentally with kind of evolutionary
theory and I think above all it's
extraordinarily kind of suggestive it's
very important that the ocelli
to be effective appear then on there and
you see them and you get frightened as
part of it the appearance that the
fundamental character of surprise of of
perception which is knocked off its
pedestal by sudden appearance you know
celli of course is part of a mask for
chi-wah in a sense humans become humans
when they start laying down masks when
they stop using the masks of course that
is the mass the mass circulates among
humans in dreams stories fears all sorts
of things but essentially the mask
remains completely fascinating to humans
it's paradoxical character whether it
conceals or whether it reveals or
whether it indeed produces a completely
different economy of concealing and
revealing which and surely
he ends with I think the supremely
actually supremely comic interpretation
he gives a new interpretation I mean
you've never think one was going to come
of the Mona Lisa as you know most
interpretive remarks about the Mona Lisa
concentrate on what's thought to be
mysterious smile he's claimed risk he
says another nod about her smile but
have you looked at the eyes on the Mona
Lisa and almost without any comment no
eyebrow no eyelashes that's a little bit
odd I mean as if that's normal to be
awed the history of spectatorship as the
Mona Lisa has refused to look at one
thing and call your attention to another
which of course to anyone versed in
Freud is completely expected what's
called displacement we've managed to
move our critical attention to the mouth
so that we don't have to think about the
thing that would disturb us which is the
eyes
I'd add another to that when I was lost
in the jacobian Brianna yeah by the
gallery in a sort of back corridor where
they kind of hang slightly their reserve
collection there's a painting and you
think that's weird that's look like the
Mona Lisa but it's not it's not firstly
because the person whose portraits been
taken has their head right to one side
and very long half and you realize it's
a boy it's a young man I think it's
quite clearly a sort of Milanese gay
joke from that well from from Leonardo
but be that as it may I think the
Khaybar argument is very strong in sort
of setting be like the scene for
discussing masks it's as if the topic of
masks is like so full of contenders and
whatever and everyone's a bit confused
and say well nonetheless it's an
impressive mask writers don't really
know what they're doing when they get
into the topic of the mask seven
l√©vi-strauss and the idea of a diagonal
fans is certainly you know extremely
interesting way of thinking that certain
scientific processes can be looked at
but from another point of view he's very
careful but the book is beautifully
paced so he doesn't kind of give the
game away you know you're not quite sure
where you're going when you start with
the painted butterflies obviously you're
getting there with thee or celli
with the praying mantis with the
different functions of mimicry which are
always embodied in the mask anyway so I
thought I wouldn't sort of assumed
knowledge of the chi-wah I'm perfectly
happy to retell you an interesting
argument in the hope that you'll also
find it interesting and I think it gives
you a route into talking about masks
next week we're going to change and I
shall talk about makeup which I mean in
the most humdrum and everyday sense it's
not something post structure is pun
until about makeup okay thanks very much
indeed
[Applause]
