so please join me in welcoming Brad to
the stage well I hope I can live up to
that oh my god so I'll talk tonight
about the work about a way of thinking
about the work I mean it's interesting
in the introduction and wondering a
little bit why I am where I am I think I
think relative to light and and the and
the kind of pursuit an investigation of
light as a material thing is an
experiential thing I think it has
everything to do with growing up in the
Pacific Northwest where there's no light
and so this the sacredness of it the the
joy it brings the wonder it brings a
sense of awe in many ways it has to be
has to come from I think that that those
beginnings realizing how precious light
is and then structure has everything to
do with my education when leucon passed
away a bunch of his students fled to the
west coast to the embrace of Oregon and
took over the school and you know I I
was the benefactor of that so those
those elements of structure and light as
anachronistic as they are in today's in
today's culture I think that's the right
word those are the things that I
continue to be fascinated by continue to
be inspired by and pursue pursue in the
work so I'll talk about process a bit
about the kind of visual industry that
we are involved in a kind of exploration
of possibilities that Aled works in the
search really the search for
architecture we were talking on the way
in you know
I mean it's in some ways finding the
architecture the reason to do
architecture what the architecture
should be could be whether architecture
is even appropriate or even applies to
the problem at all
those are not apologetic concerns those
are things that I truly think about in
in any project so when I want to travel
and look I try to find places where
architecture exists and often not in
buildings that that meandering paths in
the river where specific species of tree
has filled in to me that's a force of
architecture the wind that blows that
rock when the when the mud flats are wet
across that plane or architecture the
temporary canopies for prayer at the
mosque and that amazing American Indian
bridge of cantilevered and strapped logs
I mean anything that I can find
microcosms of climate where a 500 foot
elevation changes everything and
qualities of light that shift it's
basically the forces that act on things
trying to find those forces of
specificity trying to give voice to
forces to two characteristics two
elements that lead you to some
understanding and insight and those may
be sound bold or presumptive but those
are things that I believe in him I look
at landscape I look at objects and I
look a lot at art I think in the era of
my education in the 80s and well anyway
I won't go into for that but artists
have an ability to pursue ideas in a
kind of crystalline concentrated ways
that we only dream of
I think as architects and so using them
as models using their practice as models
the integrity of their pursuit the
concentration of ideas I had the
opportunity to work with Richard Serra
to cite his piece Joe and the first
museum I didn't st. Louis and thinking
about his process and the discipline and
the rigor of working in a single medium
for his whole career and the
breakthroughs literal breakthroughs and
and that he's encountered working with
an Hamilton on projects unrealized and
and having the chance to work with Doug
akin there's this house we did in
Dutchess County and I would they have
450 acres it's humble - humble estate
and significant art collectors and they
invited Doug that come up to the land to
walk the site and think about where he
might sign a piece and he wanted to meet
me and I told him what the we were in
design in the house and I told him this
idea of this kind of visceral glass
house with clear and transparent and
edged glass and how we were trying to
sort of mirror and dissolve into the
landscape and the light on the surface
would change the reading of the house
and he got very excited and he decided
to film the landscape basically do what
the house couldn't do or do what the
house was trying to do only better he
filmed the landscape for a year and then
projected it we sat at 16 projectors and
when the Sun Goes Down and you flipped
the switch
basically the landscape is reflected
back on the house and this incredible
incredible 20 minute 20 minute video
where the house truly dissolves
but decontextualized in time and season
so back to working back to a way of
working a way of investigating with us
there's a kind of urgent search for what
the architecture can do what it can
reveal and I think that's an important
concept when you know what can
architecture add to a conversation of a
place or an activity industry or
structure or just a general
understanding and so this is just a
little short vignette where I got this
project I kind of laugh about this but
it's true so I got this project to do
the guest house for that main house
before the main house was built walk the
site deciduous forests I'd never really
worked or even been in a deciduous
forest I come from a place of conifer
forests that suck all the light out of
the world just these black holes right
these kind of mystical black
environments and I walked the site in
the snow
and all of these beautiful black lines
of the trunk of trees and I just wanted
to weave the house into that gorgeous
composition of drawings that was there
and it led to a steel structure that
attempted to do that and then led to a
house that whoa through that landscape
with a series of inverted cantilever so
I won't go into that and ended up being
filled with glass and wood panels and
then planted with that bed affirms by a
michael van valkenburg which which
amplified the the whole perception of
this thing weaving through the forest so
all of those tools of the you know the
the drawing to try to understand that
context and and how we might heighten
the sense of that in experience of that
place the models and of course the
architecture itself are integrated and
it's an integrated search in scale and I
think that's what's been fascinating to
me fascinating to me of late and it's
really interesting we got to do the
furniture and plates and all of the
small bits of the new restaurant at
Eleven Madison Park and working in that
scale and understanding what those
things mean to the body and the hand and
the eye and at the same time working in
monumental structure which you'll see
shortly and understanding how different
all of those endeavors are but but we
started a project initiated by talking
to curators and directors that we had
been working with in museums who who
would see things you know see these
sketches see these concept models as we
call them see these bits of our visual
inquiry in the office and they always
said we should have a show and I never
intended them to be shown they're really
our work product they're not even
presentation products they're where they
were they were for us I never really I
mean I never had the confidence to show
that to a client and say this is the
beginning of your building although I've
done it now we've lost a lot of projects
because of that I'll show you some so
they found you know they would see all
these bits and so they said you know you
should do the show and and finally kind
of back to what nadir was implying there
I thought in this time of image making
of instant products of architecture you
know there's the skills of many of you
out there that can make these beautiful
things that look like buildings in a
matter of weeks it's extraordinary
it takes me a long time to make
something that looks at a building and
so to begin with you know I do those
charcoal sketches we do these models in
glass or porcelain or or bronze and in
some cases we do those models to try to
find where the architecture is and can
do and so they're they're sort of
investigations of scale of the potential
of architecture and so thinking about a
show finally again is a kind of
counterpoint maybe to many many of the
inquiries in architecture going on today
I thought of I thought that these are
our tools these bits and pieces that are
all around the office and in boxes it's
really the tools that we use to try to
make architecture to find architecture
to understand architecture so the idea
that we could design some tool cases
right that you wouldn't take these as
pristine objects of art but you'd
present them as the things that we use
to try to find understanding and insight
you know take things this is the model
for yeah this is sort of like how to
lose projects by the way you can kind of
take cautionary tale here this is a
model for the Canton Ollie Museum and
lose on project that we lost I don't
know why it's walnut and its gilt its
gilt walnut this is a model in porcelain
and chopped up pencils that was
reflecting the nature of the landscape
in Wisconsin for a Kohler Kohler Art
Museum and this is the real loser here
this I got so excited about this it's a
thousand foot long porch for UC Santa
Cruz at the edge of a meadow at the edge
of the redwoods looking out to the ocean
at the ocean and it's a it's a thread
model as you can see which then ends up
potentially or have the potential of
ending up in a timber structure that
threaded along the landscape charcoal
models of things that unfold this was
the this was a project
for a museum and come back then ended up
having a concept model in bronze that
ended up in a building design which
again lost and then this actually ended
up did ended up in a building concept
model for the kind of stacking and
compression of earth and a carving out
of light sort of holes of light and
occupation and it ended up in a winery
in my home state of Oregon so developing
these these tool kits or these tool
cases for the for these bits to sort of
gather together to gather them together
and present them we made five boxes
there roughly three feet high three feet
square and each of these boxes has an
operation they're either mirrored or
unfolding and they imply a sense of the
infinite that this this toolkit in this
exploration and the in these bits kind
of go on forever things that continually
unfold or on flap drawers that you push
in and push out the other side all of
these pieces that's a peepshow piece
actually where you can see a concept
model in context by looking through
looking through that little people and
then thinking about how to engage these
these pieces and present these pieces to
people in a museum developing a series
of frames kind of portals that would
hold these and elevate these to eye
level and that you would walk through a
series of portals and engage these the
these pieces we made all those walnut
boxes in the office and we did not make
the steel frames themselves but just the
the act of bringing our thinking to
pieces of that scale which we had never
done you know outside of the outside of
the architecture and inviting people in
than to have a relationship with these
somewhat ambiguous objects you know that
very few of them are visually
referential of building so the kind of
questions that it creates about what
these things are and where they lie in
this world of exploration and ideas and
for making and materiality and craft
there's kind of a moment there I think
that's prescient you know that has
everything to do
with how we think and try to find and
try to be inspired it's so interesting
in doing those things because you're
trying to concentrate an idea in a way
you're similar to some of those Ava has
pieces and other things that you you see
these kind of concentrations of ideas
that will inspire you then to the next
scale things that you can't do in
digital drawing you know doing models
that that bring so much more information
to the conversation that a charcoal
drawing yet yet precede anything that
you can possibly produce an
architectural drawings they're kind of
like markers along the way in the search
and sometimes we double back we can be
in design development and do a concept
model because we feel like we're losing
losing the pursuit in the complexities
of the process the National Music Center
of Canada has finished a few years ago
on that empty site in the middle of
their illustrious illustrious context
you know in the East Village area this
was one of those buildings which we've
gotten a couple Commission's to try to
regenerate and make a portal to a
neighborhood that is actually working
and redeveloping but our site is on both
of those corners that old hotel in the
lower corner there was we kind of
renovated and rebuilt and then bridged
across the street but that was the
context this is the first time where I
took a concept model I got I had to sew
a little sorry about this so we were
trying to do this concept model to take
to the interview and we had renderings
and other stuff too but I wanted to show
again I mean I don't know why I thought
someone could understand this but we
were trying to do this concept model
five story towers each of them with a
different life some performance some
exhibitions some education and we were
doing these things that looked far too
architectural and I said why can't we go
get a musical instrument and just cut it
up and and the earnest interns in my
office went to Goodwill bought a
trombone cut it up cast it and milled it
and it was one of the most extraordinary
things it was like two days later the
first of those bits showed up and I
thought we I thought we had something
there so that went to the that you know
it takes a certain kind of client that
can see that you know they want to know
it so it is our building a big hole
made of brass and and what the hell is
that thing but but there are people who
can engage the potential of that and
realize that it's a process of
exploration so after we got the project
I didn't want it to be autonomous bits
of five-story towers I wanted to tie it
together I wanted it to feel like one
experience that the in-between and all
of the activities in those in those
towers would be would be held together
by one one thing so using paper to try
to find you know quick studies and again
shows the range of exploration here
wanting to do things quicker than what
we can we didn't have drawings to do
anything digital with so working in
paper then we worked in museum board and
it became much too difficult and then
moving into digital model thinking of
how these things can engage structurally
in touch and finally this is not CNC
milled this has actually laminated
pieces of wood that we're all cut coming
to these two systems of structure one
where the the towers start is orthogonal
and move to touch at the bottom and
create giant transfer beams of 160 feet
to create lobbies and common spaces one
system that is orthogonal then at the
bottom rises up to the top and touches
creates the transfer spans that allow it
to bridge the streets and then suspend
on the right the the structure over the
auditorium space and those two systems
then interweave spatially in section
very hard to describe digital model
trying to show that you can imagine
trying to explain it to people and I'll
get to that in a minute so then there is
the issue of cladding this building and
being a museum and needing to be
thermally broken it's hard to have
museums with exposed structure although
I've done it a couple times and this one
in Calgary with the requirements of the
extreme weather and we cloud it and so I
wanted to similar to the Museum of Arts
and Design here I wanted to use a
material that would ink
and reflect and change with the light
the northern prairie is an extraordinary
extraordinary environment and the Sun
angles that there are so different than
what we're used to so we went and worked
again with royalty she'll are the Dutch
company that we worked with mad trying
to develop to glaze one earthen glaze
that would kind of hold this building to
the site this undeveloped site and then
a glaze and so we ended up doing this
kind of hematite slate glaze and then a
glaze that would catch the light for the
inside I mean it's Avoca at brass
modeling by the way so then the inside
is the light came down between these
inter woven structures it would change
with the quality of light and that's the
building actually so the orthogonal
surfaces of the street or the slate and
when the building breaks into those
forms and those transfer structures it
catches the light
with what I call the Platinum glaze so
the building itself you see the
orthogonal structure and that's the
lobby where number 1 is and the dashed
lines being these enormous transfer
beams where those pieces touch and
create this kind of woven space you look
up into the auditorium to the
performance space that's the suspended
structure the floors itself already
beginning to switch geometries and then
touching at the top to create the
bridges and the things that I spoke of
and when you look up from the ground
floor you see these things move in
section and as you move through the
space you sense that kind of that kind
of volume and you're in a kind of
netherworld you know it's it's an
incredible thing there's landscape in
southern Alberta called the hoodoos
these beautiful carved sandstone columns
that are carved by the wind that are
quite extraordinary and what I was
attempting to do was to create an
internal landscape that in between those
intense experiences of music you would
be in this place of silence that created
its own sense of wonder and its own
sense of connection to the outside where
the natural light comes down and
views to the outside through the
building and then that reflection on
that on that Platinum glaze and we
worked with acoustic engineers as the
music comes up for the performance space
it resonates but all there's a pretty
complex acoustic designed to all of
those surface and the gapping of the
tiles so the building itself
I had actually met David Byrne when he
did the play the building thing down at
the port he designed that thing and it
inspired me to think that you know this
performance space could could actually
play the building silence in in control
of light in the in the towers themselves
with a lot of interactive music
experiences and then back out in those
gaps as you move up and down the stairs
and see across and see through it see
glimpses of people and you're kind of
lost in this internal landscape of music
a little bit about drawing we didn't
know how to draw this we did not have
Revit we did not have any of those
things so combining grasshopper and
Rhino and basically doing our own 3d
modeling of the entire space that then
became we like to do it the hard way
here and Alan works became the digital
model that all of the other sub
consultants and engineers used
the cliff it's still museum I'll talk a
little bit more now about I mean that
was now it's really about structure and
surface and the surface and its role in
playing the light and what the light
does to change and amplify your
perception of things cliff it's still
museum when we won that commission you
know I knew his paintings quite well I
was very excited about getting it and
and those incredibly powerful powerful
paintings now not only had most of them
never been seen and that he did not
choose to sell them but they had never
been seen in natural light so Denver
being a prairie town not a mountain town
is the common misconception 300 days of
sunlight a year that intense feeling of
surface I wanted to bring the light down
to the surface and really embed the
building if you will in the earth and
really kind of hold it with the earth
hold it with the surface of the prairie
and invite that light and these are
sketches I did before the interview and
this concept model this actually came
before chronologically before before the
National Music Center this concept model
I took to the interview compressed
charcoal laminated rods of Plexiglas to
show where the light penetrates the
building and then these rooms filled
with light and again you know she's
showing this you know to the client with
both challenging but it resonated in
this case so then winning the Commission
what do you do looking for how to ground
this and bind it to the site I wanted to
embed the whole building in a grove of
trees which was a response to this
neighborhood being quite austere and and
not a lot of shade and I wanted to find
the building through the landscape
through the grove of trees so doing that
sketch doing a section sketch coming
back to a concept model later in the
process really just routing out this
this piece from this was actually a
piece of wood we had in the basement in
Oregon where the building and the trees
are won and you never release the goal
is you never see the building as an
object you just encounter it in the kind
of shade and shadow patterns
of the trees which then led to the
surface of the building which we'll talk
about thinking about the structure and
iteration is everything trying to find
knowing a cup knowing a collection
knowing the scale of the work knowing
how many pieces they want to show not
having to do flexible you know flexible
reinterpret able art space which is very
rare
making rooms of concrete choosing
concrete I actually initially wanted to
make the building out of casts obsidian
you know the black glass and actually
sourced something in Brazil but there
was technical problems to the binding of
the glass and the concrete and also
probably environmental problems of
shipping and huge amounts of stone from
Brazil but so we chose concrete to embed
it to the earth and did all of the
sketches we did about 150 of these
museum board models just thinking about
how the structure stacks and the kind of
open Network and with the goal of always
seeing through the volume getting a
sense of the entire collection creating
that sense of wonder and the labyrinth
and getting and holding in your mind the
whole collection itself
well embedding it to the earth so just a
series of simple volumes and then in
section wanting to rise to the light
back to that concept model with with a
luminous ceiling thinking of a way to
rise to the light it was really
interesting we did endless studies of
how to bring you know looking at every
museum precedent we could how to bring
this light in you know clear stories
scrims and I wasn't happy with the
quality and and I we were we were
looking at the building and the the
surface of the building was was engaging
light through the shadows and the
textures and patterns of the walls but
the ceiling was just making windows and
making skylights and so I said why can't
we just perforate the concrete and and
and we did working with Arab engineers
so there's a series of lineal skylights
above a concrete slab sigh cast concrete
slab with aperture is designed to
diffuse the natural light evenly across
the valley across the galleries but also
penetrate down into the open storage and
so down below in the darker spaces you
sense people walking these gaps and
these bridges and the light coming down
and you're really drawn up to the
gallery floors in into the light there's
a there's an order of which walls are
exposed concrete and which ones are
white plaster getting the client to
allow us to hang that art on exposed
concrete walls took some efforts but we
finally convinced him that it would
actually amplify the presence of the art
and set it set it off and then looking
for a palette of light that had a kind
of obscure geometry and you can see how
it kind of almost dissolves into a water
pattern from certain things and it was
just our our attempt to to make both the
patterning of the form work and the
patterning of the light apertures
disappear in the context of the work so
the design of the building would would
be less present in the in the experience
wanting the building to be massive
wanting it to be present this was during
the recession so we had a concrete
contractor that had nothing to do but
work with us and think about how we
would place concrete and placing
concrete in a way that we couldn't
control the outcome that was my ultimate
goal doing lifts of Rosse sand and
gravel adding salt which given the
reinforcing steel inside the concrete
wasn't the best idea but trying to find
ways that would interact chemically with
the concrete that would interact with
the pouring of the concrete finally
ending up was just interacting with the
with the forming of the concrete shag
carpet was one of our best ideas I
thought that we never used but but
ending up at boards that deform that
don't stand up to the pressure that do
things that we couldn't control and/or
then liquid that would pass through the
gaps and break off and that's what we
ended up with ended up doing was gapping
the concrete in ways that we could not
control the breakage in the end which is
very difficult to convince contractors
to do to basically break the up the
Sode of your building in a random and
uncontrolled way but we developed a
system of gaps and slots that then
created these these patterns of shadow
in the end the intent of this building
from the very start for me is that the
building give create light and give
light so whether it's light in the
evidence of shadows or light in the
apertures and always have a sense of
changing perception depending on the
quality of light in the aperture studies
so this was an inspiration for both the
apertures and the building itself I
wished the concrete building could be a
series of undulating interlocking spaces
and rooms like that this amazing
porcelain piece by Ava Hills
extraordinary thing I still know how
they're made actually ups and then
thinking about it relative to to the
apertures themselves trying to find a
patterning that didn't represent a
geometric reading and then working with
Arab engineers and the structural
engineers of course to come up with that
everything about the building the depth
of the concrete the apertures of the
concrete is all about diffusing the
light into the space and ultimately
giving a kind of shadowless shadowless
space shadowless volume
unbuilt projects a few years ago we were
one of two finalists for the
contemporary wing at the Met
extraordinary opportunity extraordinary
sites and it's it's redoing the American
wing on the upper right corner you know
dealing with an incredible collection
adding to that legacy of beautiful rooms
beautiful qualities of light trying to
find what we can we can offer connect to
the park connect to the city obviously
back to the to the collections of the
museum's itself
concept model of inviting the park in
extending the building out and then
bringing natural light down in those
gaps into into the building the three
stories of the building itself and then
wanting structure and light to be one
again so bringing the struck the light
down with the structure we developed a
series of concrete fins and transfer
beams probably too technical for this
talk where the structure stops creates
larger than volumes of gallery and then
also diffuses the light as it as it
moves through the exhaustive study again
with Arab thinking about the quality of
light and how much light actually can
get down to those three floors how we
amplify it
the building itself opening a new
entrance to the park and really again in
inviting the city in and that's what
they here that you see the structure
both transferring and traveling through
those gaps where the natural light comes
in down down 3 and then eventually four
floors so a series of slots filled with
structure and transfer beams at which
which become clear stories one and two
floors in and then creating a different
context on every floor depending on the
quality of light and the control of the
natural light for the curators and the
collection and each each gallery having
the possibility of different lights so
not only as are there different scaled
rooms they're different qualities of
light that the curators can use and
control and then the facade itself
filtering the west light from the park
connecting to the park giving a sense of
presence to the park and becoming a lens
in
and of dealing with that Westlife how to
take it and control it and defuse it and
we developed a series of cast glass
panels that could have different layers
of translucency opacity and texturing to
both amplify modified diffuse the light
going into the building and also give
you a sense of the life and activity of
the of the museum itself from from the
park again the structural fins exposed
on the south side of the building and
again the kind of ever-changing
qualities of that of that surface some
other projects that embassy project
which is under construction now I can't
remember the chronology but close to the
time of the Clippers steel or just after
that understanding it's kind of an
amazing thing where the the SkyDome data
from for the whole globe exists now so
we can design a building that invites in
natural light and control the quality of
that light you know on a kind of average
on this surface you know on November
25th and we can work with the engineers
to design that in control that is an
extraordinary thing so this site is on
the ocean the Indian Ocean it's for 450
government workers all different all
different US agencies this was part of
the design excellence I think this was
this the second project after the London
project and simple bars which are sort
of prescribed by the by the functions
and inside by their by the State
Department's opening them up for views
out as you travel between those office
blocks opening up to the views of the
ocean and then creating this skin that
controls the the sunlight in the
workspace itself the section
transparency was part of the mission
wanting these buildings to not be these
fortress you know while responding to
all the security issues not not winning
they become fortresses so transparency
up into the workings even if you don't
are invited aren't invited in through
the security barriers and then
transparency back to the landscape and
wanting the building to open up to the
views and the light and the amazing
amazing context itself so creating a
structural screen with bomb blast
redundancy and using this this data to
create basically a four-foot beeps
aerated concrete skin with apertures
designed to let Sun in or sorry to
prevent Sun from coming in during work
hours so creating these very large
openings whose geometry and depth are
set by the data and some of them you can
see I'm almost a meter and a half these
are large openings very large openings
and they can face South and West and
East and no Sun comes in nine o'clock to
four o'clock it's an extraordinary thing
so each facade has its own geometry has
its own structural qualities applied
then to the surface of the building
so choose to structural projects kind of
pure structural projects current current
things this what this was very fun I I
have children that play soccer won
professionally so I've been a quite a
soccer fan and I I'm from Portland
Oregon for any of you that follow the
MLS they they win a few national
championships so I invited out the owner
for a drink because I'd never been
around anybody that won a national
championship and I just wanted to bask
in the glow and I and I asked them what
they're going to do with the stadium
this is not the stadium I asked what
they're gonna do with the stadium are
they gonna move to the suburbs that you
know how are they gonna grow and pay for
these players and you know you know in a
league that is growing very very quickly
and they wanted to stay in the city and
so I volunteered to do a study I never
you know to museums and animation
studios things like that and I
volunteered to do a study for them and
it's a landlocked state and I'll show
you in a second and we found this
stadium the Bombonera in Argentina
that's landlocked and this piece over to
the right this vertical what I call
Shakespearean sort of soccer stadium and
we proposed it then for for the Timbers
and the curve bid is the existing
building the bid at the bottom is the
piece we did which is four stories of
vertical vertical stands which become
the structure of this enormous 150 foot
cantilever so it's vertical seats with
eight or ten rows and then a very very
large very large canopy that we wrap
over a very simple concrete frame and
tie it back to the street so looking for
a quality of that structure looking for
in order to that structure trying to
make something diaphanous that sort of
floats in the mist and fog of the city
of Portland Oregon looking at braids and
weaves all kinds of different ways of
thinking about structure and again this
in an industry that uses very simple
truss work most of the time it's an
emerging it's an emerging league but
anyway trying to find something to
sooo to allow us to think of the
presence of the structure in the space
so weaving together this piece allowing
it to be assembled making them integral
in some way and then all tied back tied
back to the street itself with East with
these tension members and that's where
the design is today and it starts
construction momentarily actually in the
next in the next month the last bit
the National Veterans Memorial and
Museum I could talk quite a while about
dealing with this idea of a memorial for
veterans what it means this project was
inspired by Senator John Glenn before he
passed away where and I think this is
what really drew me to the projects in
Columbus Ohio where he's from Ohio but
his his desire was to to make him a
memorial in a museum that elevated the
idea of service and I had been thinking
about that quite a bit
in my life and career and the notion of
we as a culture giving something beyond
ourselves and our own interest and how
you know without organized religion with
with various political views of military
service how we were losing the sense of
importance of that so got to work with
Ralph Appelbaum to develop a museum and
memorial that talks about that idea uses
military to talk about not war but the
idea of service and sacrifice so the
site itself very very large site very
small building 30,000 square feet I
think it got a little bit bigger so I
looked at how to mark that surface how
to hold the ground how to occupy that
space with a building that was kind of
too small to do that so began by just
carving the earth and lifting up the
earth creating a ceremonial pathway from
the park in the street what I call a
processional up to this sanctuary where
they have memorials
you know decommissioning things all
kinds of different events and services
welcoming service people home this kind
of rooftop amphitheater if you will
place a reflection quiet place to be in
the city it's right across the river
from from downtown but that was really
the design and you know there was no
really museum under it and there was no
really structure on it in the beginning
it was just this idea of lifting the
earth up from the surface of this of
this park so thinking how to create the
structure
you know creating 30-foot spans sort of
moving from the outside to the inside
this are porcelain porcelain models how
to interweave these layers as you enter
into the space and kind of spin in from
from the landscape the idea of the
building being lifted from the earth and
sort of torn from the earth and resulted
in these studying concrete again very
large cantilever and concrete arches
about 165 285 feet that weave together
and they're Cattleya written that they
lean outwards so they have to be held
together by a very large tension ring at
the roof and these that was the early
studies of trying to rationalize them
and then modify them with the rise of
the ramp and the rise and fall of the
spaces inside the galleries and then
working with the engineers on that
system we went through a couple
engineers very difficult thing to
engineer and build and everything that's
orange and red basically says you're
screwed so yeah as we as architects do
all these nice four foot deep beams they
suddenly become eight in tandem and nine
and the things that they actually need
to do but it was extremely challenging
there's an egg's oak there's also
another anecdote with this project we
worked with a pre-selected contractor a
concrete builder and we were all on
board and they got to the final final
price in the final you know a month away
from construction of the concrete
contractor quit it was too complex they
didn't want to build it and we couldn't
find anybody to build the building and
it's a crazy position to be when you can
I mean it's complex enough to draw on
design you know incredibly complex
engineer and it was a lesson for me that
you can conceive of things that maybe no
one wants to build you know you're kind
of a head of the industry you know you
know why would they do that when they
can go out to the suburbs and build some
you know whatever they build out there
you know and so for two months we had we
had no contractor we had no one to do
this so we finally found someone who
would build the building and
it opens in about it opens in about nine
months so you can see the three rings of
concrete that kind of fold apart you can
kind of slip in and move between them
these arches that that move inside and
you move through the ramp and through
the entrance there you can see the doors
and then rise up both inside and outside
through the three floors to the roof and
it's kind of an incredible thing that's
just beginning to do the steel there's
in some of the areas there's 11 layers
of rebar it's basically a textile
building I should have made the building
out of thread see that's why we should
have I should have done that but it
essentially isn't really really truly
and conceptually a textile building it's
it's woven with with reinforcing steel
it's just held by the concrete these are
photos from a month or so ago looking
through the different layers and of
course the light changes as it comes in
the glass isn't in yet those openings
but those would be the openings with the
curving of the concrete the light
continually changes from dark to light
and you're just held and woven in this
this structural body and I still can't
believe we got this bill sighs the truth
kind of an amazing
amazing thing
so
the nature of the investigation I just
want to wrap up with it with a couple
thoughts on that you know I care very
deeply about architecture I think it has
a absolutely unique voice in the kind of
cultural of making and and and what it
can communicate and what it could imply
what perceptions it can present it does
things that no other art and no other
medium does but I think the care the
careful thought in what it can and
should and could do is absolutely
critical because when it's not
considered carefully it demeans
architecture it demeans its ability to
it diminishes its ability to communicate
it diminishes its value in our culture
it's much more than a commodity and it
has tremendous tremendous potency but
it's only as potent as as as the
intention that goes into it and thus you
see you know are perhaps way too labored
and way too long of Investigations but
it is only in hopes that the
architecture can bring something can
bring a voice to a community or a place
or or an activity of life that nothing
else can so thank you for coming
[Applause]
I'd love to take some questions if there
are any questions
maybe there's no questions didn't we
hire someone to be a shill here and ask
them
yeah yeah
No
[Music]
yeah yeah
[Music]
yeah
it was it's not easy you know it's
interesting I think I mean uh my
practice is really modeled on art
practice I mean you look at the process
right it's it's just about pursuing the
ideas right and and we've become very
skilled architects so we know how to
draw them you know and we know how to we
know how to push the edge of the
possible now right and sometimes you go
too far and that had never occurred to
me never ever occurred to me right and
and there's a there's a convention you
know there's an industry of conventions
we don't just get to make amazing things
in the studio and go out to the foundry
in all those wonderful things we get to
do it in the content model so you know
we have to in you know you have to
gather in a hundred and fifty two
hundred people and you know 50 million
dollars to build this build these things
so it's it's it's it's given us pause as
an office frankly it really it really
has I mean I won't name names but
there's a lot of architects we compete
against that do boxes you know and I
would probably save my office years of
off their lives if I would just do boxes
because you know it's it's really hard
when you they're risk involved in this I
had never thought about risk yeah the
actual risk of this structure which you
know we couldn't even find people to
engineer initially in how to build it
and what its gonna do you know standing
up there for ten years my god that's
night terror for me forever right it's
you there's a limit there is a limit and
I think between the National Music
Center in this yeah I don't know it's
it's it's an interesting it's an
interesting point because we got you
know we got it built right but that's a
that's a different form of Mimi would be
a very small office that this is all we
did and so there's choices you have to
make to if you're gonna just pursue this
kind of you know always trying to press
forward with what you think is the right
thing and what's inspired by the place
and the contact
and the ideas of the content and try to
bend in something you know you have to
you have to have a client that'll do the
risk which is extremely rare right I
mean this we had less Wexner as the main
patron behind this and he happens to be
a fan of architecture so he was engaged
in a trade him so I mean you really you
can't do this kind of work outside of a
patronage culture I think it's really
what it comes down to who can go there
because yeah what happens if we couldn't
find someone to bill I mean you know
there was two months I get kept getting
phone calls and so we just went all over
the region trying to find people and
bring in people we've been all over the
East Coast and found a company to
actually do it who is amazing who was
who was up for it and didn't charge us
exorbitantly actually I mean more than
we had planned but not crazy there's
that
nobody nobody's done something's I mean
not I'm not trying I mean yeah nobody
but they were up they were excited by it
I mean you know builders love to build
amazing things but again it takes a
person who has the capacity for risk
when you don't know how to build it yeah
you know how to design it you know the
engineer you know they draw it but no
one knows how to build it
said it
haha
scale is the hardest thing especially
working in structure
I remember the st. Louis Art Museum give
every rat museum first Museum I did kind
of woven concrete structural walls big
deep walls to stories player came and
Blair came in from Chicago to beam this
is one of the days when there were
architecture critics I think he's still
writing you might be one of two or three
left but this is a day of art architects
critics and he said something about it
was one of the smallest some summer mark
about how the building was so small yet
so monumental in the monumentality and
the size were off and it was just a
knife to the heart because he was
absolutely absolutely right and I think
dealing in structure when structure is
the generator of form and the kind of
primary perception of the space how you
find your body you know how you as an
individual can find yourself and occupy
that place and be comfortable is
extremely challenging and it's it's
really really really hard it's really
hard to learn it requires the secondary
scale things being important
you know the detailing finishes and
materiality and the railings and all
those things have to kind of hold you in
that volume because these volumes are
landscape I mean these that's a
landscape piece you know is designed as
a landscape piece so the design is you
know to occupy a site that you know
acres and how do you come in there and
have an intimate relationship with some
families loss you know in more time and
how do you get that sense of intimacy in
that is extreme which it takes
everything it takes all elements of the
conversation
yes I love that question because it's
really challenging it's part of the
thing we do with the concept models is
their projections of scale I mean if you
think about what we do as architects
it's totally nutty
it's just nutty right someone gives us a
hundred million dollars god knows to
make up something that no one knows what
it is right oh you can't and they can
never see it right I mean you can do a
rendering but you still you you have no
idea what you're doing
it's incredible it's just the most
incredible leap of faith that people
make in this profession I mean if you
really think about how nutty it is not
looks like nothing else it's like
nothing else and so the responsibility
is just enormous enormous enormous
Oh
yeah
that's a really hard question I think
the my inspiration in architecture came
early right
it came in with wanting to work in scale
I think I began with growing up in the
landscape in the West Coast and being
awestruck by beautiful powerful Western
landscape and so the scale of
architecture I think linked up with that
sensibility and then in younger days you
know studying learning from architects
you know going to beautiful buildings
and amazing spaces and and believing
learning and believing about believing
the power of architecture of the medium
itself through all of these amazing
buildings and so it gave me the
confidence it gave me the reference and
the memory of some of these spaces
knowledge when you really try to
understand how they achieved it and now
I just look for inspiration now you know
now now I think I look and I think about
architecture but I think mostly about
ideas and and just possibilities and
just take it where it comes I think in
that way and it's agnostic I mean it was
really interesting what set me free in
some ways the first book I did
occupation I talked to various makers
and I talked to Anne Hamilton Doug akin
and other people about their process
their pursuit and the commonality of
ideas in investigations and concerns I
was really just set free you know it's
not you know it's what we do and what we
the world of ideas is out there and open
and everyone's involved in the
conversation and it kind of set me free
in a way from architecture I guess or
allowed me to just think of architecture
as part of a conversation of every
medium but again with its own scale its
own voice so its own mission I don't
know if I'm answering answering your
question no it's not but it's not a
voice
it really isn't avoidance it's really
not I swear yeah somewhere in the office
is
well they kind of do
okay-y I remember I'm just I'm not I'm
just trying to get it what it I don't
know if I just don't know if I think of
it the same way you're asking but let me
Larry so Kraft has mattered
well buildings matter building beautiful
buildings matters to me more than
anything and beautiful in a way I mean
that there's so considered that they
carry value and if you give me a hundred
million dollars I give you something
that holds the value of that to that
city and that cultural institution so
craft is everything to me and you
building beautifully and building in a
way that lasts and matters and
communicates that kind of intention and
and I that has imbued the practice
forever from from the beginning I think
that ethic of it and it's also allowed
us to do these kinds of speculative what
I when we did be very candid here when
we did Clifford steel Museum I was
awestruck by the people in my office
our ability to detail to figure out how
to build that building for fifteen
million dollars it was so cheap and the
resonance of that building and the
quality of the detail index and the
innovation it was just amazing and it
gave me the confidence what gave me the
confidence to do this for better or
worse right so kind of mastery of the
language right in a way that allows me
to imagine things I never could imagine
imagine responses that I couldn't do
comes from the confidence of the my
studio my people the people in my office
give me the confidence to know that we
can do this so there's a there's a
practice intent very rooted I guess in
architecture and we want to build I
think that's the other thing too I don't
want to design things that don't get
built I have no interest in that I want
to build these things so
trying to find that spot that seemed you
know what they actually built it is huge
and I think again a lot of knowledge
over the last 30 years of where that is
and how we can push it just a couple
couple steps yeah because we're makers I
mean I the buildings are intended to be
built
speaking of great difficulty
the authority
[Music]
[Music]
but I I so what I've told people my
office forever is we have to do
everyone's job for them so part of the
responsibility of designing these things
is you have to know how to convince the
city and convince the patrons and you
know it's part of the design it's it's
all part of the design you know to
design these things and just put it out
there in the world you would fail you
would just hold or you'd be extremely
lucky you know you or you have the
gravitas of a Frank Lloyd Wright to do
that I mean gravitas goes a long way but
but you have to design the process you
know we we we I knew the engineering
possibilities of this is the only way we
got it built I knew it was though I knew
you could engineer this I knew the
principles that we were pursuing I
didn't just make a funny shape and say
someone engineer it you know I made a
shape that I knew had structural
qualities that I knew we could do so you
just have to do you just have to you
have to own the process all
we encounter that at every level every
day goodbye everyone
yeah but you just have to be seen your
you have to be smarter than them you
have to be smart you have to look out
for them someone says no because they're
afraid so you have to figure out how to
make them comfortable you have to
protect them that's what it really is
you have to protect people and then
they'll take a risk with you if they
feel like you're looking out for them
you know when I was younger I would just
fight with everybody but I think every
bar but know if you make people safe
then they'll come with you take some
work but yeah it's funny rather than
fighting which was my natural tendency
empathy
you know empathy for these people goes a
lot farther took me a long time
that's nice
thank you thank you very much thank you
[Applause]
