it is so much for having me it's a small
audience and I understand that many of
you have had very busy days I've just
gone to the museum at the dog today so I
haven't had a very stressful day at all
but it was very amusing so I'm gonna try
and be as entertaining as I can and and
keep your weight even though that might
sacrifice some of the kind of academic
language so that is that okay you go the
lightweight version so I want to give
you a little bit of context for where I
am today in my head so some of you might
be aware that there are massive
bushfires on the east coast of Australia
when I mentioned this to the person I'm
staying with it in their air B&B he said
oh whatever always burns there and he
didn't quite understand my anxiety so
this is the map of all the fires that
are currently burning in New South Wales
this is from actually yesterday and I'm
particularly interested in this by here
which is this one and the reason that
I'm very interested in it very
preoccupied and concerned about it is I
have a property right here so as you can
see it's moved down this valley and it's
probably a mile from our property my
concern is not just about our property
we are in the middle of building a house
there and it's just the concrete slabs
and some steel lying around so we would
lose as much as other people at the
moment the concern is that when we
bought that property we bought it
because it was the wettest place in the
state so this is upper Cooper's Creek
this is our Creek this is our beach and
it gets 91 inches of rain a year so that
is more than Hawaii which is the us is
whether state Hawaii gets 63 inches
Seattle which where I've spent quite a
bit of time only gets 30
in chess and when I was in Seattle I
thought it rained on stop so this is a
very very wet place it's subtropics it
usually looks like this it rains all the
time so what's burning there at the
moment is rainforest and this is the
first time that that forest has ever
burned in its entire history not just a
wide occupation so I think we're all
going to have these moments over the
next few decades of now it's really
close to me not just fire but the impact
of climate change and the Australian
government instead of their a
Conservative government at the moment
instead of recognizing this as an
opportunity to gather people and and
enact some change have consistently
denied that climate change is behind
these fires even though we all this
scientific evidence is there what
interest me in these political argument
is that everything that we will do to
over the next few weeks to recover from
the fires and deal with the fires while
they're on relies on scientific progress
on scientific knowledge that's been
developed in laboratories whether that
is skin grafts of people that are being
burned
whether that's called veterinary
treatment for the thousands of koalas
have been who have been burned all of
this is scientific knowledge which has
been developed in laboratory buildings
and yet on the other
and scientific knowledge some aspects of
scientific knowledge are considered
controversial so science is at a very
interesting point it's been in a very
difficult point of thing for the last
five decades of trying to persuade
people about scientific knowledge so
we've had the science Wars we've had a
lot of a lot of discussion of science as
culturally constructed or socially
constructed and that's been incredibly
useful and good work from people like
Brent on the two but then we have others
who are manipulating their argument for
their own ends
so the laboratory building because of
where science is at is a significant the
twenty-first century as the cathedral
was - the 13th or the 14th centuries so
scientific knowledge has largely
displaced theology I know that people
who still have religious beliefs but in
many ways science has replaced
philosophical speculation and theology
as a framework for understanding life
and the universe the privileged status
of science is reflected in the policies
that many governments have for
developing research for constructing new
buildings for new precincts for new
campaigns for new research opportunities
and the budgets that have come with the
boat rebuilding over the last two
decades are sufficiently generous for
these buildings to fulfill the
particular ambitions and conceits of
architects clients and occupants indeed
for even the most preposterous ideas and
luxurious fantasies to be realized so we
might learn much about the Biosciences
from architecture for here the
scientists are given their most legible
their most insistent and most nuanced
articulation but I think also as
architects we can learn a lot about
architecture from the laboratory
buildings for fire Sciences we can learn
about its potential its expressive force
its social effects and its Disciplinary
assumptions so architecture is here a
symptom of the forces that work through
and upon it architecture also structures
and produces a desire and plays a part
in the disciplining of subjectivity in
making scientific and scientist
identities and I'm going to come back to
this point so laboratory buildings
architecture is all this and more but
many people however imagine the
laboratories as Lauren's on quoting
Warren's of endless corridors and closed
doors behind which new discoveries are
squirreled away all quoting another
critic and unloved tight with boffins a
thought never to look up from their
experiments or talk to one another so we
still have very stereotyped ideas about
what a scientist is and where they work
that date back I think to that alchemy
alchemy alchemical deliberate training
so this leap from the anonymous prefab
shed housing a functional stack of labs
and pipes to today's architectural
Oedipus's
is much overdrawn indeed new
laboratories are far less concerned with
pragmatics than they are with persuasion
and socialization so when we have a look
at some laboratory buildings we can see
that there are incredible semi public
spaces for socialization collaboration
presentation and persuasion and these
are now taking up a much greater
proportion of the Berkeley buildings
than the wet laboratory spaces these
spaces of platforms for the scientists
to engage in fundraising and
team-building educational research and
outreach media wrangling community
liaison and public relations so we find
in these buildings dramatic atria
sculptural stairs
halation roots incorporating
conversation nooks and views into the
laboratories no longer hidden away
bioscience laboratories now occupy prime
real estate perhaps none more so than
this particular building that part of
the Kermit I'm not going to say that
because there are Spanish people in the
room a PR BB where its scientists played
volleyball on the beach and fortunately
one of the great things about stone
laboratory buildings we've had an
Australian Research Council grant and I
was doing some doing the research with
my colleague Chris Smith and we got to
visit this building and then have a swim
afterwards was one of my favorite field
trips the novelty of the bio science
laboratory today is that architecture is
regarded as a means to achieve
organizational aims architecture is
engaged to recruit star scientists to
inspire young people to embark upon
careers in science and attract
philanthropy and industry partners
it is architecture that sponsors
conversation and collaboration between
scientists and enhances supposedly the
performance and health of employees and
thus accelerates discovery architecture
is charged with engaging and Cokely in
scientific endeavors in this building in
London the scientists are working in the
basement while the pods for the public
us are suspended over the top and you
can look down at the scientists in this
way you meet to understand science so
architecture literally engages the
public through spaces in which adventure
for advancement and Industry
participation might be hosted as well as
by communicating the importance and
supposedly the content of scientific
research these ambitions respond to a
diverse
arrey of ideological and economic forces
encompassing neoliberal concepts of
knowledge work the reification of
innovation and the free market
entrepreneur they also of course respond
to technological change and to shifting
financial institutions and structures
they respond to the corporatization of
universities and the concomitant uptake
of collegial organization industry we
also see the growth of speculative real
estate development in the provision of
science facilities so my investment tip
for any of you if you want to make money
on the stock market is to invest in the
real estate of bioscience laboratories
this isn't that where all the moments
that made belief in science as a means
of addressing aging indeed mortality
itself and other beat problems also
fuels the growth in Biosciences research
every nation-state from Botswana to
Bolivia from Russia to Brazil has
official policies for the promotion of
Biosciences research and development the
priorities have become sites of power
and prestige of faith and ambition they
are places that link nations into the
global trade of scientific knowledge
the contemporary research laboratory has
joined the museum and the Art Gallery is
a building type deserving of a prominent
sight and a signature architect a conic
treatment and civic pride public
investment and private philanthropy so
it used to be that Pritzker Prize
architecture winners got their
Pritzker's after they designed a
laboratory building these days
governments and private corporations
invest in architects have already got
Pritzker prizes every laboratory
architect every laboratory client
declares the same three aspirations so
when you look across numerous laboratory
buildings no matter what they look like
and who's designed them there are three
things that the architects and the
scientists say about them about their
ambitions they say elderly eliminates
boundaries between the public and
between scientists and other scientists
and they do that through transparency
and openness sometimes they go as far as
illuminating the wall between the
laboratory and the writing area with
very strange effects such as this little
meeting room the second thing they say
is that the building will communicate
the potential book benefits and interest
of its research programs the third thing
that is said is that the laboratory
building will foster collaboration
amongst its scientists so if you read
any rhetoric about the very buildings
you'll find that architectural
determinism is alive and well in that
sector they share to a core purpose and
an inner organ the wet lab and this
varies very little this is due to the
constraints that arrived from the
observance of experimental protocols of
complex service requirements the need
for even and bright artificial light
particular kinds of finishes that are
impermeable and corrosive as well as the
standardization of equipment so there's
just like five or six companies that
produce laboratory benches and equipment
and run virus from the same companies
and it's a little bit like an ambulance
you want the scientist if you oughta
walk in no matter what ambulance that is
and the other operator so there's that
standardization of equipment that
happens in the variety buildings so the
pretty much look the same I probably
didn't even need to show you those
images to show you you would have
imagined what they look like and it is
this comparable comparative stasis of
the bench space for experimentation that
has seen laboratories described as all
the same more or less and as
constituting a universal cultural space
yet when we look at the very buildings
they are is irreconcilable as a
transistor radio a cordless shaver or an
electric bicycle those three gadgets all
had batteries but they do completely
different things they look very
different they're all that similar
cleaner workings is the same with
laboratory buildings so we see ones like
these this is the Alexandria Life
Sciences Center it's via Realty science
and it's built as a development police
and other kind of mid-rise towers in
cities this Alexandria vaccine anyone
not its fill me you've seen it yeah good
buildings that are indistinguishable
from the corporate office buildings
around them we see buildings like this
that are pride of place on University
campus we also see laboratory buildings
like this very strange from the Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island
which looks supposedly like a ski
village an alpine village with its
quaint domestic buildings we see that
they vary a great deal in size from a
couple of rooms to major pieces of civic
or here rural infrastructure they can be
found in urban Broward priests
Biosciences precincts rural settings in
coastal resorts and internally the
organization of wet laboratories varies
widely from being stacked vertically
ranged in a horizontal line or radially
located below or high above ground
on display or deeply buried behind other
spaces is if this is the Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory this is the wrong way
to design a laboratory in terms of
efficiency and socialization but then
main objective was to hide the nebari so
that our subterranean it's a very
complex bit of circulation there signage
everywhere so that people don't get lost
even though they've been working there
for some time if we look at a bunch of
laboratory buildings together the blue
is the wet labs you can see how varied
they are in their organization their
circulation to this is again the Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory with its
complex vertical and horizontal our
circulation and a bunch of other
laboratory buildings if we go back to
the analogy of the Cathedral the
Cathedral was was seen to have a kind of
stable time a typology could we say that
laboratory buildings have such a bit
absolutely not there is no Cathedral
ideal wire today's laboratory so
radically different from their modernist
Priuses predecessors and from each other
how do you architectural differences
between laboratories emerge and what are
the effects of these differences
these questions are not unlike those
faced by Charles Darwin on contemplating
the myriad forms of animal and plant
life the puzzle demands more than say
ascribing the turtle shell to its meat
for protection
linking form to function does not
explain how or why the turtle took this
route rather than the articulated
carapace of the lobster or the odd vine
in other words it requires that we ask
about the mechanisms and forces of
change in the entire biosphere Oh sister
so to understand why these laboratories
all look so different and at taking
different directions we need to
understand the relations between them
and the forces upon them we need to
understand the laboratories adaptation
to and fitness for the complex
environments in which it completes for
scientists funds and industry partners
I'm going to unpack that introduction by
looking at just one laboratory building
and this is where the fun begins
so the nobility building that we're
going to look at closely and trying to
see in terms of its its forces upon it
and Wyatt developed the way it did is
the J craig Venter Institute in La Jolla
California who's heard of craig Venter
nobody okay so hey Bentley is like a
rockstar in science he is the one who
decoded that g9 in 1998 craig Venter
provocatively announced that he was
forming a private company that within
three years would unravel the genetic
code of life and so it did seven years
before the complete completion of the
state-funded Human Genome Project
so he got in there first having read the
DNA then to claim that the next stage is
to write it for this he needs a
laboratory and office that persuades
investors for the viability and
consequences of his personal and
organizational mission is this complex
ecosystem of knowledge financial
speculation and architecture the close
examination of the J craig Venter
Institute reveals and makes concrete so
we're going to take seriously the losers
contention that capital is a semiotic
operator an examine how financial
architectural and photographic artifacts
function in biotech business and in the
production of subjectivity and I'm going
to come back to this particular image of
craig venter advertising of watch so the
JCB I it's that's what's it's coming
this its headquarters and laboratories
were designed by Zoomer gunstock Raska
architects a practice that I'd never
heard of but they're a beat practice
founded in Portland Oregon in 1942 the
construction cost was 48 million and zgx
fees for its design in 2013 were seven
hundred and twenty six thousand this was
actually just eighteen thousand more
than Ventus annual salary that year from
the JCB I so he's chosen a are more
lucrative career than you can the firm
is the ninth highest earning
architecture firm in the USA in the
science and technology sector with
revenue in 2013 when this was built of
over ten million dollars
so the location is very much to do with
San Diego inviting prey then to back to
build his institution there he had been
an alumni and of course he was very keen
he was given two sides he chose an
elevated site rather than one that was
closer to the South Institute and he
constructed this building which I'm
going to spend some time analyzing Ted
Holman that la-based
partner at zgf recalls oh sorry it is
unlikely that the architects have read
the errata on immaterial labor
cooperation and the production of
subjectivity by business and state in
advanced capitalism nevertheless the
mottos on their home page suggest that
they understand completely
albe uncritically the imperatives of
their clients the architects serve a
lifestyle discourse that supports the
workplace in neoliberalism and they do
it exceptionally well
Ted home in the LA based partners EDF
recalls that vente wanted a place for
collaboration and breakthrough research
in a high performance facility that
would inspire the design of laboratory
buildings in the future scissors it's
kind of standard stuff that architects
say about their laboratory buildings and
Hammer reports from there and is a
little bit of a meet the idea of a next
zero energy laboratory building was born
at first glance and by the architects
own reckoning the architecture is a
technical response to a set of
performance parameters against which the
building success can be numerically
quantified much of the machinery for
achieving leads
patient eats ostentatiously visible such
as the bicycle racks and the
photovoltaic panels per Vita and I'm
quoting him the Institute's unique
design melds the environmental
philosophies about genomic research
weave sustainability goals this is a
really key point the design melds the
environmental philosophies of our genome
X research with sustainability goals but
in fact Venza has publicly expressed
doubts about the mechanical approach to
sustainability stating I wanted to do
more than just using less oil and gas or
installing a solar panel I thought that
genomics has something unique to offer
but symbolically he needs solar panels
because these research depend on the
recognition of human caused
environmental degradation
Venters research that requires the
identification of problems for which
environmental genomics is the answer he
believes I quote we've reached the stage
where our globe is a hundred percent
dependent on science for its future in
short the design of the JCB I
participates in the social construction
of climate change as a problem to be
solved by more and better science and
technology rather than say behavior
change or political disruption so I'm
sure some of you have seen the site
drawdown right drawdown does not list
human genomics and Venters work as one
of the key top 10 things to do in the
next few years
it's got educating women and girls way
above that
but I man also reports that craig venter
came to us with the goal of designing
the sulk Institute of the 21st century
that says something about his sense of
self
both Jonas Salk and mentor are quite
unusual in being able to occupy while
still alive purpose-built legacy
scientific premises dedicated to their
past contributions and the future
trajectories of their vision but the
Klieman architects the relationship has
not led to architectural experimentation
but rather to quotation so knowing a
little bit about craig Venter is the
rock star of the West Coast science
scene you could imagine other architects
more suitable for him to engage then the
zgf CGS design utilizes the same broad
peak walls and exposed concrete and even
the same builder as the soap but where
Khan's design foregrounded the offices
of the lead scientists it did so in a
way that promised if not delivered the
democratic engagement as a collective
with offices of equal size and
prominence so this is the site have a
guess where Venters office schist
now you know a little bit about him
I'll see so this is the road this is the
view I'm sure you can guess
so he's officers here the building has a
courtyard and unlike the silk with a
courtyard opens to the landscape the
wing turns around so that he offers
obscures the view for everybody else so
when we are standing in that courtyard
what we see is his autistic and
Moustakas so given the building's
pivotal and prominent location at the
heart of one of the world's richest
concentrations of Biosciences research
investment its location on a reach
overlooking other institutions given
this thus amazing Avengers large office
is particularly pertinent it sits at the
proud the administration and facilities
wing at the furthest distance from the
main entry and is the only office with
ocean views indeed as we saw it obscures
the views from the courtyard every other
room is in effect a kind of antechamber
there to dramatize and prolong the
procession the visitor all the employee
makes from entry to their audience
inventor this is a tactic quite common
in 16th and 17th century royal palaces
in this respect the JCV I at La Jolla
becomes the stage and the scaffolding
for ventas performance as the scientists
who would save the world but the most
important semiotic layer can be found in
the interior of his office oh there's
his office there
the larger office in licinia that has a
spectacular view and you don't have room
for vintage motorbikes and yours
soon after the completion of the JC VI
in 2014 vente was photographed in his
new office by Michael Lewis for the
Harvard Business Review Series life's
work shortly thereafter he modelled in
his studies for the prestige timepiece
company Jay Z and the cult in a campaign
shot by Curtis whirring Co so here is
the Michael Lewis photograph and if you
go to Getty Images Michael Lewis
photographed a series sorry a series of
images you can see a color one where
then to look straight at the camera
that's the one available with the Getty
Images and the dog is looking away but
the one that was chosen for the Harvard
Business Review has been to gazing into
the distance
and the dog looking at the camera I'll
come back to this and here is again the
photograph that was taken by Kurt is
wearing Enco so now I can test your um
popular culture knowledge does anyone
know who Kurt is very in careers
he was mad he is married to an actress
from Beverly Hills 90210 the old series
shannen doherty
No okay so cooties raincoat is Shannon
daddy's partner and you know once I
started looking up looking him up I fell
down the rabbit hole of the internet
gossip because it's fascinating a very
interesting relationship anyway he
promised that he would send me this
photograph and didn't but so that's the
best best I have both of these
photographs use the conventional setting
of a man seated alone any study to
convey what we have learned to call a
material neighbor now of course the
study furnished with artifacts that
narrate achievements and personal
qualities in a semi naturalistic manner
has long being employed as a symbol of
knowledge work take for example our
breeches
it changed st. Jerome in his study is
1514 and other paintings of the era on
the subject these depictions come at a
time when man's existence was moved to
the center of gibbous topical concerns
when the fashioning of a life and one's
own destiny was sanctioned this idea of
self invention made portraiture a
performance the 19th century saw the
architectural interior as an unavoidable
exteriorization of the psychic interior
the subject attempts to control his or
her self image through design and
deportment but is then betrayed by
gestures objects and expressions that
are
gave her consciousness I think you've
all experienced this when you've got a
visitor an important visitor coming to
your house for the first time and you
tidy up and you you're thinking oh my
goodness I better get that book that
embarrassing Bavarian off my bookshelf
because then they might know that
actually I'm reading this rather than
this and you curate your bookshelf ready
for your visitor that idea of the
interior representing your interior is
an old one the corollary of this idea is
that for the astute viewer can impute
personality and state of mind as well as
occupation social class and taste from
the room in which a subject is portrayed
this assumption that a person's home or
workplace is revelatory and authentic
continues today in the genre known as
environmental portrait photography and
it's this idea that motivates these two
photographs of venta it of course one
office is entirely staged to convey a
gentlemanly persona that serves the Jays
and the cook for brand the other
photograph although inventor's actual
office in the JCB eye is no more
authentic in conveying his true self so
if we look at these two images again
that one and that one which one conveys
venters true self
the design and decoration of the office
overseen by the architects is motivated
by its anticipated role in exactly this
sort of portrayal not only through the
medium of photography but also inventor
engages with employees and visitors and
most contentiously of course himself
while his office is so crammed with
objects that it recalls the wunderkammer
a precursor to the laboratory this
plenitude should not be mistaken for
intimacy or disclosure and I'll come
back to the brain you might notice that
here is the skull in the traditional one
an inventor is a 3d print of his brain
the room is furnished to underline
ventas achievements and assert his
passion for risk-taking sports and speed
it is a means of scaffolding and staging
a desired persona that of the maverick
scientist entrepreneur and I think
it's as as accurately targeted at its
audience as this J Dilla cultural
studies is targeted at things so who is
venture posing for and who is the office
posing for who is that audience so want
to look at Venters business model so one
of enters most trailblazing
contributions to science as well as
their decoding the human genome has been
the design of a business model that
twins non profit basic research
organizations with for-profit companies
so he sets up a nonprofit research
organization and he sets up for-profit
private organizations this model enables
a sweet transition of scientific
discoveries into marketable products
that in turn donate funds back to the
not-for-profits to fuel further research
so you donate to a not-for-profit it's a
tax there's a tax incentive so let's
have a look at his company the J craig
Venter Science Foundation that's the
not-for-profit was launched in April
2002 merging three of the five
not-for-profit research companies that
vente had previously established he
personally gave the foundation a hundred
million dollar plus endowment that he'd
taken from the profits of a previous
venture Samara simultaneously he sought
venture capital for research through a
for-profit company called synthetic
genome X which he launched in 2005 and
is today its chairman so he heads up
both of these the research and Synthetic
Genomics Synthetic Genomics
pays for about 25 of the JC but JCB is
roughly 300 research researchers and has
rights to their discoveries by 2010 the
company had an imputed valuation of over
500 million of which Venter owns 15% and
around 400 million of that came from
corporate companies so synthetic
genomics has three wholly owned
subsidiaries SGI DNA synthetics of
genome backsight vaccine and Genovia bi
bit bio you can see some of the partners
here you'd recognize some of those names
sgv I is focused on the development of
synthetic vaccines and it includes a
program in partnership with the farmer
conglomerate Novartis genovia's mission
is to develop bio-based consumer
friendly products which are sustainable
and economically advantaged and it
received 300 million from Exxon Mobil to
research and produce algal biofuels
there is a force of surgery that's
focused on agriculture which was bought
out by Monsanto coincident so having
once declared that healthcare should be
the least of our worries
given the graver challenge of climate
change
in 2014 Venter formed a new company
focused on aging which is called human
longevity Inc HLI and he's got a byline
which i think is probably the most
cynical thing that I've ever ever read
which reads aging is the single biggest
risk factor for virtually every
significant human disease I mean this is
a kind of hilarious thing to say getting
old is the thing that is most correlated
to disease so what are you going to do
about that you're going to cure ieg
you're going to stop people aging and
it's incredibly cynical because of
course if you did cure aging then
something else would be the single
biggest respecter this always going to
be something anyway
Ventus for profit organizations reside
in least accommodation so let's have a
look at the building's where their full
profit the commercial companies reside
there are buildings like this buildings
that are oblivious to even the simplest
fuel reduction strategy and the
environment of impacts is further
compounded by the vast tracts of
distance between them that vente and his
colleagues must regularly drive or fly
so Synthetic Genomics is in Surrey is in
this one which is about three miles from
the laboratory of JC VI it's fully
air-conditioned it's got unprotected
reflected glass curtain window walls
precast concrete panels there's no bus
or public transport there
he's 240 scientists and staff on the
East Coaster in rockville maryland they
occupied five buildings of similar ilk
which at least from biomed Realty Trust
they're also the owners of the property
that human longevity occupies in San
Diego biotech real estate is a huge
business with better returns than
investing in biotech itself this is
where I have to go wrong I haven't
printed that offense back so who who's
his audience so I think his audience is
threefold there are his employees and
all of them are on one-year contracts it
doesn't hurt to keep them in a kind of
like a position of subordinate
subordination in that in being kind of
you know terrified to go to the
Headmaster's office
so here is his office he also has
meetings with occasion the kind of this
was really particularly from newspapers
he met with a young girl who has had
cancer and they did a kind of display of
empathy
he's his colleagues and the architects
this this guy's worked with him for
decades and is someone near contacts
then there are people like this a
friends who are also investing in
entrepreneurial companies one of these
guys is mining asteroids and look what
the other ones doing but do it basically
angel investors speculating in companies
similar to ventus and they're his
partners in human longevity Inc who this
one has a site where he's talking about
how to invest in our tech and these guys
they understand the kind of risk
phenomena that is bent up there they're
sort of you know if you're going to mine
asteroids and that's your company you're
not going to be too worried about risk
you're going to understand a guy who
gets out on his motorbike and does you
know that's around at high speed do not
understand that person but there are
also people like Genting which is a used
to be called starships it's a big
company highly diversified they aren't
casinos in in the US they own shipping
lines say on tourism
it's a Malaysian company and for them
they need reassurance what do they need
reassurance about from the office so
when when vendor had Solera this was the
company he set up after decoding the
human genome to capitalize in on that
discovery when he set up that company
you can see that its stock price was not
people were throwing money at it it was
super super exciting lots and lots of
money
and then when he said well I'm going to
patent the human genome I going to paint
a genetic decoding there was an
intervention by both the Blair
government and at the time I think the
Bush government would it be for Clinton
possibly Clinton they both both both
said actually we're going to make it
illegal to privatize the genome it's not
going to happen you're not going to be
able to patent denied genomic
discoveries and the stock market for
salera
crash he was deposed as its chairman he
did take out that money and he started
all over again so it's a very risky
business Biosciences research and when
you've got someone like this ahead of it
you know you need some reassurance and
the office does that the office does
that in quite specific ways so if you've
got big corporations whether it's
anything or whether it's Exxon how do
you both create the idea of kind of risk
and adventure but also that someone is
completely in charge of things
[Music]
you'd do it like this so you make sure
that every award is on the wall every
single award then you combine it with
the motorbikes then you combine it with
the brain so that whole office is a
performance to try and appeal to the
various different kinds of audiences
it's a really tricky performance
preventative to do so that's just one
laboratory building it's a laboratory
building that is seriously a portrait of
its chairperson let's have a look just
quickly at some others so you can see
how different they are Armour so he's
been to with Watson Watson has forgiven
them up to given him at one time Watson
called Ventus something like a name he
basically said Venters suited process of
decoding human genome could be run by
Apes which wasn't you know incredibly
rude but here they are at a party so if
we have a look at James Watson's
laboratory which is the Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory the one that you saw
that look like an alpine village where
does it get its money from it's a very
very different funding group so the Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory is basically
owned by the neighbors by its Long
Island neighbors who are all mostly
operators in New York who have second
homes where their families are being on
that Gold Coast people like this so for
Watson and the Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory their architectural ambition
is to make those buildings look like old
buildings like the houses that their
board and their donors live in so it's a
really it's a disguised laboratory it's
meant to look like you know I kind of
elite college
so what's in spends his time going to
gala dinners or did his he's now in his
90s so he's probably winding down on the
dining he's going to gala dinners with
his board people who have a lot of money
to give who mostly made that in finance
so this percent change the board and who
sees the hall but her and her partner
Francis Biondo donated so you can see
that's a that's a very strange Berkeley
campus when we look at the difference
between that one this is the courtyard
for Cold Spring Harbor this is the
courtyard for vente these are very
different operations when we look at the
houses that they live in this these
houses are of the same era in fact
actually this one is a little older than
this one this is for centerfold
architects who also designed the
laboratory building it's a reproduction
Georgian that's Watson's house we have a
look closer to Manhattan and we look at
an a bio scientists like Nina Tannen she
has a company called epi boring she's
doing 3d printed bone that's made of
real bone cells
that's her project she also needs lots
and lots of funding she's got funding
from Peter Thiel startup grants and she
originally started her company every
bone in their harlem bio bio bio space
which is a small bucket co-op
cooperative working environment for
laboratory
really different environments and we can
see here it there's a kind of ecosystem
of research this becomes even clearer
when we look at the Alexandria life
sciences development so the Alexandria
life sciences development you've got
lots of incentives from their New York
Development Fund including some free
land and some support and tax breaks but
on condition that they also develop a
space for young researchers so this is
their boiler and the Alexandria towers
are largely occupied by big pharma
companies but they have a small space a
cooperative laboratory space which you
can see here this is intended for young
experimental graduates who are coming
from other places and is trying to pull
them from foster I'm going to bring them
to your tricky eight to create a kind of
pipeline of research here and incredibly
patronizing you can see here there's a
game of them what is that connect fall
on the table like a kind of decorative
pieces as if these are kind of
kindergarten it's a really different
sense of who the audiences and who the
architecture is to appeal to so this is
what we have done looking at laboratory
buildings is to try and understand each
one in its very specific context in
terms of its funding in terms of the
people who work there
identities that they need to portray and
how those identities are used to
construct a demand for their research
into it and to bring in a community of
being around them so even I have gone
over that last bit rather quickly I hope
that you have time to read more it's in
the book which comes out on Friday thank
you
