[Applause]
not really used to sitting down to have
a lecture thank you very much Jen for
the introduction and also for the
invitation to speak here tonight and
also for another for allowing all of
this to happen I would like to show five
of our recent projects today a couple of
which has have recently been completed
but before I do that I'd like to try to
construct a bit of a framework through
which you might begin to understand a
little bit of how we approach our work
as well as some of our more recent
preoccupations so many of you who have
probably read the book One Hundred Years
of Solitude by Gabriel Garcia Marquez
there's one particular scene in that
book that stayed with me for you know
for all this time even though the last
time I read this book is probably about
like 15 years ago so summer towards the
end of the book the inhabitants of a
fictive town called Macondo which has
been plagued with insomnia see their
memory deteriorate first to go were the
names and notions of things and in an
effort to fight his amnesia the
patriarch of the town a certain kernel
buend√≠a said about labeling all the
objects in his house but he soon
realized to his horror that the day
might come when things would be
recognized by their inscriptions but
that no one would remember their use the
scene in the novel is brief appointment
it highlights not only the relationship
between our physical and cognitive world
but also its vulnerability as a mental
and cultural construct these are
relationships that we often take for
granted until a glitch calls attention
to them well when the s preoccupation
was on the functionality of things we
can perhaps extend to claim that any
physical construct has no meaning
without its corresponding mental
start whether functional or symbolic but
what we flipped this condition on its
head what if we saw the amnesia not as
condemning but as liberating of course
the mental construct is essential to
understanding our physical environment
but what if the freeing of the physical
from a one-to-one association with a
particular mental construct were to
offer a different way of engaging with
the world
one that is open and capable of evolving
if the modernist subject is defined by
georg simmel as a individual numbed by
the sensory overload of the metropolis
then our contemporary subject is defined
not only by the sheer volume of
information and the plurality of
self-expression but above all by the
speeds and frequency of change in his
studies in Teutonic culture Kenneth
Trant enlists type technique topography
and temporal circumstance as complicit
and defining elements of a cultural
condition though perhaps with varying
degrees of importance of each and
different projects it could be safe to
argue that while each of these
circumstances have been given emphasis
at different historical moments we're
witnessing a period in which the
temporal or the a temporal depending on
how you choose to see it has taken on a
renewed meaning in the last decades we
could argue for example that the high
modernists were concerned with an
eternal present there was an urgency to
define a right way of doing things and
to break radically from the past as a
consequence functionality by way of
top-down implementation became the
paradigm post modest post modernism
subsequently looked at the past history
and tradition as a source for the
autonomy of the architect
reappropriation what their forebears had
rejected today the emphasis has shifted
instead towards the design of not quite
predictable futures while this may in
fact be nothing new the scale and
pervasiveness of this preoccupation sing
perhaps more than just a passing trend
we see more and more in competition
briefs that demand for flexibility
adaptability or diversity the idea that
the building serves a wider array of
activities which will evolve and that
the anticipation of such an eventuality
is the responsibility of the architect
we've seen this in commercial office
buildings for a long time
epitomize for better or for worse in the
typical plan but we're seeing this now
also for school buildings anticipating
changing pedagogy or for housing serving
a wider more diversified and more
dynamic demographic professionally and
pedagogically it sets us up for an
interesting challenge in which the
obsolescence of type use lifestyle or
other similar factors lay pressure on
the physical world arguably architecture
remains for the most part a physical and
immutable presence as we've learned from
the unfulfilled promises of the
metabolisms but such projects may be
faulted not for their aspirations but
for the scope and framework within which
they operate the literal kinetic
adaptation of megastructures seems in
retrospect neither economically nor
functionally judicious and the top-down
attitude
ignores space from the perspective of
the person but perhaps their fatal
mistake was in focusing on the fixed
relationship between form and use within
this dynamic context program has become
secondary rather we see more and more
the return to a tectonic or
constructional focus where the
relationship between the physical
construct and the inhabitable space form
ambiguities potentials for multiple
readings that allows the project to
constantly gain new life there's a loose
fit between form and program there are
of course rich examples of projects that
by accident or by intention definitely
confront this idea one canonical example
is Vilanova Artigas is faculty
Architects Apollo that creates a central
void we know this iconic image mainly as
an example of a container for events or
political space for the masses but in
fact what we often overlook is the
importance that the discrete elements
give to the understanding of the overall
space as one that is democratic
despite its monumentality not only
through the scale shift that they
provide but also the inversion of the
typical interior/exterior relationship
these volumes the asymmetry introduced
with the interior facades the
split-levels the ramps all seem to
signal independent elements that are
loosely held together by the continous
roof overhead the space becomes
simultaneously a room but also a plaza
and it's this ambiguity that sets it
apart from its contemporaries we find a
similar attitude at a much smaller scale
in Frank Gehry Santa Monica house this
house is often regarded mainly from a
stylistic point of view but I personally
find it more fascinating as a study of
space the wrapping of a new facade
around the existing house creates a
space of transition a new interior tea
that in its informality and clash of
materials creates a new hole that seems
to be constantly evolving and never
finished it's literally an in-between
space a liminal space captured between
old and new and therefore neither one
nor the other
but suspended in time even some of the
furniture is placed on wheels suggesting
a kind of evolving present an open
endedness also doesn't have to translate
only as a void or a kind of in-between
space history has given us plenty of
examples of highly specific buildings
with multiple lives the Great Mosque of
Cordoba saw violent takeovers which
nonetheless added each time towards a
new home for the iqs reservoir in
Barcelona that became a hospital than an
archive and a film studio and most
recently a library strong plans that
despite or perhaps because of their
domineering structures inspire
appropriation these projects reveal
a more infrastructural attitude where
the focus is perhaps on a series of
relationships set up between highly
specific but abstract geometries and
their corresponding form of construction
and yet there is a loose fit between
form and program that allow for
productive Mis readings
a lot of these ideas were of course also
testing in our own work for the
archaeological Center in Basel lund it's
a just outside or between Basel and and
Zurich it's a competition that we won in
2014 the ability of the building to
adapt to the changing needs of the
future is actually central to the
concept of the project for political and
financial reasons the project has to be
realized in multiple phases and at the
same time the types of work as well as
the types of spaces that were required
vary quite dramatically from sort of
workshops for archaeology and
conservation to research and marketing
departments and of course more than half
of the program is storage and display of
this kind of growing collection of finds
from you from the archaeological site
and above you know also beyond that they
were asking for a certain flexibility in
terms of being able to adapt for the
future needs of the different
departments so unifying all of this
while still allowing for flexibility
became part of the challenge of the
competition brief the site is along the
highway between Zurich and Basel as I
say and this is it's actually a Roman
site a Roman city which is kind of built
over after many centuries and what you
see in red are all the ruins that are
still or that happen that they found but
none of which really have been fully
excavated our site is this parcel over
here and the rest of it is kind of an
open-air museum that's sort of situated
in between the fabric of the existing
town and there's been excavations going
on here for more than 500 years the site
was first discovered in the 1500s but
only about 10% of the Roman city has
been exposed we forget that oh gosh
takes quite a lot of effort and
resources and finances also to maintain
the artifacts the moment they are
assumed so what they've done is mainly
focused on the monuments that were there
which is this kind of small portion of
the of the actual city and so far even
with just 10% being excavated they
already have over 1.7 million artifacts
which they have to store and of course
this collection just keeps growing the
more that they they dig this leads to a
kind of logistical challenge these and
these types of situations which is a
little absurd you will see these kind of
ancient Roman columns that are parked
underneath the eaves of a shed a kind of
garden shed where they keep their kind
of gardening tools and materials trying
to shelter it from the weather smaller
pieces are stored like this in these
kind of containers where there's no
temperature or humidity regulation and
but also beyond the issues of
conservation of these pieces they have
also been in a kind of institutional
crisis because most of their workspaces
have been sort of scattered throughout
the city in different spots that they've
rented over the years so the
department's are never really in contact
with each other nobody's really
understanding what the whole you know
endeavor let's say of this of this
foundation is about and you know what
they need to be doing together in order
to improve on their kind of working
relationships and things like that and
so the competition was an effort to find
a solution under this very very tight
budget budgetary constraints and also to
to find a way not only to sort of store
and display these these artifacts but to
unite everyone under one roof so we when
we think of storage and sorting and the
kind of retrieval of you know millions
of things we were interested in the kind
of justice
of these two field conditions on the
left
they hyper efficiency of the Amazon
warehouses and then on the right you
know the kind of mystery and aura
related to kind of archeology which was
captured in movies like Indiana Jones's
Raiders of the Lost Ark so for us in a
way it became an starting point that our
first act was not so much to design an
object we weren't designing a building
but we were designing a system a spatial
structure in this case a kind of a Vav
system of structural bands that would
allow individual rooms and departments
to expand and contract while allowing
clear circulation of of people and
artifacts and also all the technical
services to sort of run through all the
time and into this field we would then
insert sort of fixed infrastructures
like stairs shafts elevators bathrooms
and things like that which helped to
create a kind of let's a subdivision and
differentiation in the plan that would
allow it also to absorb all the
different requirements over time the
whole structure would then sit on a
plate over the ruins we actually had to
build on top of one of existing ruins
but because the the whole sort of
archeological endeavor happens over such
a long period they determined that that
site they would not excavate in the next
50 years or so but what that meant was
that we needed to still be able to
preserve what was underneath so
everything had to be balanced on top of
a plate that essentially would just hop
near kind of sit on top of the site so
there can be no pylons or anything
drilled into the ground that meant that
the construction had to be light as
light as possible but that the weight
also had to be evenly distributed which
meant for example that we were juggling
in a way how to deal with the different
programs that would occupy this
this long building and so the workspaces
for example are stacked on two floors to
balance off the weight of a large haul
of artifacts and when we look more
closely at the workspaces they're kind
of defined by two spatial experiences
within this within this field condition
on the one hand a kind of horizontality
and transparency across departments
which allows them to kind of reconnect
with the kind of identity of this of
this institution this would then be
punctuated by the occasional verticality
which would bring lights and views into
this kind of deep floor of the of this
field on the outside to reduce cost
we used actually some very common
everyday materials in this case for the
facade its corrugated steel cladding
which actually would be of different
sizes and different densities that when
stacked becomes a kind of sedimentation
that gives a sense of an abstract almost
primordial expression the linearity of
the building allows the construction to
be easily faced and extended over time
which was one of the requirements so in
a way it could appear complete at any
given moment so if the client runs out
of money and had to stop or if they
actually made more money and decided to
extend it could in a way go on forever
the Biden Secondary School is a project
in Rakas Fiona which is about an hour
east of Zurich and we finished this
project in 2017 after a pretty rushed
construction schedule the larger context
of this school campus is rather
unremarkable it's kind of typical of
most agglomerations and the periphery of
the cities in Switzerland so you see
that there's a little bit of housing
some industrial sites and then to the
north a lot of sort of agricultural
fields still and then in the middle of
it all this little campus school campus
of primary and secondary schools and
when we went to first visit this campus
for the competition which we were
invited to participated we were struck
by the kind of peaceful and
Oasis character of of this kind of
idyllic site the existing schools were
these low-lying pavilions very very low
density and you had this very Park life
setting and this kind of giant plinth
that seemed a little bit over
proportioned for the for the size of the
existing school and the original
secondary school had nine classes and
the new program called for 24 new
classrooms a double Sports Hall and
sprinkling of other types of programs
like workshops and teaching kitchens and
things like that
and so we had you know a couple of
challenges that were that we had to
confront one was how to add a building
three times the size of the existing
into this context without completely
destroying the park-like atmosphere at
the site and how to also create a kind
of stronger identity in the kind of
constellation of buildings that we're
adding to so we decided actually that
the solution of least impact was to
create a singular volume that would
stack two floors of classrooms and
timber construction on top of sports
hall
in concrete construction the competition
brief was written in such a way that you
could actually you know place the
building anywhere and also have separate
buildings if necessary most people in
fact have proposed the Sports Hall as a
completely separate building and it's
essentially covering most of the site so
we were one of the one of the two teams
I think that that that went for a more
you know a compact building like this
and you know for us then this this kind
of existing plinth between the the
existing secondary school and then the
new building would become a kind of
common entry court and so spanning the
classrooms over the gym meant that we
got a much deeper floor plate than usual
and we took this as an opportunity to
kind of request in the typology of a
school and the kind of common
distribution of a school you know I
think father we all have some or at
least I do some forms of traumatic
memories of corridors and and you know
long corridors endless corridors in in
high school and and we wanted to
actually sort of give something back to
the experience of of this school so
instead of corridors we introduced into
this very very deep plan a kind of brand
central hall and this central hall which
would be on each of the classroom levels
would be a kind of flexible undefined
space that was simultaneously a
distribution zone but also a study space
that could be used for different events
you know when when students were waiting
between classes but also for things like
school dance or parent-teacher
conferences where they would set up
exhibitions and things like that and and
now for example they they organized once
a semester I think a kind of class
Breakfast where they set out a long
table and everybody sitting you know
having croissants there it's a very
common
actually the nine o'clock breakfast
break so courtyards bring in light and
help to break down the scale of this
kind of large hall into a sequence of
more intimate spaces when you walk
through the space kind of opens up in
the center as a larger hall but still
allows for areas of retreat and
spatially the courtyards act like rooms
they in some ways I would say inverts
the relationship between inside and
outside where the outside actually
becomes a kind of intimate room within
this kind of larger field and around the
periphery of each of these kind of
central halls you have a series of
classrooms which are connected by a non
feel awed this is in some ways in
response to also something in the brief
that they had written they they wanted
to be able to flexibly pair up
classrooms for their kind of pedagogical
I would say ambitions in a way that they
that they could start teaching also in
parallel with other classes and so this
kind of pump ulid allows them then the
flexibility of pairing between different
spaces as well as a kind of
consciousness that you belong to a kind
of larger home and and the other thing
that we were very consciously also
engaging with was was the idea that the
exposed beams which are on each of the
floors also on the kind of lower floor
you will see later are something that
that are always kind of pulled through
continuously that unify the the entire
level extending also to the outside
where we have the egress balconies that
that lie in the building so maybe one of
the things that to kind of also explain
a little bit more precisely is that the
Eagers balconies isn't just about a kind
of expression to the outside which was
but it also is the thing that allows
this kind of central hall to be flexibly
furnished and used because basically
they they in case of fire everybody just
goes immediately
to the periphery and to the outside and
does not have to re-enter the center of
the building on the ground-floor the
lobby the teachers rooms and conference
hall wrap around a sunken gym creating a
kind of immediate adjacency and visual
exchange so in this image you're just
entering the building from the main
entrance with a view into this gym and
also the stairs that go up to the
classrooms and so the gym which is you
know usually something which is
completely hidden either it's like in a
totally different building or something
you know completely sunken underground
now becomes a kind of central part of
the school it becomes a kind of active
moment within the school but also offers
a sort of transparency to to other parts
of the public programs there as well
what you're seeing now is looking into
the kind of multi-purpose lecture hall
on the ground floor and and also you
know of course that gym doubles up as a
kind of event space when they have
larger performances and things like that
in the school as well and and in some
ways also has a kind of contact to the
outside and so while the stacking meant
that there was a certain height that we
introduced into this this campus which
was relatively low-lying what was
surprising was that despite its size the
building come kind of becomes a less
logical anchor to the entire campus
providing a kind of clear edge to this
previously oversized plinth and and
making it a kind of a real sort of
meeting space in central plaza
the house on a slope is one of our
newest construction sites we just
started a couple of weeks ago it's a big
hole right now that's starting to be
filled up it's actually a housing
project despite the name in fact it's a
project with six apartment units in a
posh Villa neighborhood with lake views
just outside of Zurich and the project
in a way you could argue is a little bit
if I borrow a term from Barbara Bester a
kind of stealth density it's an
apartment building disguised to look
like a single-family house and partly
that as political reasons because of the
way in which projects can be contested
by neighbors and being that this is a
lot of rich neighbors with you know
powerful access to lawyers we wanted to
remain under the radar as much as
possible
so here the question of flexibility is
approached from a very very different
perspective instead of the typical
subdivision of units into this building
into self-similar units the diversity of
the units becomes the kind of
flexibility that allows the client to
attract a wide range of mixed income
renters so most of the time when the
building is on a slope we see projects
that maximize the envelope by
approximating the slope through a
terracing so you know for example the
buildable envelope in in this town is
defined by the offset of the existing
terrain so what we chose to do instead
is just to follow that diagram dumbly so
the roofline that you're seeing is
essentially the maximum height that is
that is allowed and this allowed us
essentially to to not only integrate the
building into this kind of villa context
with this gable roof but also to produce
a kind of series of radically different
apartments with different sort of
spatial experiences and also different
points price segments so you see for
example a kind of split-level garden
unit
accessible apartments that would be on
the ground floor and pitch roof
apartments on the upper levels each of
and one of these actually also was
recently converted into a kind of duplex
loft unit so the client was interested
in a way in units that would cater to
small families and young professionals
that were priced out of the center of
Zurich so while they might be slightly
smaller unit types each one has quite
specific characteristics that are driven
by the spatial sequence of the common
areas so you would see for example in
gray the the common areas inside the
apartments one for example which is the
garden unit facing directly and opening
generously sort of directly onto the
garden another being is kind of
snake-like zigzag that provides a very
long diagonal space with two sort of
exposures my favorite actually I think
is this which is a very long narrow
sequence of spaces going from a study to
a kitchen to a dining space to a living
room so each apartment has at least two
exposures and a generous outdoor space
and that was something that we kind of
gave ourselves as a requirement and at
the same time they're they're packed
quite densely into this larger whole
revolving around one relatively compact
circulation core the landscape we just
allowed to sort of run continuously we
didn't actually design that really
except to introduce two very clearly
sort of geometrical interventions so two
circles one at the upper sort of main
entrance from the street which uses the
circle to negotiate the handicap ramp
and another which is a larger circle at
the the garden level below that becomes
a kind of gathering space for the
different people that would be living
there so this is maybe the latest Whedon
update these
slice or these images so much but this
is the latest model we had before we
went into construction which is an
update on the kind of facade concept
we're essentially using a pigmented
concrete a dark sort of anthracite sort
of pigmented concrete which gives it
almost a velvety look which is actually
quite quite curious and and so this is a
project also a competition that we got
in through an RFQ but which we didn't
win unfortunately but it's something
that we still enjoy looking at it's a
town hall in a compound called fightin
buff which is also you know just about
maybe 15 minutes outside of Zurich and
it's a town that is I would say they're
they're the greatest claim to fame is
that they are the first town to have
gotten an Ikea outside of Sweden that
kind of gives you a sense of what type
of town it is it's probably you could
say it would be the armpit of of
Switzerland in some ways but we were
given this site which is in the middle
of this hodgepodge of different types of
buildings none of which were really
remarkable and there is not really any
clear center and and into this context
we were to introduce a town hall so when
you look at the Town Hall as a kind of
typology it's actually something quite
curious obviously as a strong
representational role as a seed of a
local government but programmatically
it's actually 80 percent bureaucratic
and only about 20 percent ceremonial and
most of the time the 20% which is
ceremonial so things that are like you
know the meeting halls the wedding halls
and things like that
or need to be independently accessible
even during office hours so they have to
function in a way almost like separate
buildings and in older buildings like
the
Paris townhall which is shown here or
even the the Zurich one the circulation
is usually quite labyrinthine once you
go inside and the different ceremonial
halls are sprinkled throughout making
the kind of control of access quite
difficult and on the other hand we quite
liked the idea that the roof scape would
be giving a kind of stately character to
the building and maybe even something
more than that
our proposal then essentially
consolidated all the ceremonial programs
onto this top floor which would also
become this expressive crown to the
building that would allow then the rest
of the building to just fulfill the kind
of functions of bureaucracy so the
geometry of the groove meant that each
hall had its own special form and a
spatial experience but that nonetheless
would come together as a kind of richer
whole each space also has its own
aperture and relationship to the outside
so the main foyer and and reception area
for example with large windows to the
city more intimate corners of that
reception space as well as more
introverted sort of salons which would
open onto enclosed roof terraces that
they can rent out for for parties and
and you know weddings wedding receptions
and things like that while the roof has
an overall systematic logic it results
in each facade being quite different
so given this kind of immediate context
the building is actually not really
experienced in any way as a kind of
pedestrian do but but really as a kind
of drive-by or as a as an object that
seemed more from afar so we were
interested in this kind
dynamism of how the building can
potentially change form depending on how
and where you approach it from
the Institute for sport sciences is a
project that we won in an open
competition in 2013 and we just finished
building it last year after having a
kind of six month break it's a building
on the campus of the University of
Lausanne that unites four public and
private organizations that research and
teach sports sciences and on first
glance it's a very dill excite with you
know amazing views of Lake Geneva which
is down here these are actually sports
fields of the University there is a
beautiful sort of al-ahly of plane trees
there and if you go this way you head
into the city of ulsan if you go this
way just about a kilometer down it's the
the EPFL campus with the Rolex learning
center of sedge EEMA so it's it's a very
very prominent site in a way but the
campus is characterized by these types
of behemoths you know ladies that are
kind of from the from the 70s in a way
that are fortress-like
that give a kind of representational
character but not necessarily something
which is which is inviting or or you
know communicating necessarily with the
rest of the campus so we wanted to in
some ways respond to that and to offer a
kind of counterpoint something which is
maybe more modern and self-confident but
not a complete rejection of the campus
we were interested in an expression
which was which was maybe more quiet but
also light something which conveys a
certain technicality and and and maybe
also you know anti-gravity that would
hop over almost in the landscape and in
some ways identify a little bit with the
kind of athletic prowess of the people
that would be
inhabiting this building and when you
study office buildings you know so we
decided you know with that idea also
quite early on to to have a very compact
form which is a cube of about 35 to 40
meters in depth and when you study
office buildings of this size the
typical response is to either fill the
center where you normally don't get any
daylight with a massive core or to make
a void and in both cases the experiences
you know rather soul burn and expected
so we were interested in rethinking the
problem of this Center we wondered what
would happen if the center was both the
kind of infrastructural core as well as
a rich experience conceptually we split
the building into two halves or two you
know two parts let's say a hyper
rational and flexible ring of workspaces
and a porous mass of service and shared
spaces the outer ring would accept a
certain you know convention of office
planning based on a modular grid of the
facade that would allow for all the
different sizes of offices that they had
asked for but also for the kind of
flexible repartition
in the future so you know that became
something which was which was quite
systematic these offices were also less
than five meters in depth which allowed
every workspace to have optimum access
to daylight and then you know after the
the kind of office ring was then a ring
of corridor and distribution which
allowed all the kind of technical
services to be distributed to each of
those spaces so this kind of hyper
rationality freed us up to explore the
core in the center as as this kind of
spatial it's a experience there these
are a few of the many iterations we did
during the competition process before we
decided on the final
logic and in some ways what surprised us
was that one of the most simplest
schemes was in fact the one that for us
worked not only the best in terms of the
performance of all the things that it
had to take on but also provided one of
the richest sort of spatial sequences it
was a series of alternating stacked bars
that allowed us also to create a kind of
internal landscape and of course this
mass absorbs all the spaces that don't
need daylight the vertical shafts
elevators stairs but also bathrooms
kitchens archives and also these
physical testing labs that they have
where they hook athletes up to
treadmills and and and essentially make
them do sort of physical exercises at
the same time it's a kind of spatial
experience and a collective heart of the
building and structurally these two
parts the lightweight sort of ring of
plaits and columns is braced by the
inner core to form a kind of
interdependent whole I'm just showing
you some of these images which were
things that we produced for the
competition but these also became
working models that we started sort of
modifying what after winning the
competition but maybe this is just for
you to get a sense before I show you the
completed project in fact how similar it
ended up being so this is the kind of
internal landscape which in some ways
provided a space that would allow for
the synergy of the four different
departments or institutions that occupy
the building the ring becomes a kind of
backdrop to these daily exchanges and
and there's always a kind of visual
continuity between the two parts so that
even while you're sitting in your
private office you're looking out into
this space where you know you know that
you're part of a larger whole so again
there there's also a variety
of sizes and scales of spaces that
allows for you know moments of respite
and concentration as well as you know
other render moments and so this is the
the building that has been finished now
the photos were actually taken before
they completely fully occupied it so
it's a little sparse but this is when
you first make your way up into the
center of the building the space begins
to open in different directions
with views to the different floors and
also in some ways to the outside it's in
fact the the ring became way more
transparent than we even imagined it
would be
there's this kind of internal landscape
of vertical circulation that allows the
kind of chance encounters and and places
for people in the different departments
to meet also these moments of Brander
when you realize you know that you're
that you're in a building with four
other institutions but that there's a
certain sort of visual connection
between all of them and and then also
the kind of possibility for retreat and
for privacy so that you know you can
also sort of be within your own office
space and looking out into this kind of
atrium where all the services are
contained so these bars so on the other
side of the HBM you would have these
corridors where on the one side is our
office spaces and on the other these
kind of physical testing labs where you
have also windows into them these labs
are highly controlled environments
because they're they're measuring the
kind of heart rates and physical
characters of the of the athletes they
had to be very much highly controlled
and and also the building is in a way
you know we don't always present it
through that through that lens but the
building is actually a very very
ecologically performative building it
uses I should both passive and active
technologies for example heating and
cooling with the lake water through the
using the the sort of thermally
activated building and slats so you'll
see for example the office spaces that
the the ceilings are all exposed
concrete because it's radiant heating
and cooling from above and and of course
what I said before also the daylight
that being optimized basically meant
that there's very low energy consumption
and and also a kind of in general a high
level of comfort and here's one of the
classrooms we unfortunately didn't get
to spec all the furniture but but at
least they have a great view at and
while many of our projects are done
under extremely tight budgets we like to
imagine that there's always a kind of
spacial specificity and a kind of
architectural character that remains
beyond program and beyond user and also
beyond the kind of initial designation
so this character that we introduced is
not always the same sometimes it's more
assertive sometimes it's more reticent
but each time it attempts to act as a
kind of infrastructure to the life that
would unfold inside thank you very much
[Music]
[Applause]
should I ask the third question I'm very
open to questions yeah we so we used a
lot of models and a lot of models of
different scales but especially very
large scale models we so I showed some
of the models that you know the small
sort of blue foam stuff but but there's
also a lot of models that we built
really to study this space we don't
usually use renderings we haven't used
digital well it's not true I mean we use
digital sort of tools but mainly to
supplement the things that we would be
doing in physical models and and
sometimes you know maybe later in later
project phases but the physical model
was a way for us not only to explore the
things that we wanted to do I mean one
of the things that we did when we moved
to Switzerland we kind of started to
reevaluate a little bit how we wanted to
approach the way that we design and and
I think that in a way we questioned how
we had been working before or how for
example my own education had been which
was really looking as buildings as kind
of objects that you would design from
the outside as a kind of you know form
and that somehow you would eventually
make your way inside and maybe discover
to your horror that maybe there was not
really a space that was occupiable so we
kind of flipped the equation or we
wanted to flip that equation and we
start a lot of projects sometimes from
very very basic principles of
understanding you know organization
plans but but always together with space
we never look at them dryly as
as a drawing but always together with
what that would be so the the blue phone
models allow us to very quickly test at
but the large spatial ones also allow us
to kind of keep working on that so for
example the model that I showed of the
house on a slope with the new facade at
the end that state was with us all
throughout the design process which was
like a whole year long thing and we kept
hacking into it and replacing the facade
and changing the interiors and you know
shooting it in different ways that's a
long answer to your question and you and
how is allow certain flexibility for the
things that are not determined
resonating but for the years to come
so can you elaborate upon the project
housing the domestic paradigm is very
much ingrained in a lot of people and
therefore the program is in some way
rigid and you mentioned in the Italo
project that there's a
in addition between where's the
bureaucratic spaces and where the
conference or ceremony or spaces and
when those maybe these suit out
paradigms are too much determined even
before you tap into this project and
what specifically you did to sort of
inject a little bit of flexibility for
those possible futures so I think that
there's always the kind of MIS
misconception that flexibility has to be
generic or you know that's what we knew
it is I I don't think that that's the
case that's Chloe comes in many
different forms it's a word it's a it's
a word that's being thrown around a lot
lately but but that's kind of a thing
that we wanted to investigate in a way
is how can we be more precise about that
and what does it mean and for each
project it's very different so in the
housing one it's very clearly not the
same type of flexibility I mean I think
if you look at a typical housing project
the paradigm for that is the the mezzo
Domino of kakuzu
right like you just have these like
that's what you see mostly also for the
speculative housing that's done in here
in New York even it's like you have
these sack weights you can take out all
the walls and it becomes a generic plate
that you can reinvent in any way and so
we weren't really interested in that we
were interested in spaces that have
character and and the diversity of those
types of spaces or meaning the diversity
of the types of units became a kind of
flexibility you know because there was
not it was not about a one-size-fits-all
it's about very specific units that
somebody but but but because it's so
specific then you might get you know
different people that want to inhabit
that in their own way it's also that in
some ways we see it that the that that
it might also offer them something which
they hadn't imagined of of using or a
way of living that they hadn't done
before so in some ways it's a kind of
dialogue between the people that would
inhabit it later and in the building
that
kind of get in there in the other
project what's different is that so the
idea maybe the kind of idea of the loose
fit between form and program is not to
say that there should be no form but
rather that the form doesn't
predetermine a program you know so even
those spaces under the roof they're
ceremonial but it doesn't necessarily
say that it has to be a specific thing
or another we just give a collection of
very different sizes and forms and then
they they eventually find a kind of
matching use for it which may also
change in the future and then the kind
of and and the thing that we kind of
allowed to happen and that's a little
bit similar to the last project that I
showed is the fact that we we then also
embrace the conventionality in some ways
of what was underneath you know so so
those became more the kind of typical
plan of office spaces that you could
kind of reconfigure in a more emetic
generic sense factor another in your
descriptions and in your responses the
play of organization with the issue of
character norming a mistake
no accept that so the play of
organization for us has a very immediate
relationship to the play of space and it
is the space that gives the character so
the the juxtaposition of of types right
like in the sense of the grid versus
that atrium or the or the gym versus the
the other you know spaces that encrusted
that in some ways and the and let's say
the kind of exposure of the structure as
an underlying thing that holds it
together for us as the character so
there was another discussion
about four years ago where all of those
people that were writing about type and
typology we're trying to come around
discussing the difference between type
and character action yeah and what
happens in your work is is a pretty
significant consistency of language also
there is the kind of the restraint of
concrete and a certain type of
expression which in fact refuses to
partake in certain kinds of iconographic
excesses or one could say alternatively
that are so focused on the language that
that in itself is a goal and I'd like
you to speak a little bit more about
those qualities of materiality that you
see as part of your project those parts
of materiality that you think are
naturally Swiss those parts of your
projects which you see as a perk of
being able to do things you could do
there that you could not do here for
instance but and sort of show us some of
the behind-the-scenes strategies that
you think you're employing with your
character so there's a few things so
materiality to us you know one of the
things that I was saying before when we
kind of requested a little bit how we
wanted to approach things meant that we
wanted to also strip everything back you
know we were interested in and and this
is because a lot of the competitions
that we go for our public institutional
projects which naturally have quite
restrictive budgets and in some ways for
us it was important to consider what can
we do you know that basically maximizes
the potential of what what is put into
the project both financially but also in
terms of architecture and what that
meant was to say well why don't we you
know really start from everything that
needs to be there so the structure that
you know the infrastructure everything
that needs to be considered for the
building to function not to treat that
as a thing that comes afterwards to be
solved but really as the the thing that
drives the project so the materiality
comes in some ways from that from the
fact that there is a very structural
sort of response to the choices that we
make the for example in the the
secondary school the wood construction
we were interested in wood because we
had you know we those two projects that
are better built that I show they were
done at the same time in the office we
won those projects within two weeks of
each other and those we knew we were
doing a concrete one and we didn't want
to do another fully concrete one so we
specifically chose wood but it also
turned out to be a good choice because
the wood made the whole construction
lighter and faster I mean that project
so we won we started as the secondary
school later than the university project
but we finished it before because the
wood construction was all prefab and you
know and was done in such a short time
and but the thing was that you know for
us so you know going back again to this
kind of swiftness it's difficult because
obviously we're not Swiss we're we're
we're I mean not not only I actually
taken the am Swiss now but we're not
Swiss in the sense that we weren't
really like fully you know embedded into
that culture there before but at the
same time we're operating in that
culture and and that culture comes with
not only a lot of you know know-how that
has been built up over the years and
kind of conventions and things like that
that they use but also a certain kind of
[Music]
conservatism you could say because the
way that the system there works is every
single public project that is built goes
out to to vote you know like so people
vote too
the project or not which basically means
that there is a certain sort of risk
aversion there is a you know people want
projects that can actually go through
and can can be can be constructed and so
they usually go for projects that seem
like it would be easy to to not only to
construct but also for people to embrace
and usually that means then it's a kind
of happy median things that are not
necessarily to rocking the boat too much
no I don't make no I mean I don't know
no but the thing is that what we try to
do is we try to be more subversive about
the things that we want to inject into
it which is why a lot of the projects
are maybe not so much exuberant on the
outside like the university project
place that will be very consciously you
know went for something which was in
some ways kind of austere you could say
you could walk by and not even realize
what it is you're walking by but we also
liked that juxtaposition we liked the
idea that you know it's kind of the
secret life that only the users of the
buildings would be able to enjoy and to
to note that you know people don't get
to see every day from the outside
because in fact the building are for the
people it's not for the you know the
guys that drive by and in the cars and
the soap from the outside it's
relatively simple but still in some ways
a kind of you know comment on the
buildings that were existing in the in
the campus
building on the democratic process by
which something is built would suggest
that the natural predisposition of the
Swiss is to vote for austere things
whereas everybody in America is voting
for good English things because they
need it to be warm and fuzzy and that is
the big thing that is quite discernible
about the work is its brighness could
their their their beautiful Swiss
watches but at the same time their
rugged
warehouse prisons and so and it's your
ability to negotiate that fine line that
makes the character of those buildings
so alarming and I'm saying character
from my perspective not from the way not
the way they gather describing character
because it's it is a very hard
architecture and so so are you saying
that the Swiss actually embraced this
kind of generic news or st. Louis common
denominator well it's not yeah I mean I
think that to a large extent yes I think
we were we were lucky in quite a number
of ways I think a lot of the projects
that we wanted had great juries on them
that were able to sort of push things
through that otherwise would not have
probably been accepted this for example
I think was was maybe more daring than
the average project would have been but
but if you see actually most of what is
being built I mean there's a lot of you
know a lot of projects being built with
public money that is about the safe
you know the safe solution that solves
the brief very very well but doesn't
necessarily address a kind of extra
value in in terms of what that might
mean for the experience of the users and
I think we we were always trying to
bring in that extra element and I think
that the the so I can I can give you a
kind of anecdote when we moved to
Switzerland there was a
petition are two competitions that were
running parallel one in Basel and one in
Zurich they were both for museums for
each of the cities the one in Basel was
of course you know juried with jacquard
silk and things like that had fantastic
collection of star architects one in
Zurich also but Zurich is a much more
conservative town Basel has you know the
money but also the had something our
name that was pushing everything behind
and and you know Kristin gone to find
one the one in Basel and in Zurich it
was a Chipperfield project which was
probably the most conservative project
because it was essentially a copy-paste
extension or stretch of the existing
building and that's the kind of thing
that we face on a on a daily basis in a
way most of the projects that are one
are are these projects that fit in that
essentially are the end I work very well
but they're not necessarily agree
questioning anything at its at its paces
[Music]
perhaps just a few offices popping up in
numbers actually a manifesting
themselves in different ways and I just
speak to that I can ask you mr. cover
questions can you speak to the
difference between the actual physical
and carcass of the special organizations
begin debating and the actual structure
so should you catch the physical website
so the actual physical podcasts on the
spaces within the envelope myself
actually the actual physical embodiment
of this special attention to the
projects the difference between there
and the very structure okay
where they coincide or become coincide
they're the same thing or not that's
first question second question are you
guys giving any thought to how this
particular approach could be extended
beyond the architectural scale into the
greater scale so in other words this
kind of idea of special infrastructure
source which combines all flexibility
and
or specificity in special terms the
special quality but at the same time
certain capacity for adaptation and and
change of use can you actually begin to
think how to apply that had the skill to
so maybe I start there no but that's a
great suggestion I'll think of that next
time and for the first as for the first
question I would think so most of the
time there is a kind of correlation
between the structure and the space of
course they're not always sort of
one-to-one there's sometimes also very
conscious some slippage is in a way
between the two but I would say that
most of the time they're there there is
a set of relationships and usually there
they're structured through the
load-bearing structure so for example in
the Lausanne project those those bars
that are actually crossing the agent
they are actually bracing but they are
also containing spaces but the the ring
also the kind of rhythm of the of the
structure is the rhythm that actually
determines also the the kind of facade
and suppose odd modules and by extension
therefore the office modules sorry
organization is the thing that brings
space its character and if so what about
your question that just happened why are
you interested in offering that just
position between program and structure
them
um so I hate it it's not just it's not
as simple as just form in structure I
would say I think that you know those
are the things that we use as starting
points but of course it's it's a
combination of how you express it and
the you know and the spatial sort of
definition of it
so maybe what a maybe what I define as
character is more the kind of spatial
definition of the experience that you
would have in a building meaning that if
you strip everything down right
you should still experience something
it's not that in the so in the full
generic nosov what we use to understand
as flexibility as the kind of let's say
the typical plan of the 50s office
building you strip everything down and
all you get is this kind of massive
floor clinked which might i should be
cool stuff it's something but but you
know like I think what I'm trying to get
at is that the the character of the
space should not be dependent on or in
our point of view dependent on something
that you have to add to it or that
therefore you could also potentially
value engineer out of it because that's
most of the time what happens so for us
it's about the kind of integration of
all these different elements that that
then provide for a spatial experience I
don't know if that answers your question
and I guess the first two decisions of
what you like to reference one of your
products you put six apartment units in
a house and like you said stealth
disguised or whatever the term was
there's a certain juxtaposition of those
two decisions from the ground from the
foundation of it that I think implies
that character what I guess you're out
here or maybe I'm just protecting here
but I'm interested if that's the
conscious decision or if that's
something I'm reading into I don't think
I'm just so that but I think well if
you're referring to this idea of form
and structure being the generative force
behind what's character then yes we are
very consciously working with structure
as a generator or form in space so they
were flexibility it's a very flexible
work now in our day we could think about
flexibility defect or any such thing we
were reminding the materiality of most
architectures very differently
how it grows over time we can think
about flexibility about housing using
complete constructions will keep on
growing over time and this would give a
very different materiality service order
and your case is really interesting the
fact that you are talking about
flexibility in a contest was where
everything seems to be fixed and rigid
in a week and I was wondering I was
enjoying how for you the world
flexibility becomes more like like an
ethic in a way so I mean I think it
doesn't have to do with the fact that
this is a society over time I don't
imagine many of these especially not all
over time
I think this world gives you a certain
constraints in terms of or a certain
need for integration structure geometry
materials everything together a logic
that has to do with flexibility but at
the same time precise work yeah no I
mean I think I think I think I I could
see where you're I could see where
you're going with that I think that'd be
um so for us maybe we were more
interested in in or let's say you know
for some time we were kind of looking at
a lot of projects that for us have been
really sort of canonical as spatial
examples and references and you know
some of them also kind of
infrastructural and that have kind of
stayed on overtime or that people have
reappropriation and used you know and
and and I think what fascinated us was
like why do you know why are some
buildings torn down and why are others
kept you know why do people you know
like to inhabit certain buildings over
and over whereas others are you know
discarded even though they're equally
built well or like you know solidly
and so for us this my kind of reference
to the character has to do with
something which kind of you know gives
it life even if it's unoccupied
you know that the idea that the building
still retains an experience which is
which is not just about the program
that's inside of it but about the space
that exists I don't think
[Laughter]
you might see the role more explicit
material finish explorations and the
spatial narratives all of the projects I
think are in a way diagrammatic
Jefferson positions you establish the
certain reporter ones regular and
rational and then they wanted divergent
from it and that diagram is fulfilled
with such thorough austerity I'm curious
because I I have suspect that you enjoy
the fact that the distinction within
this puzzle is not one that's made
through a material distinction but at
the same time I can want to know more
about how you might conceive of the role
of materiality as part of understanding
this narrative mm-hmm I mean then
actually it is I mean so maybe to the
part of the austerity is that we are
very conscious about the spaces also
being a kind of background meaning that
it's not the thing that dominates your
experience but rather the backdrop that
allows the way in which you inhabit to
to be there so the idea for example for
this building was that there is a
certain sort of reduction in terms of
color and things like that of the built
stuff so that the things that come into
inhabit become the color for it so there
was supposed to be a weight in way more
furniture that's there but because of
budget cuts thing they got fewer but the
furniture for example were the kind of
colorful soft elements and things like
that I would that we begin to inhabit it
we also thought that once the students
come in there will be posters and things
that kind of you know what would be on
those walls so in a way the
kind of austerity of it was a kind of
backdrop to allow for that chaos to
happen that was one thing but it's also
that that diagram that you're talking
about is actually materially supported I
mean I'm just gonna try to go back to a
maybe you can see that better here is
that so we had two types of concrete in
that atrium space the grid is actually a
white concrete so it had white pigment
in it and then the the what he called
flood these big planes of concrete that
actually embracing their Verity like
walls that are flying through space that
those are actually in just a normal
natural concrete and we very we had to
fight for that because of course the
white concrete is more expensive but for
us it was actually an important
distinction that it wasn't about this
kind of overall hole but it was about
those two parts and so that materiality
is I mean it's a bit matter istic maybe
like I think in a real of two Swiss
office would probably not do that
distinction I think it's it's too much
of that diagram but for us it was
interesting to to to understand that
also as two separate types of spaces no
well we we would if we had to let's say
but we we didn't like where are my
limits kind of things yeah I'm trying to
test your limits and what constitutes in
your mind applied
characteristics is painted occasion
versus an aggregate which is not so I
have a confession I will go back to
another slide for that confession sorry
it's a sorry for the dizzying speed but
I just want to know you know what it's
too far it's too far back
Shay
so where would it be the most
oh I don't have the image that shows it
on the other side anyways but she maybe
I opened this one
so in the image below you see the the
Biden school with the with the beams
coming out yes
alright so that was important to us that
that came out but it's it's not truly
truly the extension of what is inside
and despite the fact that it is wood
construction which is the only material
that technically would allow for you to
have no thermal great bridge you know
and you know we had originally conceived
it that way but then the kind of fire
protection authorities came in and you
know basically said it could not be
continuous it had to be broken and so we
had to introduce a thermal break in
there even though we didn't really need
it and so those beams
no they're not to spend it from the roof
they're just tied back into the facade
but they're not as continuous as we had
wanted them to be the ones on the
general problem of there were held in
tension yes exactly and that was because
we wanted the uniform expression we
wanted on the outside confidence yeah
and you know and also they turn the
corner because actually they don't turn
the corner but they do
[Music]
looking around this swiftness because
that switches never do that there's a
subtle non-swiss miss to all your
projects and I think that's what makes
them interesting and it's not it's not
flexible I think the closest I can come
is juxtapose which I think the number of
people have pulled out that a lot of
your products are really two buildings a
building inside a building or two
buildings kind of in a slight conflict
with each other
that in in that kind of moment produces
this other nuts not the super tight
tight Swiss fit and maybe there's some
maybe there's something wonderful about
two things that are so tightly fit
together the fact that they rub against
each other produces this slight nonce
business that's evocative or elusive to
a possible misuse or mystery dinner or
flexibility that's not actually
flexibility in planning the flexibility
and misappropriation yeah actually I
could I could go with that just last
moment of curiosity because you're one
of the few lecturers were both educated
and have taught at European and American
institutions do you think this sort of
like conservatism
or a historic act architectural
character of a country is encouraged in
the academic institutions or higher
education schools in that country for
example
ETH that different from Jersey it's very
different it's very very different and
do you think the sort transition is it
is a restraining or a sort of fun a
change that you do not want to confront
or is this something that meant progress
sorry the suck those how do you view
those differences when you transition I
see them as a result of a context so you
know the the Swiss context or the
European context it's very very
different it's also a context that has
been built up over a number of years
same thing with the American context and
I enjoy them for the different aspects
that they bring to the table I have to
say I probably have an affinity now more
towards this sort of European context
that I did before but but it's also
because I operate there now I think you
know one of the reasons that that I
moved there you know it's not just me
it's my partner and myself and and he is
from there but we neither one of us
really practiced in Switzerland before
we went and started our office there but
we very consciously chose to go there
because we wanted to build we wanted a
practice that was building we wanted to
actually be engaging in work where we
could test our ideas and part of that
was also my own you could say
insecurities and and frustrations
while I was here trying to start an
office and we were in New York we were
bunking it out in the West Village
trying to get you know projects and then
realize that we were doing competitions
in Europe and flying over there to hand
in these models and you know and it just
wasn't worth it
and and and I think you know for me also
like I had a huge insecurity about
teaching before having built my
project under my own name you know I had
worked on projects and other offices but
it was something that I really wanted to
do and and I just didn't feel like I had
the authority to command you know the
the attention of students if I didn't
actually have that under my belt so it
was a very personal thing I I don't you
know necessarily think that everybody
has to approach it that way but but for
me that's the kind of context that I
chose and I think in in Switzerland you
are able to do that because the because
the the context of academia and practice
is not so distinct it's really about
feeding into each other and therefore
for better or for worse you know there
may be a certain let's say what would be
here perceived as a certain kind of
conservatism but there it's actually
it's much more about experimentation
through a kind of constructive practice
which basically means we are bound by
the constraints of what is possible in
the realm of construction at that time
or within a limited scope of time
sorry what the word of growth yo the
word like appropriation has been used
through I was running what are your
thoughts perceptions so appropriation
well in the way that I'm understanding
you're asking it is like people that
appropriated after its use or that's
kind of how I was introducing it before
in that context I mean I think a lot of
architects are afraid of people coming
in and and inhabiting their buildings
like if we see a lot of architectural
photography for example they're empty
spaces that are empty or you know
buildings and and of course a lot of
famous architects even book clauses and
then contracts where you know people
can't touch their buildings afterwards I
think we have a very relaxed attitude
about that or in fact we we maybe even
embrace that the fact that the moment we
hand over the keys that building doesn't
belong to us we may you know have the
privilege of having our name associated
with it but it's not ours it's it's it
belongs to the people that inhabit it
and and they should be able to
appropriate it in the way that they need
to of course you know it would hurt if
they actually started to change things
in a way that didn't in some ways
support the the kind of experience of
that of that space but it's also
something that you know we just have to
understand is part of the kind of
reality I mean the moment we walk away
we can't control what happens inside a
building I mean maybe it's also one of
the reasons why we try to do things that
are hard and that are to some degree
austere that that that actually you know
kind of puts a framework around what
they can or cannot do
there's quite a number of them in
Switzerland well you know the thing is
that a lot of so you know what you guys
see as Swiss architects here are
obviously the ones that are not the
Swiss architects that are doing the
competitions we're doing you know
because they're like you know they have
they have they're in the league of their
own where they have private clients and
the freedom to do things that we would
never have
I mean we're competing with kind of you
know like the the standard office you
would say which goes for public projects
and those are not glamorous projects we
try to make them in our own way but you
know there are yes and there's all sorts
of legal moves now for clients trying to
own the contract documents which you
know are an instrument as a service
there's all sorts of new clauses that
are trying to overturn any presence of
the architect whatsoever so I'm just
impressed that my questions are they
just the elite yes well I mean let's
just put it this way there are
architects or a in architect who can
basically you know tell a client when
and how long he needs to build a
building and also you know the the kind
of budget that he would command and that
same type of architect would be also you
know the one that can put these types of
clauses in his favor
power well power in the sense that you
know he doesn't need projects to survive
he he does projects because you know he
can he can command that well it's not a
fact well I mean get him to but but it's
nice and what is it would make a client
want to change a building or not afford
to kind of honor the character and to
for plan to feel that part of the
relationship they sustained with an
architect in the building is the
stewardship yep and I think here I mean
it's pretty Cooper because in the
foundation building there's something
about the austerity of this building the
interior of this building that in many
ways is invisible and so our client
sometimes the stewards of this building
they can't even see the character of the
building
it is so austere so you know I think
there's something interesting about the
conversation of the swiftness and like
how much character do you need to put
into a building so that its qualities
and characters are visible and a client
our user understands how to sustain it
and to honor the character and when
discipline we have a similar condition
across the street where our new academic
building it is extremely in your
syncretic and its architectural
character our character is is in some
ways very aggressively and it's a
response when a moment may come for
applying to make and necessary
adjustment to the building to this it's
kind of willfully it's a little hard for
me your work your interior work is so
finally resolved it's a yes I mean I'm
for sure I would care but I think that
there is a kind of idea so this is why I
like I'm you know the word appropriation
was also a little unclear in terms of
what type of appropriation but I mean I
think that in a way we imagined that the
building could just be used in many
different ways without having to be
restrictive you know so they could
reappropriation there's a certain logic
so I think it's the difference between
forcing people to do some you know in a
certain way so buildings that are maybe
so idiosyncratic that you force the
users to only be in a certain way are I
think for us not necessary
what we deem as character for us it's
it's really about a kind of generosity
of what we offer so we put down you know
some guidelines of types of spaces that
provides a kind of possibility and
usually there's multiple possibilities
and in that multiple possibility there
there is a kind of ethic generosity of
experience that that you can gain from
that and I don't know I don't know if
that's that's clear but it's it's so yes
of course I would care if they
completely you know changed it but to
some degree I'm also in some ways
hopeful that once they understand that
logic they will change it together with
that logic so the interesting thing for
example with this project in Lausanne we
faced so there were four users actually
two of them were also co-owners so we
were dealing with like whatever like for
clients basically because but the real
client was the Canton that the state of
bowl which is a political body which has
nothing to do whatsoever with the school
they don't occupy the building at all
they're just like the people that hold
the purse strings and and the whole
process was about you know making them
understand the value of this space
because the first meeting we went into
one of those co-owners basically which
is the the private institution that
occupies the top floor and a half wanted
to close off their floor entirely and
completely essentially eliminate the top
part of the atrium you know together
with a skylight business and and so we
fought that a lot they still you know
they didn't understand it all throughout
the process
and then what is the most surprising and
this is why I'm hopeful is that
afterwards they are now the biggest fan
of ability they moved into the space and
like at all the time we're like
receiving emails from them but also you
know there were some journalists going
there independent of us we didn't you
know chaperoned them or anything and and
they spoke
people on that floor and though they
were gushing about the project in a way
that you know we didn't prompt them like
we we were actually hoping that
journalists would not make their way up
there because we were afraid of what
they would actually say and and so I
think that you know look we were a lot
of the debates that happen in house and
are sort of design process and when we
make decisions is about finding that
thing that moment when it's when it
seems natural when things but you know
like basically a lot of the times when
we say okay this is it it's because it's
like oh that works everything clicks
into place it works and it seems natural
and it's it's not that we're forcing
something to happen but that we can step
away and say okay it people will know
how to use that without with us telling
them how to use it so sorry this is part
of her I had I just came from Toronto
yesterday and I gave the earlier talk as
well as another another extension of
that earlier talk which is a view into
our office which is this and and so
these are kind of books that I had
published research that I did when I was
teaching at the EPFL so this one is a
cover for a book called space of
production where I was looking at
basically industrial spaces this
particular one is the boots quits
factory which is in in England that was
left in the 30s and and it's the kind of
construction over the the assembly line
process that's there but we work so
these two books I don't know are you
interested in that
why would it call them ever do that and
why would a cult this is not a caller
this is actually you know the thing that
the conveyor belts that takes those
boxes whatever it is why would they come
abeer built ever do that because you
have actually I don't even know if it's
conveyer belt so much like whatever they
sent down the chute but the these boxes
are the the the what I call it the
supervisors of that production of line
so I assume they're shooting something
down to these people down there
[Laughter]
[Applause]
[Applause]
