[Applause]
so I felt that in these times that we're
in that are going on right all around us
I love your signs and I love what you
guys are doing here at this school I
walked through the students too and you
know students at Columbia are also very
involved and you while they're trying to
get their degree at the same time right
and I think that it's you know I thought
that instead of showing maybe
residential projects I would show some
infrastructural projects so projects
that are within the public realm
so for infrastructural projects that are
in the public realm and so nadir asked
you know I gave a reading right what's
your reading that you're going to give
I'm sure nobody had time to read it but
so I gave this reading which was
lightness by you to look ugly no and I'm
gonna just kind of read a little bit of
my introduction here because I want to
make sure I hit on some points but so
Dianna said you know our office and so
I'm gonna show these projects that's
kind of their test ideas and we're using
we've been head of developing different
techniques as everybody does and they've
changed significantly over time
obviously the kind of different
techniques that we use in our office or
that people are using the studio and
also as I said you know in light of the
fact that this is day 68 but who's
counting right this insane chaos of our
foot administration and that I'm a
practicing architect I want to show you
a little bit of what I practice right
because after I do I'm not an academic
so I'm gonna show you what I practice so
I'm gonna go down what I'm calling a
kind of slippery slope here of using our
work builder otherwise to address this
term lightness and so and this by
slippery slope I mean that given all the
complexity
of an architectural project especially a
built project it makes it difficult for
it to stand as evidence for an idea I
would say but so my slippery slope will
be constructed of a small series of
projects just four projects which span
the you know kind of the length of our
project practice to a certain degree and
kind of by identifying certain aspects
maybe our moments or details attempt a
what I'm calling a consequentialist
logical device using as a
consequentialist logical device and to
make matters worse as I said while on
this slippery slope nadir asked me you
know and others I assume to give a
simple reading for you in advance I
guess so why lightness so as you
obviously know there we go so I selected
Calvino's yes just the one so I can't
breathe right yeah so I'm okay so
lightness was one of the essays and you
may know from reading the introduction
or not that was written by out Calvino
for the Charles Eliot Norton lectures at
Harvard and as you may have read in the
introduction that he never delivered
them as he died right before leading
Italy when he was meant to deliver these
lectures and the memos as he called them
our lectures on the value of literature
that held the you know felt were
important for the coming millennium and
at the time of his death Calvino had
finished all but the last lecture so
consistency it's a very light so he
hadn't finished that so he notes in his
text that the term lightness varies in
usage and differentiation from physical
weight such as the lightness about balsa
wood but in other words like like a bird
from like I have an expression like like
like
bird as Paul very valerie wrote and not
like a feather so light like a burden
not like a feather so lightness is also
considered a noun so I'm going to use it
as a noun and I'm borrowing from his
term in literature as he extends it in
the essay through anthropology and
ethnology and mythology and I would say
towards architecture because he really
talks also a lot about things and
weights and bodies so I'm thinking today
both about material weight and value for
the term lightness and as this text I'll
say is something that's aspirational and
that maybe we could think about it or I
might be as presumptuous to think about
it as something that might sit let's say
on a shelf along some of these projects
or something is a kind of sitting there
alongside kind of as a reminder of
something that's in my head so I've
borrowed this title and I've combined it
with the words other infrastructures and
my thought here is that lightness and
other infrastructures might sometimes
address this material latent value
directly or indirectly and I'm not going
to be consulting my steel manual this
was my steel manual when I was a student
here and it's all tabbed and probably
you know people here you know had them
but you know that was so that's not the
kind of lightness I will necessarily be
referring to but so so some questions
here so can lightness so I'm thinking
about lightness in its multiple meanings
and to focus let's say on a space and a
kind of heightened and exaggerated sense
so space in which big and small things
move space where events happen a space
which is full so can you subtract weight
from architecture or from people so
these are just some images of some
projects these are not necessarily the
infrastructure projects but can lightest
be of value lightness as a value rather
than
defect
so lightness soon he says soon reveals
its true and unbearable weight so how
thin so this question how thin could
have support me this was kind of a
question about this house how thin can I
support me and architects as
practitioners I want to say because ours
is but it's an art of kind of
indirection and as architects we
obviously don't make buildings but we're
rather we make this elaborate set of
instructions right that direct the work
of others we make this elaborate set of
instructions that direct the work of
others who actually make the buildings
so you know we all think formation
choice should be very elaborate you know
attempts at getting towards it with the
model of the drawings they try to get
closer and closer so this is a I'm sorry
it's blurry but it's a very intense
construction document for a land port of
entry on the border between Canada and
the US
so between our intention and the
materialization of a built work a
multitude of institutional mechanisms
intervene when we're building something
both of finance of law of industry of
trade that inexorably shape and
impressed and encumber and threatened to
suffocate both the process and the
product of our art of what we're trying
to do so these things are like a real
struggle and I'm gonna present as I said
before infrastructural projects so I
want to just show oops I'll go here too
so this question of how scale can play a
role in the nature of of lightness and
there we go so in this case a Ferry
Building where a door something that is
kind of extra-large a huge door which
extends from exterior to interior
through movement to expand a very very
small space into something maybe much
larger this is a photograph I do to the
Turner that I like because it shows how
thin the door is like it's incredibly
thin but then when opened it kind of
makes this huge other space it's very
dark that's that's the bed of an
aircraft carrier so it's thinking that
that in keeping the pair just clipping
the building to the edge and keeping the
majority of the pier open rather than
dropping it in the middle that it would
be like a kind of aircraft carry of
space where where things happen and
change through there's something what do
you think well my it's like something in
front all this is okay right
it looks great here there that's it yeah
that's what it actually looks like there
you go okay so this very thing okay
there you go Thanks
perfect okay it's like no it's not
advancing and this thing keeps popping
up in front okay
so the building makes room for expected
and even unexpected events like this
excessiveness of real occupation here on
the site immediately fallen 9/11 as a
piece of urban infrastructure when it
was one of the only ways to get in and
out of lower Manhattan when all the
subways were if you remember ever seen
that subway map where there was nothing
below I don't it was 34th Street or
something so this kind of
and space that was meant to anticipate
so so the this this space of lightness
I'm thinking about kind of edges and
boundaries and kind of opening up edges
and these are just some examples of some
kind of edge conditions and Corning in a
model and in the building of this kind
of edge condition between a booking
lightness that has a space within it
then Episode III that's a detail from a
handrail with a similar kind of space
but I want to talk about and this is a
space of the facade of 53rd Street where
we were trying to push out just a sketch
trying to push out into kind of a window
that could actually look all the way to
the Hudson River from inside so I want
to talk for a minute about this idea of
architecture right the that art I mean
infrastructure and architecture and
infrastructure in that infrastructure I
would say is of course it's this basic
physical organizational structure as a
definition of facilities structures rows
power supplies but it's also needed for
the operation of society so so I'm
thinking of these projects that projects
that are both maybe for institutions
like an educational institution or the
port's that I'm going to show or an EMS
station or these kind of pieces that are
needed so I'm extending it to an
educational facility but this is a
project for OSU and it's their Student
Health Services Building and it's in
addition to a Student Health Services
Building and so I was walking through
your studio and seeing all your
beautiful models and wanted to show you
how we're kind of using models in a very
direct way to produce something like
kind of directly from something you
might produce in the studio into a
building so we were studying it's in
addition to a
it's a precast kind of 70s building and
we wanted to work with the precast
material as a way as a kind of context
relationship to this existing structure
so these are just different profiles
that we made with our little $27 wire
cutter in the office using the four inch
blue foam and the floor and four inch
foam also maybe the six since we were
using because a little deeper because
that was kind of a limit that the form
we knew we were going to use would work
with so we were studying a bunch of
profiles and let's see
so here's more of those profiles in the
office and we're kind of looking why
would you use one over the other and
then we sent them to the concrete
fabricator in Columbus and he just took
those made some old molds of them so we
can study them to see look at those
profiles how tight we wanted them how
loose we wanted them we were looking for
a kind of softness and lightness about
this kind of wall system on the exterior
of this building
these were full-scale they're about that
size profiles they're actually so on the
wall or look we're setting them in the
wall in the office we're looking at
these profiles and we're actually
looking at how we could have just four
forms that we could put together by
flipping them around and getting a kind
of a variety of different techniques
right then you can study them start you
know kind of started tweaking them from
the phone model in the drawing and then
they're limited of course by what fits
on a truck that you can drive down the
road and get to a site right so these
all of these things become part of your
constraints and this very complicated
world that I was talking about right
you're building and then this is I love
this photo because it's so banal looking
but so that's the best that's facade of
the building just trying to create this
kind of curtain softness on this edge
which is a new entry for this Health
Services Building at OSU so and I'm
going to show these two port projects
that are so
port of entry
so a land port of entry and I just spoke
it at that Columbia we're counting we
did something for day 64 and I talked
about the wall in Mexico so well the
point is not a wall a port is actually
something that is welcoming that is
about trade it's about Commerce it's
about ideas about people crossing you
know it's open so these are two projects
at the northern border that somehow our
little office got and we did all the
construction documents for and they're
huge projects through this design
excellence program that they have at the
federal government where they decide
certain projects they're gonna hire you
know design architects or something
whatever that means but anyway they
thought we knew something about
transportation I think as we made a
canopy once so anyway and maybe from
Corning so we made this little drawing
when we were interviewing for the
project because we started thinking
about the border is not a lot just a
line that you cross members talking
about a line and it kind of wallet space
but as something that is perpendicular
to that crossing that has a number of
things because it's very intense in
terms of this program a number of things
that you cross and come into contact
with or that are actually happening from
the side of the operation side versus
when you're just driving through when
you drive through you're you know you're
just kind of nervous right and thinking
oh if they're going to think I did
something wrong or I mean everybody so
it's kind of nervous and then you don't
realize that they're all these sensors
in the ground and they know everything
about you by the time you get to the
booth and you know hopefully
everything's okay and you just sail
through so you go up here but so this is
you know one of these drawings with a
million options like one of these kind
of constraint drawings i quick what do
we do and here at Messina actually
this in this case it crosses it sits on
a reserve what was a reservation for the
Aquos osmium Native Americans and they
cross all the time because they're they
play the cross on one side they've got a
cemetery on one side and there's some
kind of a island across the river that
they this a reservation worth a lot are
living and so one of the things we were
able to accomplish was to actually make
the road shorter for them which I'm very
proud of that so they're because they're
driving many times a day across this so
this spaghetti actually there were
intentions so at the northern border one
of the things that we realize when we
went there is that when you're coming is
we're doing you know the American side
the US side so when you're coming from
Canada and you're crossing the facade is
always in shadow because you're coming
from the north going to the south so
you're always agreed that this is the
building that was there you're always
greeted with this facade that's in
shadow and oh wow you know what are we
gonna do with that you know it's always
in shadow and so we started to study how
we could bring light now to daylight on
to a North facade was there some way we
could bring light you know like from the
south on to the north so that you would
see it would be naturally lit maybe for
part of the day anyway so that was one
of the agendas you're looking at so then
here's some of the construction
documents and then that light monitor
and the channel glass and facade that
receive that light the a port is also a
lot about seeing right about seeing from
one space across these sight lines are
all very important from interior to
exterior this is a little office that
kind of has these ears to steal light
from the neighbors so that you get
actually more daylight so all these
little things so I don't think the
federal government was interested in or
even the port directors were that you
know I mean we were just doing
architecture
kind of over here but at the same time
we're solving all their problems so
that's kind of another thing I want to
say today is that you know projects like
this there's actually a lot of room for
architecture and without anybody
necessarily even knowing you know what
it's happening maybe okay I mean I am
calling on me getting it presumptuous
and calling it that but so here's the
facade with the channel bus and it
actually I just was up in McGill
University a couple weeks ago and they
the students I'm showing to the students
and they cross it a lot and so they were
telling me how the light changes so much
on this facade because it's moving right
you're seeing the light from behind
which is the those lines are actually
obviously the lines of the skylight so
it changes as it moves through the day
and so when I said I think the reason
one of the reasons we were able to get
who knows why you get a project but we
had done a canopy for continental
airlines at LaGuardia Airport and so at
a port there's a lot of canopies there's
an excessive amount of canopies because
there are a lot of transactions that
happen outside but have to be weather
protected but then also have to have a
very very high quality of light level at
night right so that's kind of okay
that's the constraint you're working
with right so the canopies aren't I
guess very excited about the counties so
we at the two ports at one here at
Champlain we were we tried to make a
canopy out of this single surface just
out of steel plate out of a 5/8 inch
thick steel plate that was folded and
have it only be that material this is a
canopy we had done at North Carolina at
the project for the outdoor amphitheater
and the column and showing it to you
because it counts because we borrowed
these columns from our earlier project
for this project so there's the canopy
in the cinema so here are these similar
kinds of columns that are start to be
shaped and here they are being made they
had to be slit they get slit and sit
down on something I mean on their base
and we wanted to to angle them like we
did at North Carolina so that there were
a sense of movement that can express a
sense of movement as you were passing
through them weren't just static and
this is the continental canopy which we
had done and much earlier and this this
project was so this is also against
students so we didn't have a project for
a canopy we were hired by some image
consultants I think they were for
cutting all airlines and we were
supposed to do ticket counters for
Cottonelle Airlines ticket counters and
all this stuff you come in contact with
so we're in this new terminal is being
built and we realized that you know
those are not the ticket counters we did
by the way but the only thing that got
built here was the canopy we realized
that the agents couldn't even see their
computer because the light was coming
from the south it was so bright they
couldn't really see the screen and they
were like we need something and we said
you mean oh we need to make a space here
for you you know so we kind of got our
toe in the door wiggled it around you
know it didn't let it slam and we said
well we need to do a canopy as part of
this image program and then we had to
prove that we wanted to make something
we ended up we were working with Dean
Orton son structural engineer you
probably know key and we all got
together and decided we wanted to try to
use carbon-fiber we wanted to use a
material that was incredibly light to
make this canopy that had never been
used architectural so then we had to go
get it but yes they never dollars I
ended up doing it but anyway the point
being these are there's like 66 of these
pieces that March down they just took it
down recently was up for quite a while
that March down terminal was terminal C
I think and this piece was made by a
boatbuilder Eric gets up who worked on
racing sailboats and
shells and things like that so carbon
fiber and Kevlar so it's very thin is
incredibly strong and he was really
proud that it's this little
infrastructure project he was very proud
that the glass is actually working in
compression and tension that was one of
the things he was trying to do so you
can actually can did a chin-up on this
thing it's very very strong so so back
to the canopy so here we're trying to
now use a single material couldn't use
carbon fiber because if it's used
exterior like on sailboats you have to
put a lot of paint it doesn't
necessarily last they don't necessarily
have a way of working where it's gonna
have the way it can last in this kind of
weather over time so we were trying to
see how we could think about this
origami idea folding the steel working
with our engineers era and you know
working with those folds and the bends
and the welt so that we find the
profiles that have obviously the least
amount of this is this guy right here
trouble going on like red is trouble
right in this drawing so here here are
those plates and fabrication and then
they like the concrete prefab wall it's
brought to the you know the width of the
things determined by how we can get
there on the highway again it gets
craned up and assembled at so that's a
Champlain at Messina we had an
opportunity there's another canopy so we
got very involved with this I could
bring all that this idea of trying to
make something like how how much how
light can it be and how far can I span
this cantilever and and so you don't see
a fold it's a shape right that's kind of
and it also by the way has to serve as a
light fixture the lights not coming down
I wanted the light the lights are in the
ground shining up so that the whole
canopy serves as this illuminated
surface that provides a really nice you
know surface for people you by the way
you don't want to be in this area
because this is called the second
inspections where they take your whole
car parts so yeah
anyway so here's that canopy right so
it's a you know flying out there and
then this is what the profile looks like
so we wanted to get the edge as thin as
possible
but also you know there's like a little
rain little rain gutter there right
there but that you know you don't you
don't ever see that thickness obviously
but that and having expand as much as
possible so this is steel how long is it
cantilever on that I'm gonna say birdie
no I'm gonna say there's a guy right
there I'm gonna say 24 something like
that 24 I'm saying yeah maybe centerline
so then that to the facade and we saw
there so these are so I'm kind of tell
talking not really talking about the
project and the program so much but
about these techniques that we were
trying to achieve in these kind of crazy
intense infrastructural projects so
there are a series of outbuildings and I
will go into them all and now I have to
kind of get back here with the mouth
somehow to take this thing off of here
but no the mouse has disappeared because
I can't advance the slide okay where's
my mouse sorry
did you see it oh there it is okay but I
can't I can't sunshine up there he is
okay I have to there's something in
front of my image and that's why I can't
there's something wrong with projecting
so this is why the outbuildings we we
got this idea this is really crazy idea
but I had this idea that I didn't want
to have curbs in this building because
there are these out Billy I didn't want
to have all these buildings sitting on
curbs
right look you know sitting on curbs and
then you're driving around the car is a
lot of movement around the car
I'll show you some of those drawings so
so we developed a whole way of
eliminating the curves in the project
since is how do architects keep
themselves entertained but because I
wanted the relationship with the
building to be you know very clean with
the ground and have a kind of permeable
surface here and we convinced them
because we said or the snowplow you know
this is really gonna be a big problem is
there's so much snow up there and the
snowplow is gonna run into these curbs
it's gonna be a big truck big problem
it's you're much better without curves
so they let's do it so it's 88 this site
by the way so we and we were working
with Michael Beirut at pentagram and we
wanted to so we got this idea I want to
use yellow as a colour that would orient
you so this is it I don't you don't have
a million signs right but color could
maybe orient you through the site and we
didn't have curbs
so how do you know what you're supposed
to walk and not walk and where the cars
go and all that so we start to develop
this idea of yellow as this
environmental graphic err you know idea
of like how to find your way around the
site and if it was yellow is kind of
where people could walk and yellow like
yield sign yellow that kind of yellow
that was the yellow we used so this is
so Sean Gallagher was working in the
office
everybody knows Sean he's DSR anyway he
this is one of the drawings he made of
just the the yellow like the world of
yellow and the projects that goes into
the buildings some places and kind of
unifies everything together so this is
the whole site and you see some of the
yellow and how it becomes as places
where you walk and it comes something
facade and right so here these fields so
look at no curves like that so
so these sloping feels that they're kind
of moving the water away also our areas
where people can watch because there are
a lot of big trucks a lot of vehicles
moving around here you know in the
architectural photographer is not taking
his pictures like right now Michael
Moran
so here's another example so yellow of
course has to be use on these bollards
that are you know also everywhere it's a
world of bollards these ports so you're
organizing all the colors and then the
yellow so you know can go in go to the
building you see the yellow and insanity
right there it is then there's a kind of
yellow cork behind the desk at the
inside and then you know railings some
places kind of slowly moving railings
and have angles that you know kind of
keep people where it gets a little too
steep near the yellow and then this is
the customs agents are in here so there
are these two outbuildings that they
wanted to buy they wanted to just
they're the GSA days a week will the
customs and CBP is the client customs
board code base we can just buy
buildings off the shelf we can buy you
know just a kind of building that is
just made up you know we can buy from
catalog we don't really need you to sign
these two buildings so then we had to
show crew that we could make these
buildings for the same price they could
basically do a butler building right so
that was kind of our agenda here to make
something very economical but had we
felt an improved quality of life for the
people working in there ie natural light
maybe as one thing as possible so you
walk across the stripe yellow you'd go
into the yellow wall where there's a box
that is where there are offices and
they're also vehicles in here this is
the plan of the building I just kind of
found this recently but what I wanted to
show so these are offices but this part
of the building is a water tank that
wall of the building it's actually the
south wall of the building is a double
concrete wall that is both holding that
wall at the building and part of the
structure but contain
the reserve water system for spring
clearing in case of fire right because
wood they're like no fire hydrants
around here so we had to have so we made
this as a kind of in the building we
made a wall this is the wall that it's a
board finished concrete that actually
holds the water it kind of helps the
building stands up because it has the
trusses and then it also contains this
water so these are two buildings the two
buildings so that's that customs
building and this building is a building
that is I never thought I'd be saying
these words this building is a building
is just for scanning trucks so that's
this so here it is a building that's
just for scanning trucks I get it I get
to design a building for scanning truck
they wanted to buy a butler building oh
no we can design that building so we
wanted to bring they were gonna have any
natural light and so what we did was we
have this kind of cantilever right that
lifts up and pulls up with to bring the
light in from the West and then also
that's this is the light that supplies
daylight for the scanning and then this
life is at the level of a body of a
person standing in there cuz there's a
little room where somebody goes into so
this is it like this photo of it under
construction so you kind of see how it
separates from the wall the steel holds
that up but it's kind of cantilever it
and prompt right so that kind of like so
here's the building and the yellow again
the yellow is where the person goes in
when their truck is being scanned
so it's like when you're getting your
teeth x-rayed then them the technician
goes out of the room well you sit in
there your truck at scan you know and
then everything's okay but one of the
things we've tried to achieve with this
building was to see if we could produce
a building that looked as if it was
floating like it could it be so light
that it's floating so the earth burns up
to that wall that has this is where some
of its eye level would be inside to
bring light in
you know at that level so I mean I think
for the most part the CBP and the port
director didn't have been probably
perfectly happy to be in a concrete box
as a port building they would have been
perfectly happy to for the ability to be
a concrete box so we were constantly
trying to introduce daylight into their
lives
daylight and light materials that we
could prove were strong enough that you
know somebody wouldn't shoot at them or
whatever so in this case we have a
polycarbonate wall that's a very you
know it's like one inch thick
polycarbonate but it's incredibly strong
and you know a second wall behind it and
that allows light I use this one it
allows light in scarlet but then we have
to show a body there because they don't
want you know they think they don't want
people to see who's in there and you
know it's the whole kind of world of
that going on so here's how that
polycarbonate ball works it's actually a
truss right this is supported vertical
truss that supports it and at the facade
to the north and this is that northern
wall where we wanted at Messina we also
wanted to have light-emitting and a kind
of layering with another condition
beyond so here's that condition when
you're inside you don't actually even
want to be in here by the way but the
students at McGill told me they didn't
come in here because when you're on a
bus you get kind of Shepherd it into
here off the bus and but normally if
you're in a car you never would end up
in here but so there you got to see
anyway so at the facade we we were
working again with this condition of the
light bringing light in from above and
also behind and these layers of the
yellow you of the United States that are
behind the facade of looking north and
so the the final project I want to show
is this little project up in the Bronx
that is
an EMS station emergency medical
services building for a community up
near Hunts Point and the city this is
what first once it was built when it was
finished a few years not too many you're
like three years agos I think that it
two years ago but they instituted a
program when they realized that a lot of
these neighborhoods don't have hospitals
near them you know they used to just
have an ambulance that we kind of sit
there in their neighborhood and then get
dispatched or an EMS truck that would
get dispatched so now this is a place
for the EMS workers to be before they
get dispatched right so it's really some
people it's kind of like a fire station
but they're not cooking and hanging out
as long but they do long shifts so
really good really great people this is
a view from a very large housing he's a
HUD HUD housing project right across the
street so we were concerned about the
roof and what you would see the roof so
we wanted to provide a fifth facade for
that community and again it's just it's
a small building and it has a very weird
kind of configured site and these I
suppose after doing the borders the
port's you know we were working with
this these kind of vehicles moving
through a site but it's it's all about
these radiuses and turning raises the
trucks and it's kind of crazy but so we
end up with this configuration and just
again for you guys so we made a lot of
models this is just these are just the
models stacked up I just found them the
other day back there in the corner so
these are all little models but we were
studying the you know kind of tweaking
obviously the roof these are this is in
that same photo way that the wall was up
but this is the model of the building
but then these are a variety of these
files were kind of studying both the
slope of the roof together with the
configuration right at the building so
they all look really similar but they're
not that we had to keep studying it so
this is what's happening on the site so
there's all these vehicles moving
through this tiny little thing and this
is the idea that obviously that fit
facade and we working with Kate or from
scape who's a really great Landscape
Architect
on this and she's really we're really
excited that we actually have a cistern
in the corner of the building so that
the water the community gardens next
door so this is just the idea the
section it's about moving the air
through and Sun angle and vehicles
moving through so it's very simple
building and it's a very rough and ready
building so like the equipment babe
people grab their stuff they go down to
the trucks they open up the doors but
it's a little building that we felt was
trying to be bigger than it is
so the truss you know that provides this
cantilever at the corner to kind of this
lightness of the upper level and kind of
like muscular nosov this exposed steel
that's on the inside and also be you
know just I mean you kind of work with
what you've got right so we were
exposing all the mechanisms that's
behind this right up in here just to
give more height to this space right to
give a little air the lightness to it
and then there's two different this
that's part of it is operable and then
as it goes further down as I've been
gyms where they can work out down here
actually so that was the image that's on
the poster right so I just want to just
say that I feel that lightness for me
goes with as in the cabin which sa with
precision and determination not with
vagueness and the haphazard that's what
he mentions it and so I feel sympathetic
to that
so my question of this what I was
calling this slippery slope right in
which you know a party like somebody
asserts that some you know that a
relatively small first step leads to a
chain or some kind of related events of
a slow sliding all the way to the bottom
right so the strength of such an
argument of course depends on
the warrant ie of whether or not one can
demonstrate a process that leads to a
significant effect and the mistake and
the mistaken belief in the sense of the
slippery slope in that it ignores the
possibility of a middle ground maybe and
assumes a discreet or kind of direct
treads transaction transition from A to
B from lightness to this by pointing
like this is lightness of course that's
all very you know slippery slope I would
say but anyway that's what I've
attempted to do here and so the first
project I built when I left Cooper Union
was this megaphone and it was for this
is just my like field notes at the end
and it was built on the Left Battery
Park City landfill while they were
building better person look for a
creative time so I did with an artist
and performance artist John Mel Pete and
Erica Rothenberg and they're a series of
you know temporary artworks on this the
creative time organized and the project
was called freedom is called freedom of
expression National Monument it has a
plaque at the base of it there's a
bronze Pat I didn't want bronze but
Erica who I corrupt collaborated with
one to be a bronze plaque so it's bronze
and it says you know this is freedom of
expression National Monument you're
invited to step up and speak out and it
was pointed at the World Trade Center
I've been the financial district in the
World Trade Center when you look through
that hole that's what you saw and people
would go up there and they'd shout about
how they hated their boss and all kinds
of it's very funny but so later when
freedom when creative time was
organizing us some exhibits when the
National when the Republican National
Convention was in New York they wanted
to resuscitate the piece so we rebuilt
the piece and then they're like where
should we put it we said what we should
put it in Foley Square where the
courthouses are well pointed at the
courthouses so we did and then when we
rebuilt it we had to put like
handicapped railings around and had ramp
has handicapped on it but and now
there's a show that's big assembled at
the knees
sit in New York for I think 50 years of
celebrating 50 years of public art where
they're going to reenact it on a terrace
of the building so it's kind of funny
how something like this little thing
kind of has a life of its own this
little very light little piece that I
was very proud to be a part of thank you
the Apple default so anyway I know we
have a reception right I don't know if
we I yeah I mean I could
oh yeah I mean I don't see that much of
a difference you know when you're
working on a prime E like so I just want
to say something about like that we fell
into the work so we at a certain point
because we started like a lot of like
you guys are gonna go up maybe try to
start an office I don't know at some
point you know we were doing lofts like
lost the you know the dreamers gravity
and these little pieces and then a
certain point and we never got to do a
footing even we got so excited when we
got to actually put a footing in the
ground and do a fill in the head of
footing but we were doing a lot of
residential work and I just wanted to do
public work I really wanted to do work
in the public realm and we got the Ferry
Building was a really important project
for us so that was really for me it was
very important because I felt like I
finally got you think you get to get
back to the city you know you get to you
feel like you get to contribute actually
because private work is private work for
private people and even though so in the
case of 53rd Street it's an urban
project so you're contributing to the
urban fabric but everything inside like
I can't take you there you know I can't
go in somebody's unit and poke around so
but the I mean I don't when you're
working I don't see the work that
different it's you you know it's just
the client is extremely different it's
like a multi-headed client and you can't
believe these meetings you know with
like I always call them the $10,000
meeting they're probably more than that
being like all the people that come to
the median sit around the table and just
because that's their job to sit there at
the table huh I love those meetings I
love the meetings where well I like the
meetings that I don't like those
meetings as much as I like the meetings
with the engineers I really like meeting
with you know mechanical engineers and
structural engineers and the team I that
I love those meetings because that's
where you're really collaborating on a
project you're sitting you're thinking
about a project you know you're working
things out
and
really where a lot of design happens
actually you don't do it by yourself in
a corner you know you're sitting and
working you know talking to people so
but I don't the difference is the client
yeah it's just that's what's and maybe
we got to do more architecture we got to
test more things because you know they
were I mean I could present that and
Thom Mayne says the same thing about his
port projects and his federal
courthouses is that you're you never
really talk about the architecture with
them you are necessarily all the site
you might talk about daylight but your
salt you're like you've got your matrix
you're solving the problems you know I'm
solving the problems here so which is
fine it's amazing they like you give
them you know yeah well people are not
saying people aren't they're very smart
of course the community is very smart
but right no but their interest the
reason I'm saying that is that they
their concern is safety and security you
know they've got their whole you know
blinders on for their agenda which they
have to do of course cuz I don't know
that I'm not the expert of that so oh
you call it wait is it a wave gates and
doors is it power history culture the
history of culture
in case our thresholds yet pressures
yeah but that's the between nature
culture inside also public private
individual collective is interested and
then even with the wait what's wrong
wait was has more weight than the world
do you well that's a fuller says
that's a shareholding way right so I was
thinking like right but I'm pleased
about both things I'm thinking about an
economy though it means to it has no
weight yeah they're grabbing on gravity
good job right it's not gravity weight
okay point that it's really the
architects responsibility to bring the
architecture to the project it's really
important and then any project no matter
how small how big how much an object how
much a site or even an activity that its
it really is our that or what we bring
to that big table that very big $10,000
table is the architecture the likely
delight the delight every crime
not necessarily expect others to
understand that arena of expertise
automatically you know they all have
their own areas of expertise so I think
you know I think your your lessons are
fantastically realized then yeah that's
what we bring in there is to constantly
return the conversation in how we
approach honoring those concerns that
the clients have is through architecture
for is in the psyche of the building
what is it corrugated oh it's a window
yeah and that's we know the window it's
a great it's just still wasted in I
didn't talk about no it's it's the
horizon area but it's like rating yeah
but that vertical write the range sit in
there
well they don't sit together very easily
I know that's my corrugated a a
corrugated material in a frame i buy
this is on for several details right and
I know do search a lot and Sonny was
pretty fast in the beginning so I think
that there's there's a lot of detail in
achieving
some of those road gestures that you
talked about when you were I'm saying
there's a lot more than just you know I
was being redundant main gesture so if
they're gonna sit on this pace and other
great use of materials and they like so
you did it but you you talked about the
way you carry that but just brilliant to
get their life is it cetera London or
site but it's trying to be thorough
Matic with the essay because I had an
assignment are using these for students
right right but I mean it student like
that miss each essay question yeah so
right here
design New York detail and these were
you always at the draw it's not just
gotta see the details
mmm think DJ's would allow these to be
would it end up being rather than just
you know sketch well I always think you
draw something are you making on cuz you
don't know you don't draw cuz you know
you'd make the drawing because you don't
know and you're wondering exactly how is
this gonna see start drawing like that
was something about the light like how
he'll come to get the light over here
you know so you're just thinking with
your pencil but you had a question which
is the way you're able to get these jobs
that like you get the job at these ports
are these porters and you're sort of
like bringing them up a little bit and
making them more holistic place it isn't
making better light and everything's
political radical or I'm just wondering
like at what point will you like could
doing a public sculpture hurt your
ability to get these these jobs would
you give up one for the other personally
well I did that piece a long time ago I
mean I do architecture and I said that's
what I saying is like my art is art you
know it's our anarchic tights my art but
so you see you're saying with one
threaten the other or something would
one I don't know
I don't would hope not yeah I mean just
speaking out one would hope that
wouldn't right I'm just speaking
but I mean it's funny you know like
being on this public design commission
I'm on this thing in the city here or we
look at all the work because I'm really
very committed to public space in the
public realm and you have to go through
a s like a 88 page investigation that's
something that two people in this
country never did and they hold they
hold office the president the vice
president so I had to go through the DIA
you know this DIY a this huge
fingerprinting everything to serve on
this commission and I guess I was very
boring so they let me serve on it but
it's interesting that we have a
president who didn't have to go through
something on tonight to show his taxes
didn't have to you know so no I'm not
afraid I'm definitely not afraid I
wouldn't be afraid I mean but I don't I
mean I don't know exactly how to answer
your question but I would think that one
would not but I but the the other thing
I want to say about the border stations
I was on a jury at GSD and I think was
Jewish snow who had done a really
beautiful border port and like Minnesota
at a wood very beautiful small port of
entry there and so she was doing it as a
studio project and she had some of these
people from the GSA who were our clients
representatives come just sit on it and
they said the most remarkable thing I'll
never forget he's Delgado Vincent
Accardo said you know these buildings
someday to me we might not even need
them this building might be something
else like it could be a cultural space
or something like that
can I just thought oh my god you know
when that'd be great
if we didn't need this kind of it's
really like a police building it's
really a police station at the border
but if you didn't need those and so
making it to think about the quality of
life and the quality of eNOS
face but not trying to be in like a
police state mind when you're making the
building so he was I don't he was he was
one of the client representative working
on the courts he was a he worked for the
GSA but he wasn't Casey Jones he wasn't
in charge of design excellence he's an
architect he ended up he's now at
Cornell head of facilities running a
building program there they're still
there they're doing courthouses yeah
courthouses yeah I'd love to do a
courthouse we had one but it dropped out
of sight well they're now they're
building a lot of embassies yeah
the State Department's building off
embassies and they've hired very good
architects yes so it's gonna be
interesting to see because embassies are
also like you know all small build
answer to both did
we ready cut or anything there crank to
the south Pete or recognized well
because of that of the quantity no Civic
architecture right and because of the
design excellence program it's a program
that then the city has that program too
and that's how the EMS station have we
got to do the city never hired design
architects to do anything and then they
David Birney started kind of modeled it
after the federal government yeah so
anyway this is for all you guys when you
go out of here so it's into cultural
[Music]
[Music]
history something like tilted our foot
allowing to say we still have that piece
it's like mothballed in New Jersey I
remember one of them
you won't be allowed to go anywhere
honestly the bigger question is this
this judge may not know Frankie
serigraph dear Christian pastor library
when I start any chose that
in public
but they're all different
and you guys
[Music]
