[Applause]
you can imagine my my graduated in 82
and I remember sitting in this room as
much as you have been sitting in this
room and some indelible comments from my
wonderful amazing influential professors
is it includes some of the work well all
the work actually I'll be showing today
so uh I've got a bit of a message if it
comes through that will be terrific and
we just begin with my drawing practice
and then segue into some large-scale
coastal projects I'm working on right
now so they're not highly developed
finished those may be reflected on my
Harvard exhibition which was about the
belt form the tectonic at a very large
scale these are about sketches of what's
happening on the coastline of New York
City and the part that my firm for
investment associates is playing in that
is the lead architect with an assembly
group of professionals to to move it
forward and take on the vision of New
York 2030 I'm going to begin with a
bridge and I'm in an area was a bridge
this line is in Gettysburg and this line
is divides space as a division in
history it divided my family north from
South animation and has been again it
was an indelible mark in in my life and
in my thinking about space and Helen can
expect space whether it's at this scale
landscape land form architectural form
so on and so on my father's the men in
my father's family taught me how to read
land form at a very young age
there were tobacco growers and brokers
and we're very much tied to the land and
the cultivation of that land meditating
on that idea of the line and form and
marking space cutting it dividing it and
and tying it back together I did this
8-hour drawing so the assignment to
myself was to sit down and eight hours
produce a drawing that would use form to
unmake form so by rapid inscription Oh
form it erases the form
the next project I felt compelled to
show you I share with you was my thesis
project from Cooper Union and it's in
the exhibition soon the era Hutton
gallery right now and the drawings they
were very large or see them in the
exhibition now but at the time there was
as three it's a suite of actually then
six drives Elizabeth of the professor
O'Donnell is actually at my thesis
presentation and they were very large
lives and they the assignment I gave
myself is a fifty or thesis student was
the model I made had to be the same
sizes for drawing the drawing had to be
the same size that's the model so it
wasn't this idea of this it's an eighth
inch scale or quarter scale or it Lilly
was one to one as a model scale and it
was a great moment for me to understand
the power of drawing writ large and
here's the model serves a lot of letters
watches his table and I made it piece by
piece in studio and it was a very
important moment for me from how from
have a gallery it was then in Soho
gallery and it was placed between a work
by Dennis Oppenheim and Mary mess two of
my heroes at the time and it gave me the
tremendous confidence I thought well one
can leave the studio and go out into the
world and still pursue what is so
important to yourself as an emerging
voice and their artists so the other
thing I wanted to speak about in terms
of my work in my drawing practice was we
had a history professor Dorie asked in
who said right here and provided us a
window into the world of art and culture
in New York City you know
period of time from say the 20s through
the 70s and she was just wonderful to us
and taught us so much and I fact I've
sat right here with this gentleman his
city and I always had in the front row
as closely as I could get to show to
respect Ike I wasn't gonna sleep I
wasn't injured coughing he so I was like
I listen to every word she said and I
always made her smile because we were
four beautiful respectful students okay
so I'm late again these are two projects
that and I did not know this it was sort
of when you throw a stone into the well
and you get a splash back much later I
didn't realize how indelible this work
was to me as it reemerged in my own work
but very differently of course
so deco and planets set are two drawings
that I understand later resulted in a
project and then this one this shadow
here so the figure and its shadow as a
material had a huge effect on the work
that I've done as well as the idea of
framing and this one specifically right
there on board called face of these
glass planes and the light lit line by
color and just the changing frames so I
received a commission from the Formica
corporation to reuse a to use a new
material you know you know unexpected
way of surprising way and the result of
that was constellation screws is very
large screen that had navigational
celestial charts across it backlit so
the idea that was projecting notational
form into space through light or
something that was
realizing this in this commission it's a
detail showing the light and its
reflection across the material the next
one was a commission from the New York
Times to reimagine US currency the most
valuable currency in the world with the
blandest money graphically so that was
the assignment I gave to myself was to
one come up with some ingenious system
to foil counterfeiters so the idea was
to have many many many layers like 30
layers and material so it was like
sometimes I should are you nuts time to
unpack it and come up with many layers I
also wanted to speak about cash crops
something that was according to my
family and my heritage so it's tobacco
leaves cotton and so on and so forth
embedded in these old things again part
of the counter foil to the
counterfeiters was that things are very
very old time actions are very hard to
replicate almost impossible and then
finally the cutouts this is that there
is no splash back some of those
of Joseph Cornell's word that you know
these cut out shapes we gave it a
different depth so it wasn't a formulas
strategy it was one that was very much
about intuition and shape to shape and
as you know and when you're reading this
stuff all around to you you just start
grabbing things and putting it together
also this image starts to emerge in this
landscape in this incredible space you
go yeah that's it right so you've got
your piece here and about two feet deep
on paper all around you so that's where
that emerged from and then finally
another commission from the University
of I'm sorry the Cincinnati Art Museum
was to reimagine
the house of the for the year 2000 they
were surprised by this year a lot of
houses but this was my house and the
idea was that like ganas were looking
forward and back record simultaneous
through a threshold that is
infinitesimal infra thin and vast and
super thick and the liminal thick and
here's the PCEHR and so to go out to a
lot of attention because they might know
how it was a house so I hide there I
just sort of placed a the gallery said
very little and let people write what
they want how they want to do respond to
it again that was another sort of
assignment might have be quiet and
listen
and then for me a pivotal project and
when it's tied to the drawing practice
is one title of the law project again
the asagi of line and how thick and thin
that line is how it it connects and
divides and that's Simon I gave myself
was to walk the Manhattan grid and the
device I came up for that was I one of
my tests Peaks was 14th Street so I
started East River went to the west to
the Hudson River and I photographed
every doorway along 14th Street on the
north side and then I replicated that
again on 23rd Street
so and here we got a this could be Union
of course and then these are the the
preparatory drawings for the wall
project again the idea of how you marked
space and how when disrupts the grid how
one unmake sworn by location form and
these are very variations on on that and
then we get to another weather set I
mean I as part of my drawing practice
and assignment I give myself I start
many days with a drawing and I draw may
take an hour and may take a day and they
take a week I may take a month and I
knew that for about three years maybe
four years I'm this huge stack of
drawings near my bed in fact you know
but you wake up and got this idea in
your head and want to sit down
this is for my meditation and it's very
important to me and it gives me a lot of
solace in place to think so the one just
read one here all the sudden light
starting to cut into the paper and
release the form from space it became
his moment work drawing was flexing
towards sculpture very very pivotal for
me so as a preparatory drawing for this
project the wall project which was a
proposal for the battery the very early
moment of New York City right there at
the tip the battery this is the Customs
House Cass Gilbert suppose our building
and I placed it right square in front
that's a visualization of it and then
here's the the plan of the wall project
so it has a note Center it is a open
fluid and flexible which is a
counterpoint to the Manhattan grid which
is rigid a rigid iron being inflexible
very persistent this has a persistent
solid serum but it is completely it's
equal in opposite to that good friend
the next projects I'm going to speak
about are the city city assemble
projects that I've been working on so
here we are again we ought to be Union
down here third break here and we're
gonna be going to West 69th Street now
on the Hudson High Bridge on the western
Bluffs of the Bronx the hardened River
over to South ear which is on the Bronx
River and then to ferry point which is
just
the edge of the Long Island Sound so
these are large-scale coastal projects
and we're being as architects asked to
reimagine and bring our best ideas to
Sydney finance based projects this is
something it started the Bloomberg
administration and because it's public
it takes a very long time for these to
get through the pipe work to the point
where they're giving to the architects
back then then we assemble teams of
landscape architects civil engineers
marine engineers and right now we have
scuba divers on speed-dial which is kind
of fun actually so the idea that the
function of player miles of coastline
we're going to be hardening by the way
today for those of you who remember it's
a sixth anniversary of Sandy and a lot
of this city was in fact affected
greatly by that that moment in time
including this neighborhood we had all
the Sanitation trucks parked here
because it's actually high ground in the
village so yeah it was a seventeen
billion dollar told to the city and
right now the city calculated that for
every dollar that they're investing
they're going to be saving six dollars
in the future so that's what we're a
part of so the protection so we're
creating resiliency along the edge and
we're going to try to mitigate what's
happening along the coast I know this
was important remark as well as bosses
and other cities Boston always said you
know for 15 degrees of rotation the same
you could have hit Boston
so there are mindful of that that
potential so yeah so yeah it's a big
number three point seven billion at
least for public work here in New York
because it's federal state and local
dollars where it's being invest
and leveraged since about 2015 so that's
when it really started rolling and our
involvement start about 2016 and then
what we're really tasked with is
connecting this or the access and the
connectivity
yeah we're reimagining the coastline
because this used to be center to the
center of the grid and now it's being
the focuses to the exterior to the edge
of the grid
the first project I will show you is
very point Waterfront Park is an actor
connective part of New York's first echo
connector park in front of our team was
Thomas Bosley associates Landscape
Architects landing engineer and who's
doing the site site work in fact it was
so degra dated that we had actually two
feet of fill to the to the ground before
you do anything and we started I think
it was with I think 79 and now we're up
to 25 million and we're heading heavy
north of that just because of the the
remediation that had to take place so
yes and it's super important because it
to get rid to the Bronx and a whole
connective system of parts
waterfront and a lot of activity in
terms of the multimodal bicycle walking
trails so here we are this is ferry
point and I just want to point out
because this is public work as I said it
takes it takes time private work on the
other hand is the trunk golf course
which is right behind us that's happened
great we don't know whose money that is
but it happened that's all I'm saying
about that and then here we are coming
much closer so the building that we're
proposing is actually within line
the 18th green and that's again land
that we're developing with Thomas mostly
and there's associated structures Tim
you want I'm on hand laid on the land
connect the water to of the upland in a
very sensitive way for all for all uses
since it's ok the ball of course is fine
this is what we have on our edge its
Becker database it needs a lot of work
in the first moment when you go to the
Sega say what are we going to do with
this this is a mess and so we started
developing the site plan and trying to
connect different parts to a whole and
then we have to of course accommodate
parking here's the building structure
with this series there's a series of
curved walls throughout the landscape
time to different moments together
these are proposal it's a it's a kayak
concession so part of this echo
connector park is that we can now get
into the water and there to always have
this these walls that you could never
like twins twins ten transgress because
there was danger in the water now the
water is less dangerous so the idea is
that we can get get down into the water
literally so this is about active use
area that we're developing and this is a
very simple structure but actually
surfer I know how important it is to be
able to see the building from the water
because it gets foggy out there you get
lost but and it's it's all orange
including the roof which made the Trump
Organization nuts because you can see
you're gonna be able to see orange we're
from an 18-3 so they tried every fan I
think we're gonna win they throw a lot
at us but we're I think we have what
we're gonna hold the line
and so this is harder to get down area
so again breaking down that edge so it
is accessible from for little little
little young children to adults to
athletes and then just some some details
of the Bell
in its context because it's public work
you always have to show happy people if
you have trouble with balloons or even
happier so there you have it they're not
exactly our Cooper our Cooper cool
drawings but you are dealing with the
public and they have to feel welcome to
open hand to any project you're
proposing for them and then here's some
of the details of the structures to
again light on the land but you can get
out into the wetlands the tidal pools
the oyster heart attacks on and so forth
all those little moments supporting the
health of the coastline the next project
is sound view and that is on the the
Bronx River and it's part of the Bronx
Greenway which is a very large system
being pulled together to rehabilitate
and refurbish and reimagine the Bronx
that has been one of the industrial
powerhouses of New York City is a five
borough entity but we're now looking at
it as a city saying you need to clean it
up
fair enough so yeah it was it was was a
marshland and then of course the 28th
landfill really progressed put
tremendous pressure and degraded Berlin
incredibly now we're going to be at
doing it to 205 acre park and tasked
with that is the organization of that
parkland as well so
the municipal buildings that will engage
the community on many levels in terms of
park ranger stations field house
concession comfort station and so on and
so forth so it's in Queens it is a very
rich habitat there's this whole idea
that there's actually things that's
swimming the Bronx River now and they've
come back from the dead and people are
very excited about getting to that edge
and getting on with the kayaking and
running with with the water based the
marine life and thinking that that's one
way to get people to participate and
it's a life it's coming back to life
future is great for everyone so
somebody's argued with the stats not
insignificant so here we are
there's the Bronx River and this is
sound you it's a very large 205 acres
all the way around here you can see
where the cross the way is heavy
industry and this so this was all
landfill and some public housing here
some residential housing here and then a
lot of super highways crossing through
just north of here to get to New England
and then we go in closer and here is
Richmond Avenue and baseball fields here
this is our site having a ranger station
for that I'm showing you one of a few
projects and this is what it looks like
as you're approaching so literally the
end of the roads there and this is the
water side so it's it needs it needs to
be cleaned up obviously so we have
embarked with as part of the team
Landscape Architect to do a master plan
of this whole this whole piece and
trying to connect the neighborhood with
different activities
soccer's whose Fuji popular wetland
habitat studying those for those
children near but in that community and
with school children it is very
important and then all the little areas
such as an amphitheater so on and so
forth and as well as we keep a buffer so
that the tidal wetlands can clean and
mitigate honest or rising tides and then
here's a detail so here it we're right
here so you can see you peasant land
habitat multi-purpose field amphitheater
so on and so forth and it's going to
take a long time for this to happen but
you start with the master plan I mean as
funding happens and as it becomes more
successful you can actually go back to
the federal government say moving that
into 30 million dollars okay we need
another 60 million dollars okay we're
there 20 but it starts to flow in and it
develops and the community gets behind
it more and more it so here's our our
ranger station right here it is it's
going to have an open roof here's a plan
just a very straight forward here the
station itself and here's some
restaurant area isn't a large decking
area that looks to the baseball field
into the wetland area so that's just you
know liquid sketch of what's happening
along the coast here's another one
Riverside tothis is closer to home in
terms of its in Manhattan as we are
sitting here in Manhattan and it's again
pardon this waterfront Greenway project
which develops all five boroughs and
it's linking trails bicycle trails
nature trails and you'll see
let's see it's 66 acres and 32 upland
acres when the whole Riverside Park
South is complete that land actually
came from the Trump Organization because
they built residential towers on the
upland side and so the public lands
below already supported by funds from
that housing our design goals are to
create a performance space and
connecting a superstructure that's
sitting in the Hudson River with a
platform to the upper land create a
really vibrant performance base that's
tied to the actually tied to the water
it's New York Central Penn roads here
they are that's that's back in the day
the opening of the North Highway when it
was like the highways here right in
front of the river is that great we now
know this is not great
we now know like let's take this thing
down right but that was when all the
foodstuffs from the Midwest came into
New York this is part of that this is an
expansion of the High Line so all the
foodstuffs from the Midwest came into
New York and then we're put here put on
these barges and the warehouses in
Central Europe so that's American corn
soybeans and daresay tobacco my family's
a crop with sentir right here here the
Port of New York and specifically
railroads here's a view of that here's
the here's the structure that we're
reimagining as an event space a
performance space actually but you can
see and it's a float bridge so these
floats are coming in with a container so
in the day the railroad car with our
containers of today to load up go across
something hopping and then head out
still quite dense back in the day so
that's 120 so so here's the transfer
bridge itself and maybe you run by there
see that front of the elevated nor a
highway so yes here's vanilla highway
here's all of never sign park south
being developed and there it is sitting
in the remaining Hudson River yes and
that's what it looks like today
so imagine okay cam what are you gonna
do with that well okay let me think
about that
so it's yeah there was a very useful
structure a real workhorse on the
waterfront right now you could go there
this evening and see a projection by
artist Tony Ulster I believe it begins
at 7:00 but this is part of his to this
presentation it's actually it's very
good because the video on it has a
a time-space aspect to it is about
figures and very mysterious and
goblin-like and great music on play so
here's a quick rendering just to sketch
this do this for African Riverside Park
South State hey you know what we want to
do we want to bring blast I'm going to
bring a glass bridge in two glass
bridges the the trailers has two bridges
a north and a south so we can put a
glass pitch through each of them that's
quite open it's a very lacy glass box so
that you can see all around but you
don't you're not able to clear her up on
this because of course very concern is
that people will get and start and get
out and start to climb on the transfer
franchise that's what I would do like a
lot of you take your students right if
you want to get out there my might and
learn about it right but that would not
be that would not be looked upon as a
positive way to access the structure so
we're putting these glass structures in
there is from the up the edge of the
water so we have a platform with glass
into the superstructure coming through
these glass boxes viewing boxes and then
on to a barge that then has an event
space in exceeding all the way around
and the margins are quite quite large
the hundred hundred feet long actually
and then here's a quick next time in
Canary just to show again there's the
glass walkway the especially walkway
into the glass box
two out there and then the the next
project is hybrids hybrids Park this is
up on the western west of the box and
yeah take a look at this okay another
one the city said okay Karen do you want
you to refurbish this and yeah okay so I
assembled escaped Landscape Architects
and civil engineers Lange in and some
other folks to help us reimagine this
area it is a vital link to the Harlem
River from the Bronx I dove high bridge
and here it is back in the 20s so this
is an Ann Hatton sign we look at those
curves than gorgeous gorgeous cars and
then we look on the Manhattan side
here's this it appears these step
streets as it was in the 20s
we're very again a very attributes area
and crossing over from bronze to
Manhattan along the Harlem River this is
the kind of image of space stays with
you I think is it one it's beautiful the
beautiful curves and it also has a very
contemporary feel in terms of form for
our contemporary eyes
so yeah it's um it was designed by I
love this the two tension there was
Isaac Newton and so it's a time-honored
masonry very heavy masonry structure and
it's a vertical drop of a hundred and
two feet the reason it's such a vertical
drop is you know Manhattan tips upward
in Manhattan she stirs up this way and
then kicks up that way so the western
blessing the Bronx are really quite hot
that never large drop so we're
transversing that one or two vertical
drop with a step sleep which is typical
not typical but it's founded
we have these steps toots on the upper
west end of Manhattan because of that
schist shift and shift so our design
goals are creating again a new design a
community performance space so
performance spaces are tied to all this
projects from you from the architecture
perspective as well as being part of
assembling the team to refurbish and we
have rehabilitate the landscape
supporting it and again that waterfront
Greenway is something that is happening
on all five boroughs and I'm sure those
of you who bicycle know how important
that is that you can keep connecting
that you don't get cut off if you're
coming around Manhattan and heading up
towards Queens you'd only get cut off
you want to just keep going likewise we
get from please we keep going to the
Bronx so on and so forth and so here
here we are way up so here's the major
feeding here's the Cross Bronx I mean
it's incredible in these own sense but
we have one little Park area hybrids
which is a vital link to all of these
pieces and it has degraded so much
because people had lost interest in it
and lost the idea that it was a vital
lane and we're gonna reestablish its
vitality this linkage and then here it
is it's under all these trees I mean
it's like a Sherwood Forest up there
he's very these trees grew up since the
70s actually when they stopped
maintaining a lot of these sites there
was a financial crisis in the 70s and
they stopped maintaining a lot of city
sites and this is a result of that it
has it different it has a heavy woodland
feel to it but it's really in one that
needs to be opened up again and this is
the high bridge actually the first
pedestrian bridge across a river in New
York
Matt Mason Newbridge and then here it is
today so you can compare here's here's
the Highbridge Park which we're working
on here's the actual steps dude itself
in the Harlem River so you can see all
these types of connections all the way
around it and linking the upland down to
the Harlem River waterfront and the
Hudson River bicycle trail which takes
you back up then to Westchester New
England and then also pees us all the
way into the bike land around to New
York here's a close-up here so you can
see you can see the steps to here
so we're imagining as a performance
space at canopy that allows views but
also light and different staging
platforms across that 102 vertical draw
so in order to do that we are we are
connecting with we're looking at all the
connections and again we're obsessed
with all the beautiful curves we're
saying so with the step street that we
have as a urban infrastructure we're
events trying to see where our influence
can bring back a kind of a curve into
the frame of the steps team itself which
is orthogonal vector linear so that's
just kind of a a quick trip around the
boroughs and as I said it's more of a as
opposed to a design critique it's more
of us sitting out on the table the
issues that were
now in the last two years across the
many boroughs in the coastal projects
along the edges and how one starts to
think about it in terms of a larger of
broader stroke of connectivity access
from many modes of transportation and
for us the most important is the
pedestrian the walkabout as well as
bicycle and so that's how we're going to
be framing these projects from from the
perspective of the speed of the bicycle
the speed isn't pedestrian and in fact
as my landscape friends have taught me
to say park-goers so that's really what
I wanted to present today and the
influence of my drawing practice on how
I'm starting to inscribe lien forms in
space and locating the architecture
within those inscriptions and releasing
section space from those inscriptions
whether whether they're across the step
seat across this step stream in the
Hudson River on a very large coastal
parkland
so thank you
[Applause]
outlined a little bit you know what are
some of the obstacles in doing public
works you know what is the one of the
protocols of engaging the city of the
various other collaborators
how you been able to set a frame for
what you do and what you do best
well it also was setting the frame I
think as an educator in architecture for
some time it's very helpful because
you're dealing with public agencies and
dealing with local communities and
they're not used to the terms and the
conceptual framing and design ideas that
we have here in the Academy that we
wrestle with every day it was student
there across the desk with students or
even with our peers or colleagues even
some of our professional peers yeah it
really is public so throughout I said I
give myself assignments and that's so
important for me I'm always will never
have a project I'm given a task and say
okay from any agency in this city we
have a design excellence contract we've
had multiple design excellent contracts
when you see the from New York as our
architectural firm so with that you get
this project this you know you're given
in certain projects and asked to
complete certain tasks and assignments
and these happen to be long-term large
assignments with many millions of
dollars attached to them so I'm dealing
with a whole range of entities
personalities which takes takes a lot of
energy honestly so in that I I always
try to remember what my assignment is to
myself so that I can maintain a kind of
control over the point of view that I
have for these disparate sights
disparate programs and disparate
constituents and so for for me that
inscription that drawing practice and
how one inscribes in the nature that
inscription and what it can do and have
a read it and how they're highly
critique it is what I focus on and
that's why in fact that the drawing cut
my drawing classes might my meditation
I'm trying so important to me because
you can get lost in the day-to-day
back-and-forth with Department of Energy
Conservation the Department of Energy
the Department of Energy protection
Department of Buildings Department of
Transportation the State Department of
Transportation I mean on and honors the
whole alphabet of agencies that you must
get approvals from every step of the way
whether it's the conceptualization of
the project all the permitting one has
to get not just a building but actually
to study it
so yeah it's rich and thick and full but
you need to provide yourself an
assignment so that you can keep that in
your star and keep in focus what's
really important in it enough in a broad
sense so that it doesn't become atomized
over over many many many competing
interests and constituents and opinions
there's a lot of opinions about
to do what one should be doing or not
doing so you as the lead as the
architect you need to maintain a kind of
frame for what is important so as a
follow-up then I would characterize some
of your drawing work and artwork as
maintaining a kind of introspective
focus a level of abstraction and because
you can it is able to define the
necessary insularity through which a
work of art may be created what happens
as you enter the public frame with many
collaborations and so forth it's not
only codes but the democratic process of
having to work with so many different
agencies opinions community groups comes
to often impact a work of architecture
because they're asking for all the right
things but all the right things are are
challenging an architecture and
architectural ethic are you finding that
to be true or is this something that
it's very true but you have to you have
to challenge it yourself personally
every single day from you know things
like the color of the building that the
paint color you know and again these are
public projects oh they're not they're
not such as our private work which is
you know this in many projects this
guy's
we have appliance to money really it's
not the most important thing you say so
much of it these are public works so
every penny belongs to the taxpayer
which is here we need right and others
so things such as well why we're doing a
public building Brooklyn right now that
is sort of lime green so the question
was so what why lime green and so I knew
I had to make that impassioned plea
about why it is lime green under green
trees at a public tennis academy as
opposed to something like somebody I
will not mention offered that it should
just be some kind of blue checkered
board multi mix maison en la yeah no I
had to go to barricades over a color so
I know that's you know that's just one
moment another moment is access for
instance going from an upland onto the
to the the gantry the wessex - pecan
tree the idea of what that platform
would be has been highly contested
because of issues of safety vandalism so
on and so forth so every day you know
you know is we have a greediness to us
so it to everyday life here so the idea
of vandal-proof the idea of wear and
tear
no those do enter into it so you give me
tails are selected very carefully they
are selected because of those of those
characteristics and that pilot might not
be as broad as we have in a private
world well in a private role we can
develop a material materials for
specific projects putting a lot of
resources on debt when it comes to
public markets has to be okay it's got
to be masonry or that comes in so many
colors or you know how to even resizes
but we like for this size over that size
so yeah I mean every detail is
contestant
fair enough because it belongs to
everybody it's not puppets out private
into public it belongs to everybody so
everybody gets to have a say in what it
should be and you are as the
architecture facilitate the
conversations but you also try to keep a
larger frame view because you know that
as many constituents there are they'll
ask a different color yes well yeah
there are there are protocols and their
engines the most printed right now is
energy code so any building you
designing public building you design you
have to sign in seal with your licensure
that is that the windows are a certain
energy needs similar energy the walls
everything you're signing everything the
windows away yet you're not building it
the contractors building it yet somehow
you're responsible for the air
infiltration of the glass to the
aluminum frame so yeah those protocols
are spin tunes and they are valuable you
know because our we want our buildings
to be sustainable architects we are
contributing a lot of energy to the
environment so we need to work on that
and we do it in a fun end here so you
have community board means New York
City's is made up of community boards
and so your project that's where these
projects I serve the reason they're all
when I showed you today is in a
portfolios because they're all on public
land any project on public land needs to
go through a land use with you it needs
to go through community board approval
multiple community board approvals
didn't have to go through there are
other groups there's historic societies
saying community board seven there's a
historic community groups or have to go
speak with them and they put you through
your paces ask them any questions and at
the end of they say something like we
have to do something that's true we have
to do something and that's that's more
like that's what we're proposing that
we're going to be doing this so and then
once you receive all those approvals and
energy you have to show all those
approvals to every other agency down the
line so for instance we're doing a
project and we have to get approval from
the Department of Energy protection we
have to show them the community board
way back a year ago approved
to see the letter there's a number
there's a signature sometimes there's a
stamp so they won't let you do your
water sight water management during
excavation until they see the community
board letter so it's all the way down
those approvals so yeah it's it's
rigorous its intense during the
Bloomberg administration which is when
we had our first contract design
excellence contract let me speak about
that in a moment the agencies did not
speak to each other they were they were
silos and they did they did not speak to
another he went in and did a triage to
get them to all work together created
different levels of communication and
now for instance if you're in a
roadblock say at the DOB you can't get
something through that's happened to us
last week we could get some very simple
maneuver through and I was hired as a
roadblock so I emailed the head of
another agency and said I'm having
trouble you can go to at the commute
from Commissioner Commissioner so I
wrote to one Commissioner about a
problem has another agency and CC that
Commissioner but you know it's morning I
get up in my email baby
hey good morning gentlemen and so we got
it solved and so you have to do a lot of
that you have to go there to talk and
another sort of Cooper story is the why
was having a difficulty or another
another project another protocol and I
couldn't get through for six months a
very simple thing and I was really at my
wit's end and then finally I found out a
Cooper classmate of mine that's a year
ahead of me his head head examiner this
agency I got on the phone like
you know I remember every project he did
in studio I know all your clothes I know
what you ate for lunch what's going on
here you got it solved so you know
sometimes with Cooper connection it's
like ticket big-time so in terms of
protocol
yeah these agencies the thing that was
most important my this is my opinion is
that the it began with the federal
government I was actually involved at
the federal level before it came to New
York was this thing called design
excellence I think you dare you you
might have been in that design
excellence with GSA oh okay
welcome to protocol so they did a
wonderful thing which is previously you
receive projects based on the bed so if
you were the low bid maybe if you're not
contacted you said I can leave that
project for $300,000 and oh yeah well
somebody can do it for 200,000 they're
getting it and who knows who they work
with the qualifications we're the only
qualification was they were cheaper than
everybody else less expensive than
everybody else their fee so they said
you know what that might not be the best
way to operate and I look around these
look awful
so what what can we do so we created
this program called design excellence
which means that you will qualify based
on their design ideas
their portfolio built Worth and the
quality of it it's details its sense of
material it's in some form the way it
fits the landscapes on and so forth so
all of a sudden the quality of the work
was that it what was one of the deciding
if not there's a deciding factor again
with with the erect record of
achievement behind you so that was that
was a real
a pivotal point and the GSA's general
service administration of federal agency
marshaled that program smooth federal
government and now what happens it goes
to this state and then it goes to the
city and because of the Orcas such a
city state environment it was
supercharged so many firms such as such
as ours known for our design work has
the opportunity to participate in this
public project so that's been a game
changer so if you look around and you
say no these these public projects are
if you notice them are looking pretty
good and say yes because design became
the factor by which you were selected
not learning a little bit number and now
there's something they've been working
at the federal level called
construction excellence so again it's
not the contractor you say I have a
truck in a ladder and I can build with
almost nothing it's like no we actually
care about the quality of the
construction because that is long
lasting so every dollar you spend a farm
is a dollar that you're not going to
change its spending on maintenance or
something that's not
withstand the test of time New York is a
tough environment because of the heavy
use every every square foot of New York
City gets heavy use it does have to
stand up so so this has been a
game-changer some friends of mine are
doing it actually at the State
Department so that the State Department
had its to its way of doing things
previously now it's predicated on a
design design excellence again and we're
hoping you know things are a bit
unknowable right now but we're hoping
that that sense of design excellence can
be maintained so those of you who are
being graduated assume we'll be going
into a world that if you I hope some of
you choose to work on public projects
that you have an opportunity to engage
at a level that is meaningful based on
what you learned here so yes those of
educators saying that when you get from
the school is not necessary the
professional knowledge is that the
qualities that remains you all the
knowledge and the professional technical
skills are removed from that so how how
a college education is shaping your
general way of thinking of executing
things and like speaking from your own
experiences the five years
like I did not in that aspect
not necessarily the professional
knowledge but the disciplinary or the
general thinking how has that changed
you said it yourself a way of thinking
right so what my my awesome competing
education provided me one of the things
was a way of thinking so it's not about
isn't it a cool design if the latest
this way to set but really is a way of
thinking that's so valuable because you
you're going to need that that's that's
that's your foundation a way of thinking
so whether you go wherever your
education takes you that that valuable
actually you know that ability to think
through ideas is everything that's
everything that's that bottom line that
is everything it's it's the foundation
of your creative voice of creative
energy sure well I can't even honestly I
don't remember white had to be a bridge
when I was you know 20 40 years old but
that's what it was and I was just so
passionate about my project my thesis
project it was everything you know what
do you need in 19 big drawings in a big
model and as I say in the beginning what
happened was it was taken out of the
studio context the school context and
put out into the public realm in a
gallery in Soho and it was so well
received it just says I said it gave me
so much confidence how you know what
what we do here could be Union actually
can be talked about outside of Cooper
Union and the roof that was even
possible
we are in here working morning the night
so you don't know what your future is
when you take it out you put it there
and all sudden people who's working now
start speaking to you do you think do
you have something you say yeah
you know and there's you know you're
Cooper faculty and you're Dean you know
gave you that confidence to stand stand
in the light and speak about what is
important to you and how you think so
Sam like oh it's not a cool project no
no it's more how do you think and so
that way of thinking then went into my
next group of projects with happen to be
small-scale retail environments because
that's what a 24 year old gets you know
out in the world and they were great
because it was an expensive studio in
this sense that there were six spaces
and I could go in and work on the
tectonic work on you talents you got
even what if the stretching drawing was
you know and then from there just built
and built it like I said today I can't
tell you how thrilling it is to show you
two fringe projects you know at this
point the whining that to liver is very
important to me because it really is I
feel like I'm back at my thesis project
in this circumstance because of a very
direct very clear tectonic but a real
need you know the wine at Cooper was
speculative they came full frame from
here as as your work does right but all
of a sudden they're him in da Hudson
River literally in that River trying to
design and create a public space for
performance with this structure that has
a new tectonic on the survey I can't
tell you how stability matters
oh yeah focus focus in and honestly not
not to be cheeky but just stand your
ground and just follow it through it so
it's not about I had a great idea last
week I have a new idea it's okay it's
probably not in writing you know you
only not one idea you're working on has
many lines to it but you need to be
focused and and keep persist persist in
tracking it down and following it down
and my advice is we need to do a drawing
a day you just need to draw you can't
decide about I remember you know we had
some classmates and they'd sit there
just staring what are you doing I'm
sinking right that's not really smart
thinking obviously makeups working and
then I have to tell you reverse reverse
looking backwards think less make more
because then you have an opportunity to
remove some things and then through
serious editing of idea and detail there
will be very clear so that rigorous
editing can only happen if you go back
to material right you'll be like you
know what that's it that that drawing
does everything I'm talking about what's
important to me what I'm trying to frame
simultaneously so that ones are so one
drawing that would be more important
than 200 darns because it plated better
came out of 200 on so it wasn't like
here's my one drawing what do you think
what did you bring you think we're
together 199 so we can start looking and
seeing what's happening so yeah see if
less drama
yes Elizabeth I guess hold on my
classroom the line it's a specific line
but news it's not an either-or line I
think what you draw back and forth
across that line is incredibly elastic
and you need the skills of the thought
the ways of thinking on both sides of
that line on both sides so you're moving
into these pretty significant landscape
projects which it's certainly very
different than a thesis that was an
object once as and so are you do have
also as part of your contractor also
design at that scale or do engage with
with teams of people like how has the
nature of your practice changed as you
trying to landscape and also if I may
how have your drawings perhaps taken on
new forms more new obsessions since
you're working in a question
yes well I don't have to say that
through the design excellent contracts
with the regime's we're the prime so can
batsman Associates has the contract and
then we turn around and we can assemble
our teams they're not someone for us I
turn I like okay what is the landscape
architect I think would respond best in
this project what is the most
responsible so when I depend greatly on
my civil engineers because they're
looking subsurface I feel as if I've
been through a graduate school a civil
engineer working on these projects
because it's something because
previously to my design excellent
contracts I was working with our private
people and private institutions and it's
not the same rough-and-tumble world
that's out in city on land so you depend
on these experts to be on your team so I
have been working with them in terms of
landscape I do have a very strong
opinion about many of the aspects of it
but I certainly yeah we're a team so we
worked and they have had comments about
the architecture as well because they
really make together so we've gone from
where they'll say okay well okay you're
over here and they put a box right then
they start can you get everything else
I'm like no no no no where you can
invade the box and I'm invading the
landscape because they have to be
holistic they afternoon it together
that's the way it's going to be so those
have been interesting conversations and
trying to get the tectonic of
architecture who is the tectonic of the
landscape because you know there are
many architect landscape architects and
see they see space differently
differently but the tectonics of the
landscape are something that you can
relate to as an architect very closely
so where we work with people whose work
that we really admire in that in that
sense and I would say that this is a
portfolio of specific work we have
private clients and it's for me too
difficult in the sense of my drawing
practice because when I sit down I told
you just I tried to just be me you know
I tried to cut out the voices of all
these personalities I deal with on a
daily basis and I try to just really
good signs that it's my it's my
meditation space I'm tied up first and
then so what I do it just as I was
thinking about thesis it's all more
faith less I have all these drawings and
sometimes I lose track of where I am and
I spread them all that you know I look
at all of them and I start saying oh
this one is about this and I put this
one next this way something happens
where you put one next to another I'll
say this new conversation happens it
gives me many more ideas about how I
perceive space what's important how one
indexes marks what form is in fact and
so I for me that's a rug that we have
just take all this material of thought
located in a drawing and just shuffle
the deck like you know Texas Texas
Hold'em right like okay kind of hand
cars on first immaculate some better
ones right so I'm shuffling the deck and
looking and trying to see what
conversations happen so I just did that
two weeks ago and you start on a whole
new set of drawings based on what I saw
but I because these haven't drawn some
of them I hadn't looked at in three
years probably like they're near the
bottom right my turn I'm like oh okay
you know what this is about this and
that's
that Berkeley together before something
else completely different and it's a way
for me to step outside of the arena of
architecture form and the relationships
they are and what I know you know I want
to know it I want to see what I don't
know and drawing where I suppose
architects are you're the expert so
there's so much you know and it's hot
you know as you get experience there's
so much you know so you have to find a
way to put that aside so you can get
back to what to find out what you don't
know and look
[Applause]
