thank you very much for this
presentation thank you very much for
inviting me and I'm super happy to be
with all of you here and actually I'm
here to stay I'm going to be here Friday
so Friday is my turn also in the
seminars and I'm very happy to be
presenting this whatever first because
we've been working on this for a long
time the result of many many many many
discussions and many things many other
things many ideas of young ministers
discussed before but also in specially
I'm very happy to be sharing with her
also this great moment for a lot for you
because London I need to fight to stay
here in New York and especially knowing
the the superfun life that you have here
but it's a great thing for our
collective karma that AEA has chosen you
with this amazing 67 percent which I'm
very impressed by arathi okay let's go
to the back okay
the the this is one of the projects that
the office of political innovation we've
been developing but actually these
photographs are not that good in so in
what is that that we're intending to do
with these projects basically I'm very
interested on the architecture of the
quality like what is the architectural
objects but not as isolated things but
as heavy things things that are
responding in connections with other
things in disputes in in love in hate in
many many other things that somehow
expanding in different scales and make
them sense that actually this is
something that we discuss together in
what do I remember or this is here with
zezima but in a way what I'm interested
on is all this hangry people are lies or
toxicity that expansive isn't beyond
their actual
dimension actually this is something
that is not something that we choose
when you look carefully to for instance
the conditions of this island in Corpus
Christi world were constructed this
house is basically that it's been
totally destroyed with the recent
environmental events that happen in
Texas you see that actually architecture
is very much suspended in all these
hairy relationships and that
architecture in a way has the
responsibility of caring for them of
caring for the way that architecture
contributes to the making of moons of
multiple months of participe of the
color of the year and that is something
that it's the center of our work the one
that we did in the past and the one that
we're trying to do now okay I'd like to
talk about to start before we talk about
Sex and the City acting let's talk about
cuts cuts is everywhere and this is a
gap a nebula cut [ __ ] or whatever but
whatever enters it is the fact that
she's standing on this job or tying a
slap that probably many of you recognize
as part of the Barcelona pavilion the
reconstruction in the eighties in the
nineteen eighties of the pavilion that
Lily high and Miss Wanda were
constructed in in Barcelona in 1939
together with many many other people
there's all these theories and I'm very
very interested in them that have to do
with the fact that the Barcelona
pavilion is not creating space let's say
but it's creating subjectivity that is
actually producing or personas let's say
it's gave in space and is also engaged
in the protection of bodies
subjectivities ways of thinking of
dimensions but also way of being in the
universe and in a way that's true but
for me not innocent molecule way but in
a very very practical way this is the
first photograph that was taken in the
back olan a basement in the basement of
the bathroom a pavilion and I took it
not that far away
a few years ago what is very interesting
for me
that the pavillion has this invisible
basement a basement that was never
photographed before not as a closed
space and that is the container of so
many things like for instance this
broken glass that so carefully it's been
placed there on the wall when we look at
all these things that happen to be there
what I'm very excited about is that in a
way they're telling a very different
story of the pavilion ISM it's a little
bit like like like a cupboard like the
the grotto where you don't see the
pavilion but you get to see glimpses of
it but glimpse and that is slightly
different to the ones that you see in
the postcards this is for instance the
material that used to cover the lake
where the Coleman sculpture is actually
this is where the colbus culture is this
column is holding it is taking the load
to the to the foundation but this
Plexiglas panels started to curve with
the Sun and they were removed in a way
all the experiments that were showing
that the materiality of the pavilion is
not something that you can do at once
instantly coming from nice head and
immediately been translated into
architectural form of or technology like
this door that was placed there it is
the first one that was placed in the
1980s and it was too heavy that the
frame of it was the still frame was too
heavy for the mechanisms that are
holding it to the floor and the and and
entering to the floor and the ceiling
and they it have to be replaced by a by
a new door with a lighter frame so all
these elements that are denying the
possibility of doing the pavilion at
once are kept there
Marissa Francis this broken slabs of
char Burton that are taking there to be
fixed we see that the composition is not
that different to really live and miss
on the Royal work even the numbers that
our user can do the numbers that are
very much the mass that maybe the verb
would they would
so this is not that different to the
whole tradition that really - miss when
the world were activated and there's
something that obliged it to remain
invisible when the vulva it starts to
look like this it's taken down to the
basement in a way that is weird
or like it becomes a little bit of a
phantom but still it needs to be
preserved which is exactly what I'm
interested on the fact that they need to
make it invisible but still it needs to
be preserved and it's preserved a little
bit like in a museum in the modern
Museum so these are the two sides of
this pavilion on the one side is what
the Mishnah words all of us want to see
and want to confirm when we go there the
images that we've seen in the books that
we want to again photograph and put an
Instagram post in histogram and then
underneath is this other story that
needs to be hidden in order for the
upper floor to to work like the Dorian
Gray or to it a little bit but again
when we see what happens here is not a
different God - the colors for instance
that miss hunter boy was doing himself
after the construction of the pavilion
and the ones that are putting together
people like this naked man with all the
things in kind of dirtiness compositions
this is the basement as you can see it
here in the flow in the section plan and
this is the way it look when it was
being constructed all this for me is
crucial because it has to do with what
is architecture about which in my
opinion is not that much about providing
a neutral space for society to happen
it's not an empty post that any form of
society can fill in it's rather the
construction of that society Society in
itself so architecture is the making of
society it's society and that's
something that is very very clear when
you see this guy here that is not
allowed in the basement it's very
very literally but the the the the the
two-story building is doing this is not
an architectural mistake it's not the
result of a bad design is not the fact
that the staircase was wrongly designed
is actually the result of a very good
design that was fulfilling the
intentions that that they had Christian
series in Ignacio chela Morales and
Fernando Ramos the architects who
designed the reconstruction wanted to
prevent that in the future and the new
director could have the possibility of
using the basement as a place where the
pavilion could be interpreted and in
order to prevent the pavilion to be
explained and to save it from future
directors they decided to design a
staircase that in no way could get
licensed for the visitors to get there
the way to design the constituency of
the basement was actually going to that
wrong staircase that you know what they
would basically make everyone hit their
heads with with the ceiling and would
know in no way Allah be allowed to give
access to the general public
our work or the work of my office is
very much like the work of many many
other social forms like grinder or like
IKEA or like nice it's about we
articulating the social so basically we
operate in these ecosystems trying to
change a little bit the the way the
agency here of all these different
actors are related to each other so what
we do is basically the pavilion we took
the things from the basement and took
them after first as the water lilies
that are no longer in the lake because
there's salt and chlorine that is taken
there but we we put again all this
process that all these elements that are
not made making it or preventing it to
to be in the in the legs in a way of
unblocking why there's no law
water lilies in the upper part of the
public okay this is an introduction to
Sex and the City because what I'm going
to tell you about now it's not a
different to the work of Mies van der
Rohe and lynnie right in the way that
they're prescribing and producing the
social but what he's producing the the
miss Monro of this moment I could defend
his sex and sipping it means when the
Royal had the capacity to reconstruct
societies in the 1920s it is now Darren
star the author of what the person that
promoted Beverly Hills the Golden Girls
Melrose Place Sex and the City
what travel is prescribing what are the
societies we live in by and this is what
we've been doing in store from I am very
interested on the fact that Sex and the
City are Samantha would love to chain is
putting together the two major passions
of our times love or sex and real estate
if we look at the way the practice look
in the first episode of the first system
we see that they're very different to
the last one in the last reason
basically everything has changed the
thrift store clothes by but with your
phones have gone into something very
different the interiors the Sur
apartments in Lexington Avenue have been
replaced by other things
even the gate frame is no longer the
same in the last episode and gayness is
a good marker to understand what's
happening here all around the world in
major global cities the brain is 4k life
the twenties for all those spaces were
LGBTQ communities were empowered like
for instance in Chelsea or the
Meatpacking District in New York or in
so many places or the ojas keychain have
been replaced by apartment towers this
is something that many people like
sabres
south of the the owner of La Scala
for instance the nouns and all around
the world has been demonstrations to
confront this process what is very
interesting is that the same locations
that in the past were places for
emancipation for the LGBTQ communities
all around the world haven't replaced by
this high and condominium towers
high-end condominium towers that as we
could see when we did this research
three-year research on grindr have
become the locations where Grindr users
have chosen to is like the the favorite
location for Grindr users to switch on
their app so there's something that
remains there gay people want to switch
on the apps with the fantasy that they
might get lucky with someone that is
living in one of these amazing from hide
the silliest apartments by using by the
mediation of Grindr
but it's very interesting for us is that
the in this process a big part of the
quickness that was part of the LGBTQ
communities is being raised the process
by which neither are responded to the
construction in 1962 of the Elizabeth
cargo or container port that grew with
the Vietnam world that took all the
economy of the of New York Harbor to New
Jersey and that the the challenge the
New York economy and made it possible to
for the gay scene to find cheap venues
in places like Hell's Kitchen are on
shelves of Chelsea or the new park admit
packing district has been challenged by
the process by which different majors
and different forces decided that New
Year would become a North Shore location
unknown offshore location where money
could be laundered and could be a
storage in Highland apartment
rather than become a place that could be
inhabited in the ordinary basis became a
way of a an asset oriented way of
inhabiting that process that was very
much reflected by the way Grindr became
no longer a space of queer emancipation
as it was in its origins but became a
place where JW understood saw his
fashion shows were paper magazine would
be finding their models were so many
things were sold with the action of
lambda Smithers the marketing director
of Grindr that was the one that removed
that before was the marketing director
of Playboy and removed the naked bodies
in Playboy to make it familiar to make
the magazine family-oriented is
something that then happened to
queerness so when we looked at the gay
frame of these characters in a way he's
very much representing showing enacting
a huge transformation in the way gayness
and gay sex is being part of New York
City and by looking at that we can very
much understand the economical
architectural urban transformation of
the city in the last twenty years
everyone knows this of course but this
is actually rendering this was built
before the the action tower was bombed
and actually this is the result probably
of these famous Bloomberg mandate to
attract to make the city attract
builders as he said it could be a God
God sin but actually that was not
something that was a spontaneous it was
very much the same for instance was the
moment with Bloomberg that near cities
allowed all of these to be used as some
corporations to have the ownership of
condominium towers or condominium
apartment or condominium in
in this kind of towers this is the
moment in which basically New York has
started to attract all this capital that
was storage in these apartments that was
also part of the 1972 one started in
1972 tax deduction for Villa neurs in
the tax in the property taxes that they
would pay to the city so basically
billionaires could be paying following
the 421 a act of the city would repay in
less than one percent of their property
taxes where's the rest of the people in
here would pay much more than that in a
way what I'm very interested is that
this mundane of this project by
Bloomberg to react to the crisis that a
list of that cargo container report
cause in New York City by transforming
economy and and the way Blomberg ended
up supported a line that Sutton in the
1970s to transform New York into um no
known offshore location it's very much
an architectural contribution actually I
defend that the main contribution in 432
is not in terms of architecture is not
Rafael viñoly which normally recognizes
the official architect of it norris
developer is actually massive Bannister
the director is the CEO of Depot's the
rendering company that did all the kind
of previous live and online life of 432
this is one of the first things they did
before the tower was constructed to to
solve some of the condominiums they
produce these images in which ballerina
would be dancing in the windows of the
432 but they were placed at this
magazine that they did that is a that
was strategically located in the rooms
of the Ritz Carlton Hotel in Moscow
together with the
so in the middle of the night when the
billionaires is staying in the rich
cultural hotel and gentle dip like
Belarus would try to find something to
do they could open the magazine and they
would find the 432 and they would
basically move their fingers touching
the coated paper of the magazine and
touching this kind of body floating in
here this is actually what demos did to
architecture what they did to New York
is in a way a pornified
process or a horrifying work of
sexualizing New York City
what does it come from this is one of
the first images that devoxx did
immigrants are all two when they were
one of the first place that worked for a
high-end apartments or condominiums
project they worked for which is the
current hour but I'm very interested I'm
seeing what's happening here with this
hurtless guy with a beer kind of
reflected mixed like that because if we
try to find where this comes from it
comes from d-box
deepok for neighbors for cocky from
cockyboys a cocky boys is gay porn
studios that are basically in New York
City they started to operate in 2006
more or less and it was the moment that
porn studios were moving from San
Fernando Valley to other locations porno
was no longer something that was that
still stigmatized and the objection
invented the form of porn that was very
much connected to interior design he
reproduced kind of trendy interior
designs in Hunters Point in the in their
studios in Hunter points and they
started to work with J see Sebastian
that you see here somewhere
he will be there so at one point that
developed the technique too soon
in front of windows so he could actually
adopt the lens both to the light of the
people having sex inside the Cheever and
the view outside which is something that
was a little bit complicated that you
would never see in San Fernando Valley
sport but I'm very interested on is that
Jake Jackson was not coming from porn
even though he declares to be a
pornographer he was actually the owner
of a company that is called media
notions that was that he owned in
partnership with Glenn Greenwald grain
will Greenwald every probably all of you
know him because he was the the
journalist from the Guardian that was
released in the Snowden papers he was
leaking there or he was part of the
leaking of the Snowden papers this is a
photograph with Laura Poitras and
Snowden and it was part of the same
project media notions was a company that
was had as a mission to and black boss
the American secrets as a way to produce
a new society and one of the secrets
were of course the secrets of the
military services but also it was famous
and to expose casemis for them was the
same project than exposing NSA it's very
interesting that actually the whole plot
exploited when when Glenn Greenwald
became so such a celebrity and then
everyone looked at the other business
and then they saw the Jake Jackson was
his partner and then they broke up these
are some photographs of these are
typically for those that are not
familiar with cockyboys
these are the typical scenes that they
would do since in front of windows and
I'd like to pay attention to actually a
link in one of their exclusive models
that you see here because these
photographs were the reference with
which d-box produced this
so basically a porn is the origin a very
particular kind of porn that was also
revealing secrets like there or leaking
secrets practice known in papers the one
that is behind the language that d-box
used to produce these fantasies this is
a rendering of course with the word
photographs taken in a studio in Queens
in a Croma and then replaced all kind of
relocated inside the rendering but I'm
very interested of what happens in this
sin of course we the first thing is this
Christina makovski it's the sport
Illustrated model that was in a was made
up in a very particular way so she would
be appealing both to the to the Asian to
the Middle East and to the Western
publics she was probably many of you
recognize her clothes the very much
version of Kim Kardashian's very Muslim
fan circular suit but of course in the
case of Christina makowsky and Armani
version of it's a little bit more
respectable but what for me it's most
interesting is what is happening in the
second scene what happens here this guy
here I mean all these are actors and
models but this guy here that this
chubby guy here is not a model is what
in the box they call the Danny DeVito
guy the Danny DeVito guy is actually an
a real businessman very close friends of
Matthew banister from New Jersey problem
with business related to the container
port but this is the one that is making
believable to someone that maybe in the
rich Carlton Hotel at 2:00 in the
morning
jet lag will be moving his fingers her
fingers on the coated paper and will be
having the fantasy of making love to
probably this woman by just
the possibility of imagining to buy
these assets in a way sex is not
something that is performed as we
thought
it was performed in the past it's
something that is happening in magazines
in investments in renderings like this
and we engaged that in a very different
way now I'd like not to see why they
invested so much in the skies why I mean
they're doing all these efforts of
having amazing views in this buildings
and in these renderings 80% of the image
is just a blue sky actually this is not
an accident this is the first image that
was produced by demos to explain what
was their strategy to solve the
apartments that was basically filtering
a little bit the sky so as you see when
you get to the 432 you see the sky but a
slightly different as you see here
that's a simple step but that's
something that goes very much with the
detailing of the architecture so this is
not an immaterial process this is not a
strategy that has to do just with ideas
within imagination with fantasies with
whatever is actually transforming the
public or is the building the
materiality of the building is a key
actor here this is the glass that was
used the excel glass that is used in the
432 is the most expensive component of
the buildings much more expensive that
the elevators that the implications of
this in deal with this in the omer cost
is much higher than any other thing and
this is an Austrian glass that is used
that is basically filtering and
polarizing the light so the blue speck
part of the spectrum of the light is is
saturated this is not something that
happens only this investment material
investment in produced in the sky and
actually producing the sky because these
windows cannot be open so basically
there's no way to compare the sky filter
by these glasses with the other one with
the the actual unmediated one but this
is not something that was only designed
the scale of the building in 2012
Bloomberg the one that was trying to
attract believers approve a hundred
million plan project the heat the keep
the clean heat program to transform the
fueling of heating in New York from
oil-based to natural gas this is very
interesting because basically within one
year they reduced 26% the missions of
night nitrate dioxin which is
particularly the component of the other
polluting component that changed the
blue the blue color of the sky into
brown so basically the whole program was
meant to do what the renderings had been
doing before what the glass the active
cast glass had been doing before it was
rendering at the scale of the city the
same effect of eliminating the brown
color within the earth the Blue Earth
project was a project that was very much
celebrated at the same time that New
York was becoming natural gas dependent
so if in one year the city doubled its
its provisions of gas of natural gas but
it's very interesting for me is that
that particular year that the city was
needing more gas than ever it was
precisely the year that New York state
banned fracking in New York City so at
the same time that basically the city
was requiring someone to strike us that
destruction could never happen no longer
in New York State where did it go where
did all that brown component of the
earth all that environmental cost went
to it went to Susquehanna Valley
Susquehanna Valley started to produce
gas increase the production of gas to
fracking and therefore the toxicity of
Susquehanna guru
same pace that the one in New York City
reduced the Marcel cell became the
provision of energy for New York City at
the time that New York City was
preparing to attract billionaires by
getting blue and environmentally
sensitive let's say but I'm very
interested is what is the way that
fracking is perceived this is the amount
of gas tools or wells that are operating
now in Susquehanna Valley this is the
way fracking looks from from evolve but
this is the way it looks from below
basically fracking is a very much of a
landscape design project one that makes
it almost impossible to perceive what's
happening there when you are close to
the ground on the ground this is
actually the closer you can get to a
fracking pot legally and this is the way
the borders are designed so it really
looks like a very sweet thing the
perception of the effects of fracking
are very much perceived by the people
either as a magic event as opposed to
case thing as a kind of a shot arisen so
it's a new form of magic a new form of
kind of paranormal event a little bit of
a phantom thing like the the fourth
Elona pavilion has a place for phantoms
in the basement suit Kahana has actually
a very particular relationship with what
happens down there that is again like
phantom appearances like this woman that
can burn the the water from the top
because it gets mixed with gas by the
way the world is been affected by the
drilling and the way it's channeling
because what what for me is interesting
is the asymmetry between the way this
action in the underground is perceived
by the people that are living evolved
and by other sectors of
sadly mafia knows much more than me
about this and he will be talking on the
first thirty first on the representation
and the technologies that are used to to
attract mineral assets in Susquehanna
but what is very interesting is that
this is the technology that graphic
dynamics together with General Electric
and with Baker Hughes develop to
monitored chumma to sense once that that
is happening down there and whereas the
this is the the way the the surface is
divided basically underneath there's a
huge consolidation of the ownership of
the properties of the mineral properties
so this is again a little bit like the
bottle on a pavilion the two-story
reality that is segregating societies in
different groups is creating actually
different types of beam of different
types of humans the ones that are
perceiving fracking as a kind of
esoteric thing as a magic thing that
they don't make sense of and those that
have this huge equipment this capacity
of introducing sensors in the 12 bits
and says what is happening down there
but it's very interesting for me is that
this is becoming a new grinder people
are don't make love to other people they
basically move their hands or their
fingers looking at assets in social
media like this asset performance
management a very tiny part of our
society is really doing something else
than moving their fingers and changing
the grinder profiles but they're
changing the doing the same with assets
and by doing that they get connected to
this mineral domains that for most of
the people are just fantasies on core
goals but that they can control and they
can stabilize of which they can
stabilize their prices so in a way what
I'm very interested on is the way Sex
and the City is a project of segregating
society from extreme that is very
to understand without really accounting
for the architectural territorial and
spatial uses and the way people perceive
reality of different manners this is
something that goes from the scale of
mineral mineral beds to the scale of
genes this is the photograph and that in
2009 Sarah Jessica Parker released I
mean her
publishers of Babbitt advertisers
released of the the birth of her twin
daughters but it's fantastic for me is
that this was very much of responsive
image it's an image that was trying to
come from another image that was already
circulating in the Daily Mirror this
image of what the Daily Mirror called
the tattooed bisexual worker who was
pregnant with Sarah Jessica Parker's
twins and this shows how difficult it is
culturally politically visually to so to
visualize surrogacy Misha Rose here on
the right is the the person that was the
surrogate of Sarah Jessica Parker and it
was something that is becoming
progressively popular among wealthy
couples to go through surrogacy embryo
screening combination of three parent
sex cells to produce children but this
is something that is in the core of New
York City this is in Columbus Circle dr.
sands New Hope fertility clinic the most
growing economical activity in the city
of New York now is fertility and this is
in particular the room they have for
fertility treatment for celebrities in
Columbus Circle but for me it's very
interesting that this goes together with
many many other technologies
this is lookalike the service Cryobank
service that sells sperm according to
the resemblance of the donors to famous
celebrities this is actually the donors
that the claim to
Sumbul to James Franco I don't know
whether they look like James Franco
maybe this guy but that is not an
accident James Franco and the changing
host are the most demanded celebrities
in donations because basically there are
people that could be equally attractive
for the Western publics and the ACM
publics they have the they are a little
bit in the middle of the stereotypes of
what the Western and the nation person
is and therefore they're connecting the
biggest market in the world with the
biggest factory and these new production
of humans that is happening the core in
the center of New York City and that is
becoming its main economy now the
fastest-growing economy is something
that it's connected to the technology
that enables to control assets so in a
way and I conclude with this something
is happening here New York City is no
longer becoming an accommodation for
experimental societies like the LGBTQ in
the in the eighties but he's becoming
actually the center of the production of
segregation segregation that is not
something that happens in materially but
this a maturity transformation that goes
from the deep of genes should the deep
again of mineral rights and that is
happening in the way in a way that some
people are perceiving this as a process
that they can control just moving their
fingers on the borosilicate screen of
cell phones and iPads and folders is
part of an eSATA reason that they don't
make sense of and this is the project
section the so-called city that is meant
to provide the blueprints of this
project that started with Sex and the
City the TV so as many others started
with other progress by Darren star and
then it's the reality by
which we all live by thank you very much
thank you so much
it seemed probable to see that that
would be presented is probably just a
fragment of of the work that it is
excluded at the storefront and the work
that he have produced as I can what a
koala contemporary form of forensics in
the understanding right they'd be kind
of political and social constructs that
that make the built environment there
was a debate associate between Chomsky
and Foucault that was called on human
nature right and there was a very heated
debate that was not unlike the
evaporation one and two of banham that
this lecture but so Chomsky was saying
that you know there is something that
brings us all together there is in human
nature there is something that makes us
all feel reacts to certain things and
Foucault is like no in fact those film
abs are actually constructions the only
test that we have as philosophers or
artists or architects is to unveil the
politics and the structures that have
constructed the radiance of self so in
that way they do and some people in this
room may be able to respond to some of
those questions for Foucault hosts the
only task that we had was to unveil and
to bring certain ideas of truth to the
the text the realities of politics in
front of us and it seems to me that your
work is that but your work as well as
you showed that the very beginning with
some images in the Vedas will be much
bigger there is an architectural project
in the most that's a canonical form of
the world in which you're interested in
the building of particular forms of
engagement then in and of themselves
sometimes like the one at ps1 unveils a
reality but produces an idea I can have
a simulacrum over Google machinima
performance would have been worth for a
certain message so in terms of the
question I would like to ask you how
does one reconcile right that kind of
investigative project that kind of
research project into a project of
architecture that is usually the inside
box that is that metal discursive space
of lineage in which we learn orders
materials technologists and I'm saying
this with it with the fact that I'm
looking into a pedagogical project that
they think it's to reformulate what are
the fundamentals without the foundations
of architectural education because one
doesn't learn any of these in
architecture school right no one learns
other things and so the question is how
did you was naki think that was trained
through a very classical form of
understanding architecture has found the
space of practice that is a matter of
political loaded strategic and powerful
form of engagement with the world that
said of us think of his own practice and
his own way of thinking pedagogy so how
do we train architects the way then how
do you practice as an architect that
takes this research into your to build
for me yeah it's super good question
super difficult but first how to train
architects I think the process of unveil
in mobilizing this reality is connecting
them is a process that cannot be done
alone it's a collective process so I
think that way for me I mean for me
architecture is producing these
connections I'm finding this realities
and operating immersed
there so there's two parts project I
think one is really creating the
environment in which you're operating
and I think every applicant has the
responsibility of producing the
environment in which he see their
whatever he'd want to operate so it's
not a given
and I think that we have to understand
that as part of our job as any other
scientist for instance we immediately
you might understand that you see there
whatever wants you to do or need to do
the other is you emerge there very soon
and then you start operating it
transforming the connections moving them
for instance we're not working with some
of the people that are here when working
with cocky boys we're doing a glass
house for them in which there will be
soothing so in a way what I see is that
we did an alternative window to the one
that d-box designed and in which other
kind of bodies relationships territorial
connections will be done in the future
through the shooting of a different porn
so we're already operating here but the
only way for us to operate here is
constructing our environment the same
we're doing with Barret Robbins one of
the most important activists counter
fracking activists were working with her
also to have her also producing
different evidences that will change
probably the conversation that she's
having missus Kahana
so in a way I have the feeling I always
remember these ideas this idea that
Renko has said that before he could
start designing he had to spend a few
some time to make space for the
architect he wanted to be so I think
that in a way we all go through the same
process of creating the ecosystem in
which then we at one point were part of
and we operate them the second has to do
with pedagogy for me pedagogy in the way
I do it in the way I imagine it is
something that deals with the conflicts
of daily life so I'm not happy with the
kind of pedagogy that is about
transmitting a knowledge that was
formulated thirty years ago that we very
much control and can we can teach
someone to
I'm very interested on the fact that
we're lost in the world surrounded by so
many conflicts and that we can use the
tools of the Sun to navigate that the
tools of designer the tools of measuring
recognizing connections challenging them
pushing them a little bit and those are
right tools very good tools to be in the
world with and I think the act of
pedagogy sharing this uncertainty and
this purpose of making sense navigating
this mess with others and on the way
everyone creates different paths that
somehow touch for instance we have a
part that has to do with funeral homes
that that's probably your word the one
that you presented in Seoul we've been
talking of many things that that's the
work that you've been doing for many
years in storefront with 13 things that
have to do with the mineral assets that
touch the work of math so in a way we
create kind of a network of people that
are linked by it by these ecosystems
yeah
things too openly out to be aliens and
then react as well and bringing and I
think it's it's a great presentation and
I think you've brought many issues and
many of the citizens are here in the
room and not some of your words provoke
a bit a lot of the base of the mythology
of what Cooper Union has been as well
and so many years so I think like this
is a is like it's a real challenge right
and in some ways and I think the fact
that you are here also at teaching this
year is is a great way of really shaking
but at the same time having this
conversational engagement with a history
of pedagogy that was pretty automatic
Buddhism is also trying to understand
the the real power of that presumption
of measuring and articulating those
pieces so I would love to open it up to
see how to the auditorium was the first
question for a complain or a petition at
work for if you want that was the one
mechanism through which you speak about
a device yeah we somehow all share and
it becomes a way of gauging our context
or constructing that yes there is little
that's uncertain about your own
architecture and the only way you get
there is through specification yeah and
with all of the uncertainties pedagogy's
with all of the changing circumstances
of the social and political realities
around us there's this moment that any
architect has to pull a trigger
it's probably an extended moment because
you have to specify over days sometimes
weeks but it produces a very particular
set of
relationships formal relationships
material relationships and by now you
have produced the sediments of a
particular aesthetic and modus operandi
and I would like on the coattails of
Eva's question is to open your your
palms to exactly what drives not so much
your pedagogy
but those prejudices and biases that you
confront and as you do your own work
because I think that that will reveal
something else about this yeah yeah
anyway I think this is the last work
that I've done I don't make a big
distinction between for instance when we
design a building and we do this when we
design a building like we're doing an
apartment building now in in in a beach
and immediately all these components
emerge there infrastructure's people
economies nor regulations and a similar
ecosystem happens there and we can
operate reconstructing the connections
between them basically so for instance
we're designing this apartment building
as an extension of a villa the villa was
constructed by a family that wanted to
have it as a holidays location and now
the family is evolved into a number of
groups of people that no longer have
that much money they want to do some
apartments so they can transform the
villa to a source of income for them
this is something that could be
described in the same terms that we do
here it's a project that has to do with
money
economies expectations and our take is
really take into account for instance
hidden actors actors that are not part
of for instance the meetings in which we
are but that they are because they learn
for instance the waste or for instance
what will happen in the future or what
is the sustainability of that economical
project things like that become then
crucial in the project that we're doing
there but it's very specific very
ordinary that's the way for instance we
work in the plaza theater G house
we understand probably that every
architectural and design take is a take
on a long owner owner owner and on an
ecosystem that is operating at different
scales in the placenta clergy house it
was basically there was a 15th century
building that was the minor seminar that
because the Catholic Church is not
attracting that many seminaries people
that want to be priests but they have
many old priests the building has to
evolve to accommodate that
transformation and in the same way the
building was really relating to this
huge ecosystemic transformation so in a
way the way we work is not different to
what we're doing here reconstructing the
story connecting it to other actors
bringing them the confrontation that is
already there to the let's say demonical
narratives putting together the box with
Susquehanna Valley which is something
that probably no one did before and this
kind of recomposition of the ecosystem
is what I believe design is about and of
course it requires many things it
requires structures it requires pipes it
requires many things form requires
images it requires colors and when you
get to the detail of the design those
things make a difference if you put it
in a different color that connection is
maybe not happening and that is the way
I imagine design and the way I think we
practice it respond to your question but
there was a moment in which you were
speaking as if all of this happens in a
deterministic way or an unmediated way
but my sense of the very end this values
this critical moment of you as a
producer anticipating reception the need
for translation from one modality to
another yeah and the role of manner
distinguishing between this type of work
and another type of work we we all have
choices and we don't design the same way
and that's what in fact
with historical hindsight we look at the
work of Ponte and Damiani as we know
they're not the same then we know they
stand for different things because the
new process that pushes their work in
the same era are motivated by a
different set of questions yeah yeah no
it is to what you say I mean I don't
think but I don't think this narrative
is deterministic either like no no but
we could connect these things very
differently the narratives are
constructed and we could tell the story
very differently these stories
mainly told in a very different fashion
most of the times so this is one of the
stories that we could construct out of
these materials and in the same way
design is very much construction but
this doesn't mean that it's not true
this doesn't mean that by not being the
only absolute Universal narration is not
mobilizing many of the facts that this
is about oh this is about and this is
for me very important like the
possibility of a single narrative is
something that probably we at least
myself I don't believe on and this is
something that I I really want to have
it the narrative of this woman that is
far in the water is totally different to
the guy that is basically
like this and since Kohana so what
probably our vanity or the city's about
is the encounter of these different
notions of perceiving reality for me the
city and the tradition of urbanism is no
longer contained by the patch in the
land of the CP is a little bit more
complex it's happening probably in the
encounter of these different ways of
relating to daily life to resources and
if in the past architecture was
mediating in the production of the urban
by doing squares for instance I wonder
what's the way we can mediate now in
this very conflicted encounters of
difference that are segregating in space
in time in scales but that's why I think
it's important also to produce the
laboratories in which we can start how a
glimpses of this everyone working in
Madrid into a bar but they didn't know
it was your bar but somehow enter the
bar and it's sort of your thing and in
fact it was a nice bar right and what
was incredible is that Y was not being
reminded foretold in history or
narrative about the politics of this
maze but there was a very calibrated
disruption of their feeling and
understand
of where you we're right and so this
connection maybe we were more sensorial
or steady in some way and so my question
do you go sigh mean you have shown us a
lot of moving images and kind of a total
overload of gifs and then flipping
flickering canvases and so my question
here like in a kind of a traditional
runs here right the politics of
aesthetics yeah and how you are
producing a specific vocabulary
maybe with specific colors right there
is a tendency towards the fluorescent
there is a tendency to the overload
there is a tendency to they a kind of
digitalization of the surface with a
being a digital there is some pop and
there is some camp and there and I would
like you to talk about what things using
are essential to they kind of make
investigatory processes and they kind of
a project that Oscar political
innovation is doing that is much more of
an adduct
and anecdotes to your practice versus
that what you see is intrinsic to your
practice so do you think that your work
has an aesthetic and that's that
aesthetic carry it's politics or for you
there is a politics that this still
hasn't found an aesthetics yeah
I think there's no way to do politics
without aesthetics I think aesthetics
held our sense the world like bye-bye so
in the world in the to this the filter
of itself or reconstructed to the
certain aesthetics we're making it sense
in a very different way like for
instance the images of the assets these
digital graphics that we see here are
very much science oriented versus the
images for instance of this like these
photographs that are very much of the
realm of activism so aesthetics are
producing on location in very particular
realities we're located here as
activists where we're located here as
scientists and investors so the role
that we play in a particular contingency
very much depends on the statics filters
we used to be part of that and I
we that this is something that comes
from the queer and camp traditions for
instance and then the the pride movement
was very much about words and using
aesthetics as a way to occupy space as a
way to to really
rename and to reconfigure the meaning of
certain possibilities in society and a
way to force others to perceive them
differently in the same way the status
of D both are very much prompting dis
apartments as part of high-end world so
the way for the apartment stood to
emerge as components of the
International jet-lagged high-end world
is two very particular aesthetic
calibrations and that's why I Mathieu
banister and the debugs people are so
good it's so well paid because there is
using those aesthetics as a way to sense
things in a very particular way and for
me that's the role of aesthetics of
course we don't always get it so we try
and and but does but that's our
intention we also think that that is
something that is moving all the time
for instance I don't think that we will
see this within the same statics in six
months I think predicts this software
will probably evolve into a very
different statics because I don't think
that this is very much effective in
making people aware of the the power
that it comes with assets for instance I
think it's much better these other
graphics for instance and in the same
way that I don't think this is working
that well as aesthetic like the fact
that we don't really see the possibility
of producing children like James Franco
who this website is so in then there's
something of the statics of these that
are really not working so the studies
are making fun of us it's not only for
for the office for political innovation
a film just came out called annihilation
I know so what is it about horror film
but it addresses a lot of issues of
representation okay this is my design
hey I just thought it's no no what I'm
trying to say is that in six months this
story will have a glass house that is
the cockyboys glass house and in two
years probably there will be other
things this is my design I could tell
you the story of the Catholic Church and
at one point there's one character that
is the pathetic larger house or I could
tell you the story of New York water and
at one point one of the characters is
Cosmo the installation will be for the
ps1 so this is the beginning of design
or not the beginning I've been working
for a long time on this but let's say
that we're very slow on producing our
projects and our projects are not not
something that comes from clients let's
say we start working working working at
one point we're changing things in the
same way that we're connecting things
are reflected this and this is something
that has to do with pedagogy what I
believe about pedagogy is that is very
much a personal project or a pray that
you do with others but it's a project in
which you construct the space in which
you operate and that's something that
this is low my deduction powers you
because when you have your laboratory
which in my opinion sees you then are
the one that are operating with all the
people you have your network of friends
to work with your network of enemies to
confront you have your for me this is
very different to the way of working of
people that are just for instance in
their office and then they get a call
from someone
let's do a hotel and then you do a hotel
when we work in a way we're constructing
these ecosystems and at one point we
also do take phone calls but then we
started doing this again like the cookie
boys were at the opening run at yoga
master funds like you invite your agents
into your openings in that regard for
sure where they're actually it's very
interesting because of the ways
resistant that one part that we I didn't
show is about also prosthetics and the
cockyboys have been investing on
producing masturbatory devices but
that's an extension of the bodies of the
models so basically they take the cast
penis and of the of the most important
models and then they were produced them
in silicon and they sell them so it's
afraid that again we're transforming the
world by doing something not that
different to what we do they're
producing these narratives that at one
point they need to produce devices to
transform them to extend them and for me
that's that's not a different what we do
that's enough in the debate I think it's
a record I hope yes yeah basically we do
that we start I mean there's many
clients that get very annoying because
we ask too many questions
we yeah we W so all sort of things we
had many princesses there was a moment
that we were experimenting many things
there was this family that came to our
office they had that basically they had
a very beautiful house that was designed
by a Barcelona super stylish architect
and that and they got divorced so they
decided to divide the house in three
parts one for the one of the partners
one for another partner and the kids
that they have would be living in the
middle so by opening doors they could
basically distribute the time that they
would spend with their kids so there was
a few days that this door was closed
that this one was open or this but then
everything changed when one of the
partners got the new partner and then
there were too many people the doors
were really not working so we were asked
to transform the house to to adapt it to
the new person that arrived to the to
the family and we we asked them to work
some watches Casio watches that could be
with me every hour and to have a
notebook so they would just describe in
the notebook when that sound what is
that that they were doing so why is that
that you're doing okay I'm cooking
breakfast you know listen and but they
can super annoying after six months not
just learning to serve the house and buy
different houses for each one so yeah
it's but that's basically so
that we really try to develop
methodologies to extract information but
I understand you something
in the long run it's really working
commercially as well because you become
an expert on the context of other people
and people get addicted to do literally
like they really need you to explain
what is happening to the lives and this
activity of a very weird relationship
that at one point becomes a little bit
vicious but yeah with many examples when
we did the house in never develop for
instance I would say there's the bit of
a weird situation because we were
explaining everyone what was happening
there what was the connection to the
valley to the ecosystem what was the
connection between their home in he
beachside and their way of living in
other places and yeah I think it was
important to design also the way we
could remove ourselves from that because
system at one point because we became to
need it for that too to keep going we
became a little bit the narrator's of it
so so yeah we had to remove ourselves
and we decided so it was we thought of a
way to progressively disappear now the
house us and these people have their own
yeah
I'm going to ask you a very difficult
question that you may refuse to answer
and you have taught advances to viewers
in many schools and you have been
teaching probably for the last 15 years
maybe if you were to teach the first
year of architecture and in in any
school right from Madrid to Princeton
with Colombia or anywhere where you are
what are the fundamental aspects that
you see an architect needs to get today
in their first exposure with the beauty
of architecture yes it's a question I
have to ask myself every day when I'm
teaching it's mandatory question I think
for any teacher for me the main question
is this and the main thing that I do I
don't know if this some people don't
know the main thing I try to do is to to
so people that architecture is not
something that will happen in a few days
but we're already architecture all of us
our connections our lives our bodies our
shoes our daily life it's architecture
so if we started to unpack what is
happening here this is our architecture
I couldn't be talking to you guys
without this table without that
projector without the the curtains
so the situation that were in is the
result of a huge amount of design
collaborations and for me emerging as an
architect is more gaining the capacity
to operate in on an already existing
architectural Rhianna rather than
inventing a new one rather than
imagining new architectures out there in
our models so it's more something that
is all around here then something that
is on the table dirt
and that is the fundamental change if we
think for instance of all these images
of people with others I think I see do
you have any of these pictures we see
that probably that's at least from my
point of view a position I don't
identify with I have the feeling that
architecture is all around and that we
are struggling to remain our meaningful
contributions to that already existent
architecture beyond I think that's an
incredible way of closing a talk of an
individual that I think is participating
in that afternoon of finding what is the
architecture is and the way in which we
might be redefining it in the near
future here or anywhere else in this
world
thank you
[Applause]
