so I don't know what else can I say
maybe I can just play the images I
really thank you mother for the generous
introduction thank you for the
opportunity of being in Cooper and happy
to present this lecture as a compliment
to the exhibition that will be in the
corridor for maybe a couple of more
weeks more so what I want to do with
this lecture is show the itinerary in
which the works that are presented
outside say a selection of six are
inserted so that you are able to see the
reasons sometimes the chances that take
us to think about these projects and
actually get to feel them there's not a
linear path that we follow for sure and
the work of the office as you might have
realized if you have walked along the
corridor it's a it's a work that spans
across programs across territories
across the scales it's true that we like
the big scale and that construction and
the way that ideas are materialized is
fundamental for us for the way that we
design and we think about architecture
and something that I want to highlight
about our work and I kind of realize as
when we have the opportunity to look at
a broader whole career elliptically is
that there's quite a balance between the
works that we develop you know on our
own initiative at our own risk
like the Minsk open house at the top and
the works that we are commissioned so
there's a big amount of work that
happens because we
take everything we earn as architects in
our Commission's and we put into
research and into the construction of
other works that we want to develop we
are kind of a a small family we work
Anton Raphiael who is seated here and is
the major responsible for in Samba
studio and the Xavier quest our amazing
partner a building engineer we work
together in every project we kind of
sometimes exchange roles we learn from
each other from the conflict of the
conversations from the collaboration and
it's it's something that we try to
preserve even as the office grows our
first works
it happens in connection with Santiago
Compostela historic city in the north of
Spain we started being very local
architects where the presence of history
was very important to us and also the
materiality the works that we developed
in Santiago de Compostela had to be
built in stone and that immediately
drove us to a pallet of materials that
we had to work with and as architects
trained in Spain with an interesting
technical education but still having
responsibility as an architect of the
whole of the construction process and
working with very low budgets we felt
that we needed to complete our education
understanding the processes of
manufacture the processes of of
production of of materials in order to
be able to operate them to build and and
then be responsible for for that so in
the first two works that are located in
the same site very close to the storage
center of Santiago we had to build with
stone and we look at what industry
offered as a final product and of course
having
studied amazing ancient architecture
knowing you know what other kinds of
forms could stone take and also learning
about the Neolithic tradition in the
area in Galicia we decided to explore
further to better understand the origins
of the material and to go to the
landscapes where that material is
extracted from to be able to think with
more freedom
so this visit to the quarry was very
important for us and it has been taking
us to visit factories and other sites of
production when we are studying or
looking at other kinds of technology so
that we were able to insert ourselves in
the change of in this chain of
production in the in the moment where we
really want it to be so the
conversations with the quarry owner with
the party people were very fruitful
fruitful the first work that was
completed in in Santiago is this music
school where as I say that working with
granite with the local primates was a
given and the volume was also given in
this project when I entered the office
these project was reaching a conclusion
and I entered when Anton at that time I
was probably a student in fourth year I
think so for me it was a discovery no
because Anton was you know they had
recently completed this building and
Anton was saying you know there's this
empty plot here why don't we propose
something there you know they want to
build residential it's a it's a garden
in historic centre where there are these
different musical programs let's try to
think about something that makes more
sense that in a way completes the the
cultural activity of the side and let's
put together client with mayor and I
coming out from a university I didn't
know that these this
was possible you know that an architect
would really come up with a project and
sell it but I was lucky enough to a
surveyor marketed be involved in this
process from the beginning of the design
and essentially what we propose is to
bake a thick wall that we would build
this boundary that was would have you
know very interesting stone wall that in
a way would translate and transport to
the landscape that we have seen in the
quarries into this garden and that would
relate to history but in a very
contemporary way and we we develop these
spaces in between walls we build a model
we build a project we found the client
the general Society of authors and
editors who after continued to be a
loyal client to us we went to the major
we told him the story he loved it he not
always happens like that let me tell you
but in this case it did work and and
also we knew that we learned in the
process that no contractor was willing
to build this is the wrong because we
were reusing spare materials as per
stones from the quarry so they didn't
want to take responsibility for us so
the only way that it could happen in the
end was us becoming the contractors so
we were terrified at the moment when it
happened but I think it has been the
best gift that we have had so in our
visits to our quarry we discovered
I think it's important to hear the noise
of the of the party no because here it's
imagine this for when not 24 hours 15
hours
no so we learned about the techniques
and we discover there was a lot of spare
material irregular stones that are not
fit to go into the chain of production
so they pile them here and they are you
know they are a burden for the for the
quarry because they are all over the
place the only thing that they can do
with it is crush it and turn it into
Grable so we went to the quarry owner
and we said okay we want to release this
material we want to remove it from your
quarry it's okay and he was super happy
so we went back to the office and we try
to represent this to represent the wall
and it was we didn't have the tools to
really think about this of course today
we would go with our mobile phones we
would scan the stones we would have the
full catalogue and we would build an
amazing super precise 3d model but at
the time we didn't have that technology
so we were struggling on how to
represent this No and we found that the
model was our best ally and has
persisted as such throughout the years
and it allowed us to build with to
design with uncertainty no we were able
to control the scale we were able to
think about a concept of a structure we
were able to test a form and Composition
we were able to test an idea of space
the spacing between this thick wall and
also define a strategy of how we wanted
but we we did not we were it was
impossible to build a final world
because we were reusing all this
material that we could not catalogue
easily but we we had a plan and we were
building in historic center of Santiago
it was unthinkable that we could move
all these experiment area into this
amazing beautiful garden so our plan was
to build the quarry to build a hole in
the quarry of course we could not tell
the quarry owner something like this
because we he would have said no
so it was some kind of love story that
we had to develop with him we went there
you know we serve a let's try just to
see this game and to kind of rehearse
the maneuvers with your machines let's
put one star on top of the other and see
how it works you know the first times it
was not easy so he realized that maybe
it was not you know one stone on top of
the other but maybe two or three so we
continue to develop the wall I had to I
have to tell you that I have to move to
the quarry for four months because it
was impossible to get these people who
have been working you know in their own
fashion for many years asking them to
build differently it was impossible if
we were not there if we did not
demonstrate the or commitment so from
time to time the quarry owner would call
Anton and he would say can you remove
this girl from this chorus this is not
working she's asking me to put my
workers you know in impossible places
and possibly he was
you're right
I think sometimes we were not completely
aware of what we were doing but these
were the first tests you can see how
awful they the technology the recording
technology was at the time but these
were the videos that we produced
you know advancing the the world little
by little until we were able to build it
completely in the quarry and it might
seem double effort but I think this was
the only way we could have arrived to
this point so by this time we had
already rehearsed we had written the
script of the performance that we need
to repeat on this precious site of
historic center of Santiago and we had
trained ourselves in all these
uncertainty so now we had a certainty we
had the design we were able to test it
as structurally and to fix the things
that were not completely working and we
were ready to disassemble it and
transport it to the site no and this was
you know a real happy moment with a
quarry owner and a life experience for
me that transformed my vision as an
architect completely so we moved one by
one all the stones to the site this the
quarry was one hour away from an hour
and a half away from the site and now
with all those all that training we were
able to assemble the wall on the side on
this far then you know and complete the
whole building you know building that it
holds a public space almost like Street
these in this garden and that Heights
underground the performance spaces for
the artists and the production spaces
that are connected to the other musical
buildings in the garden
and this was a way of translating this
landscape that we have seen in the
quarry into this discarded you know
where you can you can see the the big
scale of these stones that are the size
of of the stones that already existed on
the side we really made very little
transformations to those pieces so while
we were building Santiago we were also
getting ourselves familiar with
different technologies different ways of
materializing architecture we were
developing our own way of learning about
all these things that we were not
experts on and we did a very interesting
visit to a precast concrete factory we
had always been fascinated with you know
the scale of the infrastructures and the
beauty of of of these Universal Delic
and artificial structures and we found
this beautiful Cemetery of beams that
they caught and of course or mind
connected to the Santiago whirring on
those spare stones and again we wanted
to you know take these stones and this
take these beams and do something with
them we had earned some money with doing
the the sky building the stone wall and
we decided to spend it into Commission
or first work to ourselves which was a
house that we wanted to create with
these kind of structures no the house is
the American house that we go
it's our reinterpretation of a cordial
house so the central space becomes an
open space that is not the limited in
its four size
it is embraced by the structures but it
opens
the landscape in in different ways so
there's an Alex of structural elements
traces that define these enclosed space
of the career that becomes the heart of
the house again the model here becomes
the way in which we can design these at
the moment we were and we thought we
were going to be building with these
spare beams that they had in the factory
so we were trying to organize them to
develop the Elex of the annex of spaces
embraced by these structures finally it
was not possible again for liability
things and because the the structural
concept of the house was challenging so
but we were able to use the molds that
they had available in the in the factory
and that movement that implied
committing to the scale of these
elements we were able to use them to
cast the new pieces so here you can see
this a video that is also available in
the exhibition on site with a very nice
music that you know the kind of parallel
thinking and the way that we use the the
model as a way to think about the space
but then a way to think about the
construction and to plan the
construction so there is there is a
simultaneous Akina right when we are
designing and we are already thinking
about how we are going to build and how
things are going to come together and
how the final architecture has this
legibility in which the way things are
symbols become also evident and the
the building when it's when the
structure is completed all the space is
there the architecture is there and it's
just a question of the limiting and
enclosing the different spaces no but
you can see there's really the structure
is the one that is defining the spaces
it's resolving the support of those
spaces but it's also expressing and if
in this case transferring the scale of
an infrastructure into a domestic space
so these houses in a way and
experimentation about this translation
of scale so the contextualization of our
technology but is also a revision of of
of a courtyard and annealing
interpretation
gorget with you know all its part for
the water the vegetation the space the
flow of of the air inside the space this
is our house in in Spain that you are
invited to visit if you come if you go
next week and and this is where now we
are accommodating or our office and this
is a video that we developed when Spain
was swimming the World Cup so we had all
the family gathered it's not that we are
soccer fanatics but I think it's a nice
video to show the dynamics of the house
and how everything happens in this you
know outer space that connects the
different spaces on the house you know
and something that we discovered with
this house also is how with these very
heavy elements we were able to actually
build very light spaces
[Applause]
after doing this house we were invited
to a competition to renovate
slaughterhouse in in Madrid again an
historic context in this case we were
working with these amazing warehouses
from the beginning of the 20th century
that had served their purpose and I
wanted to be transformed into a cultural
center and the program was an immediate
ech the client wanted to build a second
storey within this space and I think we
won the competition because we were able
to propose this new space while
preserving the memory of the place
they're almost intact so the what we
proposed was after having experienced
and learned from precast concrete
technology and the benefits of
prefabrication with American house we
proposed inserting through the windows
doing most of the construction effort
offshore in a factory and then
introducing with very precise maneuvers
these elements through the windows to
their final position and the way that
you can see you know the two different
warehouses by introducing these bridges
of activity we were providing that
second level and we were also connecting
the two warehouses I'm turning to in
dividend dependent spaces into one you
know in a very simple gesture these
bridges were designed to fit the windows
we were very lucky that the engineers in
the early 20th century with we're really
precise and really good and everything
was you know quite well in mind and we
also had you know a good yard in front
of the warehouse that allowed us to
do this maneuver and so this is
something that now looks kind of fluid
and easy but it took us quite a lot of
time to to engineer and and the client
was so scared more that she would we'd
kind of demolisher do something very bad
to this story spirit
[Music]
you gotta watch this video outside I
don't want to stop it but I know we are
we have limited time so you know you can
see the distinction between the existing
the previous structure that remains
untouched and how the new structures
also with these very industrial nature
are inserted in between the spaces
without touching and how as we knew in
the American house these heavy elements
would feel very light in that space
because of the span across the whole
warehouse so they became the bridges of
activities supported by these windows
and allowing the space to flow
underneath and again these dialogues so
important between the history without
being romantic but really how to
preserve it and how to continue it was
something that was very important to us
in this project and with the client that
we developed the stone wall the sky
headquarters in Santiago de Compostela
we developed our first work out of Spain
which is these theatres in Mexico City
this is the moment when we realize that
the office at some point cannot be local
and that we are starting to work abroad
and this was a theatre that was meant to
be inserted in the castle complex where
Carlos Haslam has his speaker
headquarters in Mexico so it's again a
very not historic but very sensible a
context
where Fernanda Romero had developed this
my jam' you see you and David
Chipperfield developed after another
museum and we actually do
aside I mean there was no buildable area
and left in the garden so but the client
had arrived to an agreement with
Carlos's name that they wanted to build
somehow a theatre and they wanted to
insert it into the commercial center and
what we proposed was actually to insert
the theater underground occupying this
void that had already been opened for
the parking but reserved part of that
space for the theater and just built up
kind of structure that would in a way
suggest the presence of that space but
that would participate of the kind of
the landscape experience of the garden
so you can see how the theater is hidden
underground and on top appears this is
structure that again wanted to be very
very light in the garden
it was permeable to the Sun and the
eating kind of reinterpreted the public
spaces that this Mayan pyramids create
but inverted creating an excavated
sequence of lobbies on the ground and
then protected by these thicker
structure that because it was supported
by you know these elements that had
different structural and spatial
function it appeared to be almost also
floating so the the role of these
supports was associated with their
structural function with the way that
for example this first one is
responsible for evacuating the water and
on the roof but also you know learns
from these kind of experiences where
forms sometimes hides the function and
by doing that you know the whole
structure was able to move and feel
lighter than it really was we had
learned from the santiago de compostela
wall how important is for some of these
structures to build them off the site to
in a way in a very controlled setting
resolve all the uncertainties and when
it happens on the site everything is
designed and and it's ready to to be
built so with a very similar strategy we
built the structure on the factory and
then the process in the construction
side was much more easy to control
and there was no there were no surprises
technical surprises or economical
surprises when the structure was built
and of course there was a training that
had been developed a training that we
had developed in ourselves but then
knowledge exchange that we had done with
there with experts building with steel
structures this is how the structure
appears in the garden and Heights all
they or pushes on the space of the
theater underground in a sequence of
public spaces that go from the street
level to the level of the theater
underneath
so with the different new projects that
we were that we were getting and
developing we changed office who changed
to a larger office and we decided also
to again spend what we had earned in
another experiment that we wanted to do
this time in an amazing landscape in
that idea that we had discovered when
building or one of our first works and
we wanted to build in his amazing
landscape a very sensual space almost a
window into the sea and we wanted to do
it with very few resources with the
materials available locally and we
wanted to build it ourselves so it was
some kind of summer workshop with the
office we took us reference the liquid
we see a Karen on that we have always
admired and studied and created a
similar program in our hat and this was
the document that we produce to describe
the project where we were you know
writing the recipe of how we would do
the construction carving a hole on the
ground filling it with hay bales that
have presented the space and then
filling all the spaces between the earth
and the heat builds with the real
structure with concrete and then
removing the hay bales to reveal the
space and also here space appeared
almost as a surprise you know that we
were able to control up to a certain
point and
is us on the site kind of following that
recipe or that script that we had a
previously we really written and again
working with some level of control and
some level of uncertainty which we
actually like know when architecture is
able to surprise you know it's kind of
an orphan gift in there in the end so we
are placing all the hay bales after
having built the mound of Earth and we
are feeling the spacing between with the
structure we are letting in the concrete
mix with the earth so almost we are kind
of building an artificial stone and then
we are counting where we know that we
are going to find the door and the
window
we are cutting the concrete to reveal
the space by starting there
they're habeas
you know and these were some of the
surprises that we you know we were
looking for but we kind of have some
kind of intuition but we didn't know
exactly how it was going to operate but
how you know the artificial structure
actually over the time was able to melt
with the landscape and build this kind
of reverse or a architecture and these
were all the textures that we were
exploring the textures again then
against the hay bales
the textures against the plastic and the
framing of of the horizon
so here you can see the change of offer
scales no it's it's not that we are
always doing small projects actually
from 2007 we've been working at
different times in projects some of them
like the Tower of Music Commission's
Tower in China others research projects
like these baton towers where we want to
as we've done with the truffle or will
be a masculine house we want to explore
other concepts although here it's more
difficult to get the funding to build
them ourselves so a1 competition in
Milan to build a residential tower and
another competition in these high-rise
projects again we we apply the lessons
learned from you know very fundamental
works like the immerse copyin house and
the in the tower of music for example we
were looking how to insert it needed to
be a vertical campus because of the
urban parameters of the of the site
where we were working so our research
and our intention was how to bring into
the vertical dimension and the typology
of the tower the urban scale and the
urban experience of a campus a
university campus and how to also bring
the urban quality of the spaces the
public spaces that we find find in
cities like Valencia where this project
was to be built No and also again how we
look at history how we learn from past
experiences you know and why things were
built as they were was
just a question of available
technologies at the time was it a
question of protection was it also a
question of response to a climate like
the extremely warm climates that happens
in Valencia and with all those
references we created the tower of music
that you know was a tower where the
different functional programs were
organized creating an annex office
spaces trying to break the scale of the
high-rise into four-story high buildings
you know trying to bring in a domestic
scale into the scale of the tower and
also inserting in these moments public
spaces that would cross views from cross
experience and we were creating a thick
wall that would embrace all these
programs and would be able to respond
acoustically to the demands of a music
program and also to a climate that
required a lot of thermal control and
shading so in others this kind of
balance between what's void and what's
built that we were proposing that in
this tower that we in an urban quality
you know and also
an idea of how to build and control the
the quality and the sequence and the
budget in the construction of these
high-rise following some of these things
that we had explored in numerous coping
house when using prefabricated elements
the Big Bang Tower
it's another tower where we again here
explode the central core to create a
more urban more open high-rise building
you know where programs can be
accommodated differently in the
different levels this is more on a
research project that we are trying now
to you know we find the client or find
the opportunity to to advance further
but here are some of the ideas you know
that probably will take you to the near
scorpion house and how the structure is
also framing the views and it's it's
creating a different scale and a
different spatial quality and another
project that you know we want a
competition and we were almost ready to
build but that also us the same as the
tower of music in the end and didn't
happen it's quite our back news when you
are working on you know this kind of
project that you're so sure you're going
to build and then you know you get the
surprise no I mean these we want the
competition to build a residential
building in these master plan in this
case it was kind of luxury apartments
and we were happy to build a competition
with sort of the motor so he was doing
one tower and we were doing the other
and we were so sure that because cerca
de moda was there we were going to build
this project and it would happen but
anyways we were able to develop a very
interesting
theme that we had complete we have
continued to apply in other projects in
Milan and what the client told us is
that people when they get their
apartments they typically demolish all
the partitions that are inside and they
recreate their own world in their home
so our proposition was to do that from
the beginning you know to design just
the interest the basic infrastructure
that would allow a variety of
compositions to happen inside no one
here we were using languages and and the
distributions imagining what other
architects would have done in a way
distancing of ourselves from that
process to allow the users to
reinterpret their own frame and this was
something that solved many things to the
client and they loved it and we
continued developing it but in the end
it it didn't happen but we were able to
meet sort of the modern who is a great
architect and we learned a lot in this
process no but and we were a little bit
disheartened in this moment of our lives
but then suddenly two amazing clients
arrived to our lives Kathy and Peter and
they proposed us to work the proposal
first work in the United States in
Montana in a ranch that they had it was
their dream project where they wanted to
build a music center in nature with art
he was kind of also a dream project with
us because he'd allow us to go back
again to nature which is place where we
always like to be and of course we said
we go and and also two other great
people into our lives
Santos another Taurani who you know with
this project that we had and suddenly
the opportunity to go to MIT and fund a
lab there you know we made the decision
to move our center of gravity to Boston
where we are still located and we
founded the pop lab that in a way we
thought would give the support to all
those research efforts that we were
doing on our own and we went to our
public which is basically parking garage
where we can keep building prototypes
and we decided to explode the office so
that beautiful office that we had bought
made these grant projects we realized
that if we wanted to be present in those
places where we were designing and we
needed to move to Mexico and we needed
to move to Montana and we needed to move
to whatever we were building we had to
have that flexibility and and so we did
it and we moved our center of gravity
from Madrid to Boston so the first thing
that we did was find home for us of
course you remember we had this amazing
house numerous copying house in Madrid
so the home was very important to us we
also needed to have a very small office
we have also four kids so that scared us
to death coming to the US with four kids
education health so public education was
very important so that we decided to
move to Brooklyn where there are very
nicer schools and we found the cheapest
property in Brookline which turns out to
be according to co-op this garage
one-story garage
[Laughter]
so you can see how convincing another is
to you know move us to this home that we
renovated and this is the the renovation
that we do deed of the one-story garage
that some of you have already visited we
change it for this from this so but we
were very excited because we were seeing
already the potential of what this could
become knowing we were very excited with
the American adventure and with the
possibility of buildings all these new
things the lab and everything in the
labs we continue the research that we
had started in 2011 when we were trying
to think about emergency housing for
Japan and we were looking at foam a very
light material to build very quick and
we designed a foam house that could be
assembled by 4 people in one week you
know we we had built these and this was
a home that could be assembled to create
a calm very sensual unit and we continue
this research building other other kinds
of spaces and structures also we form
this is the Kubek igloo in our yard in
MIT and this is a structure that again
is just filled with foam it's mainly
working in compression so it's it was
very easy to build it was almost like
building a model we we were not only
discovered we were not allowed to use a
scaffolding we found a license so we had
to in a way build like the Egyptians
just by creating a steps that would
allow us to arrive to the top
this needed to be very nice to the
oldest all these research was a balance
of niceness because you know we knew of
course we love precast concrete but we
also know the limitations so we wanted
to explore you know how to develop these
technology of prefabrication reducing or
eliminating the variable of weight and
then this other experiment was how to
build not walls and compression
structures but you know how much could
fall resisting tension with some
reinforcement so here you know we are
also reinterpreting the technology of
precast concrete but substituting
concrete with form and a small prototype
that we build testing these being a
world foundation roof and we left there
for two years while we were getting the
money to be able to build and become
again our best clients and build our own
home on top of our one-story garage so
this was the test proof that we need of
the technology again we tested it on
ourselves and we decided that the only
thing that we needed on top of the
existing house was just one big room
that as we have developed in the stick
tower was this kind of open framework of
possibilities a multi-purpose domestica
space that could serve as sleeping area
at night a stymieing as working space
cinema playroom and a garden on top so
on top of the existing garage we
designed this double-height space
because we were building with these very
lightweight technologies we
to reinforce the foundation and this was
very important for the budget of the
house and then we also ended up we
amazing that there was no way we could
fill with the budget that we had builded
in the US so we designed the emergency
plan of opening or assembly fabrica in
Spain and building it with the people in
the office so we became fabricators here
and we developed while we were building
we were also researching and testing
with this technology that was then
proportionate and I mentioned to beat my
team containers and this beam was of
course more rainforest that the one that
you were seeing in the lab because here
we had to respond to fire codes and to
also all the movements that these
elements have in their tweet as they are
cranes and they are manipulated so we
had to take into account all those kind
of partial moments of the journey from
the factory to the house but finally we
were able to put them in the containers
and we were happy actually that we were
testing all of these and it was for
ourselves if it had been for a client
maybe we would have been more uneasy but
you know we had measured the garnish and
refined perfectly where we had developed
all the drawings or the engineering and
it had to work and it did work
that's because also Javier our partner
is like a Swiss watch
he never fails so this was a magic
moment for us this house again as the
truffle as the American house has become
kind of a monument for us where you know
it's just the starting point of
something that we keep you searching
that we keep developing and now we are
studying how to apply these to
collective housing and other skills
using you know they're open lessons
learned and of course it's also an our
upgraded house
where we feel we are in the middle of a
forest
[Music]
with a great roof terrace that by the
way was the suggestion of of mother so
we are and this is then of course how
orchids at this point when they need to
represent that
with the cream this is mom with the
tractor beam climbing too you know the
nice part of the house that is this top
part so you know all this research we
are applying in two other scales I won't
go into that because I want to end up
with this project and again as we
started with the landscape in Santiago
de Compostela I will end up with this
amazing landscape in Montana where
tuckie and Peter wanted to build an Art
Center and they looked at our projects
in Santiago de Compostela and they
proposed this challenge to us how to add
architecture to this place to help
create shelters to help people navigate
on the site and experience art without
compromising the beauty and the purity
and the vastness so we went to the site
part of the team of our team actually
moved there and we started driving and
driving and thinking trying to forget
our urban thinking trying to forget you
know many of the things the references
that we had from other places and trying
to immerse ourselves in these magic
landscape we were looking at geological
processes of erosion fragmentation
explosions to almost create a new
language or a new palette to be able to
work in this site and here is where you
wind understand what mater was talking
about when she was talking about
explosions but we were thinking you know
how can we create architecture from
matter from energies and we were you
know doing all these models back in the
office
and exploring experimenting
[Applause]
well there's actually amazing explosion
engineering that happens where they
demolish the buildings that's absolutely
all sold and calculated so there's a
science of destruction so we are not
there yet but it's there it's these were
the kind of landscapes within landscapes
that we were proposing connecting with
fire with water this was a fountain that
we were strategically located for people
to be able to drink you have to imagine
these kind of very vast space rolling
hills 11,000 acres of landscape where
there's not a single tree a single shade
or world fountain so these kind of
became infrastructural elements spread
across the land that required very
little maintenance and you know in the
office we were interpreting these very
basic architectures that we would relate
to different natural elements or
different structures or different spaces
nor minds we had
[Music]
in our minds we had all those places
that we had captured from the side but
we were also allowing ourselves a lot of
freedom to explore an experiment you
know or a breach that we were designing
by carving all the ground and casting
the concrete on that path that would
become the way up the mountain and we
were reinforcing the land and we were
extracting the structure from the earth
and I'm putting it into position you
know this is the kind of moment of
conceptual experimentation and then
there's a moment where we say okay how
are we going to build this no and then
it comes immediately after no so we were
these are some but we actually developed
a catalogue of possibilities different
scales different potential programs that
we presented the client and we said we
don't think you know one whole building
one single building makes sense in this
place we think it should be something
that we participate of of the vastness
and that will we really make people
experience the land directly also this
was this constellation of elements that
would also allow the client to develop
the project over time because this is a
risky project you know taking an art
center in this very remote place the
client selected three of the pieces two
doors into the landscape that were
connected to the two circulation paths
that then we scans from the model again
the model was the
designed to and these are very
interesting drawings where we were
already comparing all the logics of
fabrication and we were casting for
these pieces the pieces or something and
then we were tilting them because this
was the the easier way to to delete them
so they were way casting the earth of
the of the ground we completely
engineered all of them this was the
second one that had a similar process
but was tilted in a different way and
then these open grew before performances
that we call yomo that represents the
spaces of the heels in this case the
structure had to stay in its position
because of it was a larger piece is
weighted a lot and so we could not move
it so what we were doing was really
doing us with the truffle we were doing
form work and we were casting the piece
on its position and then we were
unearthing it so when the client
confirmed that we were going to build
this we immediately went to or amazing
place in Indonesia where we have the
truffle and we jumped to scale and again
trained ourselves in the process of
building and these structures and we you
know rehearsed at another scale but
already studying these methods of
construction and writing the script of
what would be performed on the side you
know already experimenting with the
textures with the structures to then go
to the site and be ready for
construction and be ready to convince
the different agents involved in this
because we need a rise to this scale
you're not no longer building a model by
yourself when you're actually meaning to
engage a lot of people and
we needed to make adjustments to the
available resources we needed to make
changes and and all was for for good so
these these structures of landscape we
call them that like these because they
are casted in the land they in a way
reinforce the land and create a space in
them we were you know the way that they
are casted with the plastics or against
earth respond to the need for different
acoustics for example more reflective
surfaces or more shiny surfaces taking a
reacting to the lines of the landscape
and the moment of unearthing was again
us in the truffula moment of of
discovery a moment where we were in a
way relinquishing control and allowing
for a nature to take over
so these are all the processes that are
hidden and now when you see these pieces
in the landscape all those invisible
process or the engineering of the effort
that is behind is erased but we like to
to remember them now in these in their
final position some people might think
that they belong to the landscape that
they were always there because they have
this strange familiarity
they provide the shelters into these
vast territory and in a way they mediate
between the scale of the landscape the
human scale and they have an abuse
condition between all right architecture
and nature we were not pretending to be
architects or artists we were just doing
what we thought was right for the place
and in an absolute harmony with
relationship with our client so I think
there are as responsible of all of these
as we are and you know they create these
continuities with a landscape they do
participate of the art program so they
can be read as these additional pieces
that happen in dance with all the
elements but they do have architectural
properties their surfaces are designed
to balance the sound and actually they
become instruments in them themselves
their thick masses are able to control
the temperature and protect from snow or
the rain and they are waiting to
activated by people and by music but you
know they are also perfectly well by
themselves without a program or a year
so they in a way they enable habitation
without exploitation
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
so we were in the in the factory in the
assembly in the on the side it was there
were seven containers and he had to be
seven days because we didn't have a
place to stalk just the small parking
spot where we were able to stalk
actually the the Roofus labs and so it
was you know perfectly coordinated
movement where the container left the
port where he had arrived here arrived
home and there was a crane waiting and
we were assembling one element one
container at a day
yeah yeah we fabricated everything in
Spain and then we organized the shipping
so that you know we had all the
containers wearing the same ship and
when they arrived they they have numbers
we knew which pieces where in which
container and we just till the track
okay you bring this container they stay
the next that you bring this container
and that way we were able to to assemble
the whole the whole house we found they
need to stock somewhere in the material
it's like a model with her well there
are I mean there it's not glue because
it's dry construction but there are a
moments in which we are putting one beam
on top of the other and then we are
tying those with the steel bars and
screwing and I'm creating especially
they couldn't the structure will
continue to you know for not for the
vertical loads but for the windows it
was important to tie that also to the
existing garage we were lucky that the
existing garage was cement block and
that provided enough support for the
house to be built on top and of course
because he was also lightweight but we
were connecting those new structures to
others in air it's this thing arash
screwing some steel elements that
and then you were seeing those joints
in the first project at the quarry where
he built the wall of stones that first
the question that was all held together
by gravity
yes there were no bolts in the quarry it
was pure gravity when we arrived to the
to the site the security measures were
different so during the construction
because the the wall was a stable when
it was all completely built there were
partial moments when there was not where
there was a lack of a stability and in
order to secure some of the pieces we
added at some point bars that then we
wanted to remove but the client didn't
want to remove so in the end they stayed
but the fact is that there's a
triangulation and also the thickness of
the wall makes it behave as a very
stable the first time they gave the
energy duty to test and fix things we
test structurally so with a big
machinery we were bumping the because
the structural engineer of course he
said I cannot do anything with a model
this is not a final thing so there's
nothing to do here but then he arrived
to the sign he said okay if you glutes
were stable
we trusted especially the party people
because they they had some kind of
invisible x-rays that they were able to
locate these hidden cracks in the stones
that we were unaware of so for example
they did locate some stones that they
felt had interior cracks because that
was a moment when the wall could become
fragile and they substituted some of
those and we changed some of the stones
that maybe were not having a good
support or they needed more connection
in the base like very slight
modifications and or sometimes we were
cutting the base slightly you know
to provoke that better a touch or
contact between the stores
yes there was one project where as you
mention that you pay attention to the
reservation and then also the product
which I'm not sure if it was intentional
you preserved some sort of quality of
the environment so I just want to aspect
it's big attention on how how would you
say to approach that in projects in
terms of preserving the environment I
mean for us history is kind of a natural
thing we live in and we've been born in
in the Spain and we've we've discovered
architecture or the story architecture
that happens in Spain and of course in
other parts of the world that we've
traveled but it's a natural way to read
the contexts whether that history takes
you back to the Neolithic period or
before that or whether it's a shorter
story but the paying attention to the
context to react to it to incorporate it
as a fundamental ingredient or to have a
different kind of conversation I think
that's kind of something that every
every architect that saying is to take a
position and for us it happens in in
other project no of course when we are
working in a vast landscape the
conditions are radically different than
working in an urban setting or in a
historic city center where there are
other rules so some rules are in post
already by the codes and other codes are
codes that you have in your imagination
or that you construct in a way I find
very interesting that like a comment
because this young your work is so
interesting at many levels and talking
about the coast what I find
interesting is that in a way you're
modifying almost everything like you're
creating in a way you're not you're not
accepting the parameters that are
available as own architects but you're
reformulating and opening up new
parameters for your architecture to be
able to manage both of the landscape
level and a very loved building so I
find it very interesting and fascinating
so I just want to congratulate you
because you know was it also
reverberates in your life and is very
evident so so the parameters of your
life and the architecture of your life
become a little bit like a bow right a
way of dealing and a way of doing a way
of thinking and a way of producing since
you achieve a higher level of
architecture of this community I don't
know if it's higher this is just in the
way that we know how to how to do it you
know and it's true that when you are
trying to go beyond convention or push
the boundaries or discover new paths
yeah you sometimes need to create those
parameters and have to in a way create
the story so that others in these cases
the cities that need to license or can
interpret and can follow and and there
are very thin lines sometimes but that's
also why we from the from the early
projects
it was either if we wanted to build a
poetic missions that we had in our mind
we had to bring that poetry to the
construction and we had to do the
construction actually because some
people just didn't understand and and we
understand that
because sometimes it's easier you know
structures of landscape is a project
that if we have not built people would
just think okay that's another nice you
know idea you know but all the truffle
or all the apartment the Stonewall know
that when you see built it seems okay
yes it's possible but when you are
telling the story to somebody you know
and you see their eyes and you see that
they're not following or you know
willing to take the responsibility
they're the liability to be that so
sometimes you know where you have to a
number people or try to get them
exciting and try to make them believe
what you are believing on that we we
were lucky to learn it from the quarry
experience which came on him quarry men
are very tough and it was really tough
to bring them into a world you know get
them to change the there you know daily
dynamics and get them to build these
crazy structure in the middle of their
quarry occupying a lot of their
resources their material their time no
because some architects have this idea
living you know and in the end they
wanted to keep it so this was the
amazing thing for us this was like the
the compliments know that we receive
with the quarry owner where we said I
don't know if we should you know make it
from scratch and we keep this in the
quarry and and we were no place is
that's a good you know when you are when
you realize that when other people
follow you and you know join the boat
with you that's the perfect situation
[Music]
these large stone very very heavy
objects the new transition that
materiality is the lightness of the
phone it's kept retaining the language
of these original massive almost
monolithic structures for us within that
like what was the strangest thing for
you in the construction process of
making that switch if suddenly I made
something that's just as an assistant
model is so I mean we we love stone and
we love precast concrete but that brings
some limitations because of the weight
and then you realize that you know the
the kind of dimensions of the element
respond actually not to the loads that
they need to care about their own loads
no so so sometimes you know the loads of
life in a building or you know nothing
compared to the loads of the materials
so all this research with lightweight
materials you know was to try to erase
that element weight from the equation or
reduce it and see what happened you know
and we were discovering a lot of things
from the easiness of building and you
could see when we were moving the beams
in the lab we were moving them with
booked trolley you know versus the huge
trucks on the cranes and then you know
this heavy machinery that costs a lot of
money and also that opens a whole
possibility of new contexts no context
where you know people really need to be
doing things with their hands and moving
things with their hands and you know
there's not so also you know part of
some people that come to visit us in MIT
and they see the lab and they see you
know how we having all these robots and
things we are building everything you
know with our hands they ask the
question why are you doing this and it's
because you don't want to prove it that
you know there's this versatility of
doing with that and then we know that it
can be perfectly automated that's the
easy part
no so you know there's there's this kind
of
[Music]
kind of easy construction component that
opens new possibilities there is the
question of when you reduce the weight
of the building you reduce the weight of
other elements some of the budget like
for example in our development house in
Spain we did not need to reinforce
foundations and that was a huge thing
that would have cost maybe a lot of
money to be able to do to build a new
house so you know there are a lot of but
then we keep that solidity because that
implies thermal mass it implies you know
in many cultures and the culture where
we come from this validity has also a
psychological thing to it where you know
it means protection it means shade it
means you know thermal properties you
know that we like about stone and that
we like about a concrete and you know we
with foam we we are exploring and we
also able to get so we are also in the
process of discovery we have not solved
other variables we have built or a home
which is already a proof test of many
things so now we can approach a client
or a developers in a you want to do
these kind of housing applying this
technology before they looked at us and
they said like are you talking about
former what didn't and they they're not
ready to to listen know but if this is
something that is real that it's there
that they like that they touch and mean
you've been there now some of you know
you touch and it doesn't feel like paper
modern no it feels solid it feels it's a
completely different story name so
that's that's something that I don't
know if goes in favor or against but
it's part of her the way that we operate
is that we have realized we
many times we need to do things and then
and we are able to talk about them
also using your own life as an
experiment to legitimize your active
building and also just short-circuiting
thank you
I guess I'm just curious to see also
being a mother arrangement for kids also
you moving across I'm just interested to
know about if you were cast the
experiment for your spell rebuilt at
home in Boston do you see that there's
kind of some reciprocity and going back
to speaking again and again and again
and you feel like the experiments are
going to continue to become more like
week
or I guess I'm just interested to know
where you are seeing yourself up next on
the tooth directories for the building
and also personally so we I think we are
adventurers we don't like to make
long-term plans because they never
happen and we like to be very open so
for our passion I think it's clear its
architecture you know this kind of
mixture between research practice
education you know really teaching is
also a big effort but but that gives us
other energy other contacts with their
reality you know so these balance is
what what moves us know so a strong I
think our goal is to keep this balance
but you know we cannot stay we we don't
know how to wait for the opportunity we
just go for the opportunity and go to
look for more than works I mean I have
almost well I have not forgot but I mean
I arrived home crying almost every day
literally destroyed and I sometimes
cotton burn I mean was like I cannot do
this anymore
this is impossible imaginary and a
quarry the noise no but also the people
of these men I didn't know there was no
like toilet or no like minimal
infrastructure it was so uh burden like
this noise and at that point I didn't
even have like the vision of you know
now when you see it and it's completed
is amazing for me it was kind of a
military service
but it was paying then I realized I
loved because if not I would have quit I
mean there was I didn't I was not forced
to be there you know I realized that I
was learning or wiling things I was
learning a lot many many things and then
from you know from know basic things
that you learn in the university and
then you see apply when you see the
things you learn that much better in
construction to know how to really talk
to somebody that does not speak the same
language because you come from this
discourse of university of and you have
to communicate with people and you have
to communicate with people you have to
understand them so that they're able to
understand you know and this is also a
personal and human experience now and I
think the success was that I that we
moved I mean and I was able to move
there completely you know in that
implied that I was everyday I was
travelling an hour and a half to the
quarry I was doing the word sometimes I
was going back to the construction
supervising the foundation work and
everything I was drawing at night all
the plants because we were the
contractors at that time and I arrived
exhausted no and it was also missing
from the story that you told to is
revealing that struggle well there's I
mean there's a lot of pain behind all
the words of course you want to stay
with the nice things but you know there
are a lot of nice not missed
opportunities but projects in which we
have worked so much and then suddenly
you know that we were going to build
this finally you're going to jump a
scale and this tower and this and the
project just you know in one day it's
out of the question and you are left
like so actually it's a risky business
because we have our practice does few
projects at a time that's the only way
that we are able to really be present in
all the phases and and that means that
sometimes you are in moments where you
have no Commission so you have no stable
source of income and you are spending
spending spending especially when you
decide to okay let's build these
experience no let's let's build the
truffle and let's spend everything that
we have been learning for two years
that's what it here oh and we do it
because we believe in it I mean
economically it makes no sense and
that's why I think there's not an
economist in our team know maybe we need
a business developer and we would do
much better for example now we have this
moment where you know we want to be
jumping a scale from our house and
developing you know their house in
prototypes and we're trying to convince
developers but that takes a lot of time
so you know Anton just told me this
morning hey I think we're going to rent
this warehouse no this yard and we are
going to build a factory so we are now
in a critical moment in our company know
where we are about to you know take a
major decision like do we want to push
this further are we waiting for somebody
to grow
or should we do it ourselves and I think
that's the the way that we have learned
to be architects and that's the way we
operate and I think we wouldn't know how
to do differently that doesn't mean it's
the best way or is the only way or it's
the way everybody has to follow it's
something that yeah I think we we have
this kind of adventure mind where we
like taking these risks also because we
have proved to ourselves that they are
worth it all so it's kind of a learning
learning curve I mean for example I mean
if you see structures of landscape that
project probably would have not have
happened if at some point we had not
decided at our own risk to build a
truffle and suddenly five years after
building the truffle we get this client
with this amazing you know where these
ideas that we had explored suddenly
makes sense there in a way we are trying
to go ahead of time developing these
ideas about architecture that we can
answer apply in other places programs
and and about your question about being
a mother and an anarchic then at the
same time again it's a question of
passion I think that you it's a balance
it's a balance and there's something
that you love you have to make things
compatible and make things work on and
you have your I have this philosophy
then you have you know we have this
amazing kid who has this image of his
mother and his father means his mother
and father he wouldn't understand live
with that with a different mother and
father no so that's good
yeah
[Applause]
