incredibly thrilled to be able to have
this conversation with Deanna aggressed
I'm Michael Young this is something that
we've been planning in the school for a
long time both as a request from
students but also viana and many other
faculty have spoken about this that you
know besides really the review format or
other kinds of seminars there's no real
format within the school for a faculty
conversation about certain issues and so
I think it's great that we're starting
this and it'll continue through the year
and hopefully it becomes something that
continues on at googler for years to
come so today we're going to talk about
representation in architectural
discourse I think this is the the title
and what we're gonna do is we each have
very brief presentations I think - five
slides and Deanna's four slides so this
is not a long lecture not intended to be
intended to put a few ideas on the table
for us to then talk about and then we'll
see where the conversation goes and
everybody is welcome to join in when the
time is right and by the way I want to
add if you can hear me that without a
microphone that Michael and I just each
one put together something without
knowing what the other one was doing
well I knew but I already had my thing
so because he sent me sooner
tonight sent him but so we'll see how it
all interacts so there you go it'll be
good as Fast Eddie Felson said in The
Hustler we're gonna play this fast and
loose
[Laughter]
okay so I'm using the word image in a
particular way and for me at least in
this kind of brief statement brief
presentation I think there's some
particularly important things for us to
begin to address as architects in
regarding the image not only is it
because image often gets a kind of
demoted position in relationship to
other forms of representation
particularly it's put against drawing
and has been done so throughout the
history of architecture but also we're
in a moment now where for a couple
reasons were in a kind of deluge of
images every day
super architects on Instagram I think
has six hundred and sixty-five thousand
six hundred and sixty-five thousand
followers next top architects has
something like a half a million and you
put all these things together you guys
have seen more images in a day then when
I was your age I saw in almost an entire
year now these images are no longer
curated they're no longer funnel they're
no longer dealt with in terms of an
institution or a format that is
selecting and choosing and making a
discursive argument for those images
instead you're getting them you're
seeing them for milliseconds and they're
going away so somehow I think it's
crucial that we think as architects
about how we can talk about act through
and argue with the images that were
created it's incumbent upon us to do so
today I feel the other thing that I want
to say is that everything that we
process through computations is
essentially an image we can render a
digital model to look like a drawing but
it is not a drawing in terms of the ways
in which that medium was defined either
in methodology or process before it this
does not mean that the drawing is dead
the drawing is very much alive but it's
operating within a different form of
communication one in which we must know
the conventions and must know how they
communicate we must understand the kind
arguments that a drawing puts forward
that other things do not all of this
still brings us back to the question of
the image so we got three things up here
and the reason why I'm starting with
these three images all from the occult
abodes arts are that Nicole DuBose arts
had a substantial discourse on the image
and these are three things that every
representation would have to pass
through after its party after its
initial design after its initial sketch
problem
the drawings would have to be rendered
imaged through three different types of
entourage poche in mosaic and very
briefly and very bluntly entourage does
all that stuff you put into a drawing
the people the furniture the plants the
trees the sculptures even that begin to
define in locate a character in a
program and a scenario Hoshea which is
that graphic fill for the walls there's
also something that allows space to
become legible space to become visible
space to become sensible in terms of the
drawing as a figure ground and the
histories of poche are much more than
just a graphic the histories of poche
are a conceptual argument within
architecture and mosaic is quite simply
how one renders a surface again to
describe atmosphere to give character to
begin to articulate the nature of a
floor of a wall of an elevation in terms
of the imaging of that surface now these
three things formed a coherent argument
within the bows arts that made the
design legible and intelligible and
interpretable they were not merely
secondary something that came after the
design was completed there was something
that allowed a body of people who had
been trained within the methodologies
and trained within the discourse to
present ideas and arguments about the
architecture
they were consider now I'd say these
three things are alive today but they've
been transformed they've been mutated
into something a little different so
here we have a drawing by ishigami where
it's almost all entourage if you can
find the architecture in there it's a
very thin line and maybe some steps but
vegetation people furniture almost
taking over the entirety of the
representation
Andrew holders drawing in the middle
poche for him is now a kind of floppy
fabric coating which is creating pockets
around the objects inside and the
rendering on the far right for mosaic is
from the photographer Philip Shearer and
I say rendering but it's not rendered
out of a digital software program it is
literally a flush a collage of the
character that service and it's done
entirely through Photoshop through
hundreds of images layered over each
other to present an idea of the real an
idea of a real that is very strange in
many ways and it produces a doubt
regarding what that reality may be but
the introduction of photography is I
think one of the crucial things that we
need to do with as architects in
imagining and rendering the surface so I
have three drawings that I want to show
that I think are what I would call in a
way pair different paradigmatic hinges
and I use the word paradigm not in the
sense of Thomas Cone but in the sense of
Agra bans rereading a fund that a
paradigm can be a specific example that
shifts the ways in which people think
about something doesn't have to be the
overarching set of theories the kind of
generalizations the the rules it can be
something that alters our considerations
so here's our kazuma's no stop city and
in it there's things that come before
that are crucial the free plan for
but it's more than just a commentary on
that free planet it is almost to the
point where architecture becomes
Entourage where the homogenize ation in
totalization of the field be it a city
that extends forever or a building that
extends forever defined through its
systems through its mechanical systems
its lighting systems its elevators its
structure opens up a playing field in
which landscape buildings in habitation
people lifestyles desires begin to
become the architecture the architecture
becomes the entourage and we can see
this in numerous examples today from
Andres hockey to oma where the entourage
is almost the political the ways in
which people begin to describe or
inscribe our project events into spaces
and how we inhabit those second one for
poche is Oh a maze entry for the grand
biblioth√®que and there's precedents for
this as well of course we see the
precedent where now space becomes
legible and sensible through the graphic
technique of blacking out a zones and
reading the negative is as formed as the
solid there's the Noli map as a
precedent in terms of public and private
but there's also something else going on
in here in terms of the use of cliche
for you those of you who don't know the
drawing everything that's black here are
the stacks the library the books push
A's translations are varied one is
pocket another is the hidden or the
uncountable and there's something in
poche as a imaging technique that
underly reveals something it also
conceals something it conceals labor it
conceals the inhabitation of what is
beyond a certain scope of attention and
doing that there's something we need to
think about in terms of the politics of
poche if we may be hashed it before in
modernism we fill that poche with the
labor of
we filled it with pipes and wires and
ducts and in a contemporary situation
where is our crochet in terms of
electromagnetic energy things that are
moving through our environments at a
certain level when are you hidden from
surveillance what is the shadow space in
which you can no longer become seemed
last one this is a photograph from
Vernon Phillip Becker in am using it
here now to think about the idea of
rendering the surface or the mosaic and
for me the Becker's are pivotal and for
a number of reasons not only because of
the people they trained in Dusseldorf or
Thomas truths and Thomas Roth and
Candida Hoffer in Andrews Gorsky kind of
the the major monsters of contemporary
photography but the ways in which
they're using architectural precedents
these are almost like elevations they
are almost like documentary evidence but
they are also within the realm of
minimalism and conceptual art they
become serial we may see them and read
them and like their forms as abstract
objects but what they're also doing is
putting in tension the problem of
photography that it is both a
documentary index of something that
existed in the real in the past and then
the pressure of it becoming also an
aesthetic object in its own right of
contemplation and the ways in which we
as architects need to begin to deal with
photography deal with the imaging of the
world deal with a certain level what I
would call the background of the way the
world appears is a question of how we
render out a surface it's a question of
the mosaic and ever more pressing in an
age where everything is an image being
processed as a collage of discrete
pixels arrayed on a surface and
compressed and disseminated to millions
of people to only come back to us after
it's been reprocessed and appropriated
by the hard drives of unknown places so
that's what I got
so just think about
[Music]
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Applause]
okay so intersection the connections
between the real and the imaginary in
three times that's my target so so
here's John Podesta Piranesi always
their course so this will be in this a
percept and actually what I'm going to
talk about is the architecture in
relation to the city as it there have
been to use your term paradigmatic
moments we are actually big changes in
the concepts and thoughts about the city
from architecture seen from architecture
have changed and in tandem with changing
in the modes of representing the city
that is thinking and representing the
city have gone together and together
with a lot of other issues which were
the particular political social
historical context in which these
changes happened
so because pier Nessie is a critical
figure in the history of architecture
because his work of the camp Omarska
which is the only thing and be
presenting here although had the Karcher
II before and I decided to take it out
because we don't have the time for that
but basically the camper Marcio a
reading of Rome of a previous existent
plan of RO is a subversive critical
project it is not the actual Rome it is
not actual buildings many of them do not
exist those which exist are misplaced
there's the question of typology in
architecture is taken to a paroxysm in a
way
in a wave negates even its validity in a
way it's for architecture as the object
each one of these being an architectural
objects and against architecture for the
impossibility of architecture in an
urban context were at the autonomy of
each of these objects is denied by the
mere chaotic which is not chaotic it's
very well organized in the drawing
juxtapositions that couldn't so
basically in a critical work towards the
rationalism of the Enlightenment the
rules existing as in a different way
than other architects of the period like
live module okay and certainly in a very
different way as the orderly manner of
durand piranesi takes the city and makes
it the locus of this critical
development through drawing based on
actual ruins actual ruins discovered of
an actual map rented flip and marble
slabs from that was his current 1562 so
worth which a few slaps remain but which
was supposed to have a very strict order
and were the buildings and the types
were the actual ones so this really is
the impossibility of history
disregarding both the historic history
and a certain topography so that it's a
new it's a work the proposal is really a
fantasy of the real and imaginary put
together in this very sort of extreme
case and we can talk about it more
now we jump a few centuries here and
here is Cedric price podracing Phelps so
we're now nineteen sixty one sixty four
how many years 1900 about so it's 200
years later times goes by fast
and so policing belt I put it here this
app - together with another example that
will come in a minute because Padres
team does away with it all together and
but at what price does is at the city
there's no longer than Lagos itself of
any of these eating the state is
replaced as you see here in this drawing
is replaced by a network in a regional
scale really very large regional scale
and basically is replaced by systems
theory of which he was it was a big
thing Genesis in theory at the time and
he worked with one of the big proponents
of general Systems Theory plus he was
really influenced by planning urban
planning which most architects did not
know and which was still alive then very
much alive and so basically what remains
is a narrative or the podracing went
programmatic aspect is which is
basically the learning system where
users doing infrastructure and it's
based on a question of information
because that's general Systems Theory C
Burnett etcetera and communication but
there's no recognizable city because it
in this project I mean he started this
early wrong but from Paris is earlier
but it's very textual in his beautiful
and although there are some that in talk
about systems these when he goes to
extreme and only chose three of the of
the many drawings that exist of this
project but basically because the city
is about the present the future and the
past and social presentation and in this
case in a way if source the future sees
are ready for seeing what's going to
happen but it's also really happening
these what's interesting it's like the
planners at that time thick already saw
but it was already happening just in an
embryonic way it wasn't there yet and
and as you see the model representation
here tries to the technical tries to
stay stay away from it treasure
akiko draw very well at receptive price
you saw his hand runs are beautiful but
this is trying to stay on the detached
there's no subject here there's no
architect here their systems and here we
go to his friends Archie Graham and this
is by one Heron Peter cook after the
lefties this is wrong hair oops this is
from here on that's beautiful and that's
the plan of instance II which it will be
peonies iam by the way basically very
influenced by Reyner Banham
and by Cedric price both in this case
they see in a certain way is a field
that has a place as the present this is
really bad present and has a place in
the present at least the lefty Santa
Monica San Diego freeway and on the
right is Burma and so their places were
but it's all
for popular culture about consumption
about the instant of the instant City
the importer ability the city's
ever-changing and it depends from these
decisions that are very short-lived that
happened and happen and it's really
based in Los Angeles perfect also
centuries as many amazed has no depth of
history and so it's a city that for has
no form of really strong form a
structures and about that about this
collection of objects in a certain way
sort of an antipodean if you want of the
Piranesi we have all these collections
of objects just opposed in manners that
anybody knows la you don't go there for
a lot of formal planning I mean we know
that I complain a button all the time I
guess I'm old-fashioned and so this
about the event the moment and most
importantly it's influenced by pop art
which was really what's going on in art
at the time in England hammington famous
collage that everybody looked at this
made sense and octagram etc and so I
think these really important because
this is not nostalgic about the past
it's just take for granted that the city
is what it is there no history history
is not important as we even some
consumption the site so they were
different mode it's the same moment of
capitalism actually one has the tools
which is general systems that allows us
to be where we are in the extreme late
capitalism music later system going we
don't know of extreme communication
based on information and most of control
through it and
the the moment the production of objects
images as going to you that characterize
pop art and the putting into Vario
supposed to historic city we the
traditional urban design not a REM
planning historic looked at the city we
said we don't need the city because this
environment can be created in different
manner
and then actually is Aldo Rossi and I
chose the Chetan a Logan and a load city
and the game of the goose and the
painting and the Chetan other guys would
go back to piranesi of course we have
non Vienna Piranesi
the important thing about Rossi
recipient brings language so it's a very
interesting moment just slightly not
even ten years later the communication
the information that we see in general
Systems Theory or even in instant city
in their mode of representation it's
more about information and most of
communication popular communication mass
communication then it is about the
question of language when Rosie brings
this the background of historic city
with all the buildings and places he
loves these like they scientifical to
biography in a way but he the subject
received psychoanalytic subject is here
present that is a principle of jetan a
yoga which is another way because
analogous to a city but because there is
a relationship he takes a Freudian and
Union where you're thinking about energy
and work incorporate for his projects
their part and he talks about that he
doesn't talk about the actor he says he
can't explain
he says the image should be enough Lisa
collage we did it with women writing and
to others now this names escape me
the ETH in Zurich and it's other collage
no books but as you
either's some of his projects we can see
here the same Medina Cemetery piece in
both places and basically I think that
they're clearly the image refers back to
history but in incorporating the subject
present there here's the architect is
always putting the architect there right
this is him which other negation of the
objects not the social projecting onto
it
but these about the present this was
interesting that he's using the
historical background because that's the
European silly action as opposed to the
American city but here is his projection
of his desires the places that are in
his misses that memory is the most
important what history does which that
generates memories and actually we say
that it would City should generate
memories and some cities do that better
than others actually and here we have a
case and the other thing that Rossi does
in terms of representation which is
haven't happened I think in a long time
because he has collection one hand that
we have collage before even Cedric price
at college but he brings painting again
the painting is a hand of the painter
you talk about how its abuse these are
handmade these are not computer drawings
so it's the subject the creative subject
they're producing the drawing where the
sheet analogous collective which was a
thing thought purposely to do it in a
collective manner with collage
pre-existent material then the this
drawing of the collection of his
particulars in modern asymmetry there's
a whole collection of his projects here
making the game of the goose board and
then the collection of his project as
his paintings all paintings actually
here so I think that
interesting that it seemed like he's
going back but it's going back to the
role of history now incorporate in
history and the subject together as
articulating both of them and changing
in the motor presentation the question
of the pre-existent images in terms of
what happens at that moment but by
incorporating the subject he's taking
history also in a different way it's
already filter their safety
he makes it's a big difference and also
hearing Fletcher equals everyone agrees
it's a stop there all right so there's a
hundred things we could talk about
something just to start because it
crosses through a number of whereas
things is the the question of maybe
would start collage because at a certain
level we can talk about and relationship
to we could even talk about the journeys
and so this is I think a continuing
interest the the changing nature of
collage and the ways in which it has
been and continues to be incorporated
with an architectural representation and
one of the things i'm i'm always
fascinated about collages when and where
and how is the seam i mean the seam of
its assembly
reveal or conceal into what effect
all right and so to me well this one I'm
sure that they looked and I do have
actually an original but so I'm you know
using the mediated image but in also the
prints it was a college but then the
word prints made out of that collection
so when you see the actual you know hard
copies and they printed it smooths those
edges it's interesting
you know it becomes you don't see the
materiality of the collage percent so
it's interesting but I'm sure the seams
are there they're all taken from books
and informal seams of fragmentation and
and one level it's powerin and which
ways does one because this to me is also
about this question of the real and
imaginary yeah when in which ways does
the Assembly of the image of the
representation want to jar you into an
abstraction wants to reveal its method
it's its tectonic at a certain level to
claim a difference and imaginary in a
way and then at other moments when does
it want to remove that scene mmm to push
you into the possibilities so that could
be of a field or it could be a a mode in
which the world looks what I think that
if you go back to here and particularly
the drawing
one of which their serum corner version
sedges when I like they're brilliant
they're done or there but basically that
type of representation at that moment
that of which there were many by the way
there was Gordon Colin actually at that
time was making all these very nice
picturesque the new version of Camilla
Sita only they'd had the color and the
good flags and the dogs and the flowers
and then big leaves of the trees on that
for all that stuff which was actually
straight for the newspaper but basically
is trying to make it look into the real
although so here's the place where
representations you cannot tries to
tries to eliminate the seats are there
but after it tries to make it as though
it is a real it is there whereas I think
in the case of Aldo Rossi he doesn't
want it to be its complete abstraction
it's about architecture it's it's
actually it's interesting it's about
architecture it's talking about
architecture and the architect it's not
talking about the object that's being
represented at all it's talking about
the concept of how you know this the
architect in relation to facing the city
was here in a certain ways more
traditional as representation in this
case because he's trying I'm not saying
the traditional projects nobody had done
it before
but it more traditional train of trying
to make it look as though that is a
possibility this thing is the
possibility of the real in this vision
and what about music or lives and he has
it not one day included or not
yes three tranches pelagic section and
there's something continually
fascinating to me about cutters they
felt as well which is what is this
question of the ephemeral and the
constantly changing and how does one
work through multiple representations
images maps data diagrams assembly
systems modules to do in a certain way
you can never reduce it down to one
thing that's constantly spreading each
one kind of looking at the possibilities
of it changing the other yeah yeah and
actually he strike many in this project
there are his perspectives perspective
terms of course you don't see a whole
building ever cuz that's on what the
project is about but there's a famous of
drawing with the cutter the Train right
car their bread with a window right
words like actually you're seeing from
seeing through the window of the car and
but on their hand here you have these
around on tracks and assembling elements
and these are called transfer points
they're transfer ports he also make it
as mechanical but the interesting thing
is that that for recalls a couple
Marshall and I have was exact word a
some crazy Poisson machine actually
which is like impossible machine the way
that Piranesi puts the pieces together
in it they're all kind of playing with
the denial of the CD and the
reaffirmation in the subway accepting
price pressed the truth is that to me
pressure should be at the end because I
always said he did it end
I think price was the one he's the one
that really changed everything in a
survey of their hand he's the one that
allowed the Rosa
they're right because he was the extreme
or would you have been a fashion elise
mode of representation we just skipped
all of it all of that right gone we know
it right and this is the end this is it
in a way our Tea Room is more
traditional this is the N so when I put
it there because I wanted the the
contrast between the peonies and all
these extraordinary typology and
architecture morphology tonight you know
all fragments of fermentation and then
the field is gone right there's no more
you know so of course on their hand
being a system any association is
possible there was one thing to just
continue for a second this spot on
collage yeah this this image show on the
on the far right from from helix here
Swiss photographer he worked for Herzog
demo on for 15 years as their rendering
expert and what he essentially assembled
over those 15 years was one of the
largest databases of material
photographs that anyone had and so when
he does these their collages there's
hundreds of photographs in that
photograph but what he's doing in red in
the red there it is made with red color
for only photographs there's no digital
model there's no rendering engine it's
just a collage but what he's after is he
wants to erase the the visible C's of
the meeting
he doesn't want that strategy and
instead he wants the the doubt that
abstraction produces or the estrangement
that abstraction produces he wants it to
actually be in the image itself and so
there's a lot of weird things if you
look at this long enough like the
weathering patterns are identical
basically just stamps twice no no
building weathers identically twice
that's just not what weathering does the
the line of where that weathering stops
is just on the flat surface there's no
there's no indication of a break but it
would stop there you can't see it's too
small but the reflections and the
windows have nothing to do with the
environment of what's being put in the
foreground so there's I would say that
the reason neither is the building so
all the things that actually collage is
able to do in terms of the really
imaginary that the kinds of
juxtapositions that the sharp edge
produces to push you out of a moment
from the context of that representation
he's doing it he's just doing it not
with the scenes of the medium but in the
possibility or the plausibility of the
image that he's putting forth so there's
there's something there's something in
collage that just comes again and again
back into our conversations as
architects I think that what is
interesting here is the question of
image and the architectural discourse
because I think that we're both talking
about really important questions
a representation of the question of
representation I would have a question
for it I would say you have to be fired
on a fabulous example and I could second
recognize those three modes of operation
with image in serve in it
these are where you could you could read
pianissimo say you know if you wanted
you could even read a basket on top you
could reduce muscle you know so there
are many many things that go on there
and it's a mechanism producing image so
my question to you would be how are
these three they authorize the portion
the mosaic how do you relate them to
critical issues in architecture dismiss
that that's that's a crucial question
and that's at a certain level what I'm
attempting to at least lay the
groundwork and the way that I would I
would put it is that most often when we
talk about representations in a critical
manner
we often default into the realm of
geometry there's many different places
we go but I would say typically we
either go into geometry or we go into
signification and in terms of signs and
symbols and how its produced most know
what we interpret in our way
I'm saying so I'm from that point of
let's say what do we know are these
anyway but house seemed to me my hope is
that because I think that all of the
examples that I'm showing in Norse as
well
they are architectural speculations
there is immersive projects they they
may end up with buildings but that's not
necessarily the proof of concept it's in
those represents exactly and in that how
do we then become not only critical but
what are them right what's the matter
that these images are produced what is
what are the ways in which they are used
to speculate on future possibilities and
instead of at a certain level dismissing
the image always a seduction
they're always as the last thing or
always as the tool that it's only best
served for a non-disciplinary
audience or a City Planning Board or
a publication for promoting one's own
work
how does part of things that are
operating within images and particularly
also can we incorporate lessons from
photography and other other mediums so
that those things become critical to the
arguments critical to the speculations
of the architects of putting forth and
and I would say that these examples do
so and sit in the same aesthetic price
and our program and as well so at a
certain level just can we can we open
that up I mean this is this is what my
hope is because the image deluge is on
us and it's not going away
and if we don't have some better tools
conceptual tools to begin to deal with
it
we're being swamped we may think that
but on their hand I would say you know
everything that's image there's not
photography everything that's written is
not literature everything at field is
not architecture and everything else
photograph through photography everybody
there's the Inari authority I mean I
have a thousand pictures in my phone I'm
sure none one of them is worth a
Caernarfon by child- good one but you
know there's they're just pictures you
know send them you know you can have
buildings I'm gonna pin here's k2
whatever right
so I think that what worries me about
the deluge of images is the distraction
the indifference I think there's a
question and a lack of concentration all
very current questions right it's not
it's not generational because it happens
to younger people this generation could
happens to everybody that's immersed in
this culture and the technologies that
we like on one hand but that creates
these conditions so I think that the
confusion is because when you get so
many it's very hard to discern in the
end you know even in art where there's
so much I may not you know how do you
distinguish there's a market with it
one is the market of Instagram when
there's the market of art right so how
do I know you know and the other one is
indifference because in the end you're
not sure it's just going our festival
front of you know in a museum just
walked by right so there is a kind of
confusion and there's it generated
indifference because there's so much of
it and
all the same in a certain way and
together with that there's also because
of our least changing through images and
other mediums whether it is a gory
service you know everything we do
there's the in capability for their
production the loss of of concentration
and in a certain way including this it's
very interesting the medium for that
it's great it's a real way in a certain
way it's like a balance exercise I think
about it but it puts forth a question
you know well it could be anything
because you know in the end you know I
can't really focus on what this is or
that is or what it's gonna be
and I think that that is something that
I'm just reaffirming what you saying
just elaborating on that about the need
to bring I think what students have to
understand is that drawing and
all-around represent we use is it to for
thinking that's what you were thinking
architecture you know models whatever
and and every time you make a drawing
there's a concept of whether you know it
or not
so one has to use that if you look at
out of the rosies drawings and a lot of
people cuz I was simply a Twitter
anybody was interested in architecture
ideas are rethinking architecture is
using drive through drawing not just
DUS writing and drawing and as a
critical tool and if you look at Rosie's
actual building drugs that he built the
drugs are spectacular the drawings you
know that are described straightforward
wonderful
you know they're not like the game of
the goose where there's a whole range of
ideas and how to keep composes and it is
a board game
architecture is a game and then by
chances they are right and you know roll
the dice and then I get this one or the
other one or jump or go to prison right
so and of course it's a question of
chance in the CBS were already
straightforward drivers I was treating
me getting the images with everything
beginning from this in a while so and
they're truly beautiful wrong exact
precise you know and so I think in any
drawing the it's there's always a
concept even if you would be in trying
that you use for taking to construction
generate the waiters
something and now do you think with the
bring all of these drawing back as a
critical to these were they think is
really for us you mentioned before
because they're speculations right but
he has to be because representation is
use it's that which allows us to
speculate in architecture I think the
point you bring up about distraction is
cook and and this is not just to say we
live in a in a time of distraction but
with that I think comes the necessity
that we we begin to understand the
attention and how how do we begin to pay
close attention to the images the media
the drawings that we produce and and
what is it that does begin to pop out or
what is it that that removes distraction
from the continuous flow and puts it
into a different situation and and what
I'm what I'm fearful of is that is that
used to be maybe something that would be
called like a closer reading I feel just
reading for productive reading I think
those reading you said no turn in my
fears that that's not that's not enough
anymore to fight this what I'm trying to
figure out is if if all of these things
are flooding through and
what is it what are the ways in which we
as architects within our discourse and
focus attention in this Milosh to begin
to draw out the desire for that person I
understood the students and been telling
them because after our analysis that if
you don't spend as much time looking at
where Rory has been making a discernible
drawing you have to love your drawing
you know Christian pleasure and desire
that goes into producing these forms you
don't have that it's gonna happen but I
assume that both the students being
young from the fresh energy should have
that desire yes it's one o'clock and
there's some sandwiches waiting but
let's break in the images each other not
a new problem right when Krakow I looked
at all the sentimental Lube is that
worth putting people into a state of
complete distractions from the politics
of the day and Eisenstein said well
actually the way we can come back and
shock attention was by not not doing
that narrative but the narrative which
was
when super studio and like is zooming in
through sublease anarchic I'm doing
those drawings that they had a shock
lining because they were not like
attention they were not what people were
thinking about last time
now the question is is all the networks
of price the virtual and real the
inflatables instance that disappearing
it's all about the cloud it's all
architecture so how can one we gain
attention to architecture by doing not
architecture or you can't so the
question is what what is it in
architecture that will sharpen with will
will shoppers to breathe to pay
attention and to like
that's the crucial question isn't it and
that's I guess there's there's a comment
I came upon the other day by Boris Royce
which I found incredibly strange he was
commenting on Walter Bennett means loss
of aura within mechanical reproduction
and he was saying that that that
argument is typically accelerated into
digital times in the internet but he was
he was making a point that there's
actually something quite different in
digital reproduction than mechanical
reproductions and suggesting if it's in
mechanical reproduction that infinite
copy removes the aura of the original
from it's tied to its place in this
material in its time in a digital
reproduction that what's being
reproduced as data and every single time
you open that image on every single
machine it's always different the
software will be different the
resolution will be different color
settings will be different and so what
grows said which I thought was
incredibly weird was that instead of
having you know originals losing auras
what we have is auras without originals
as if everything is now our attic as if
everything is now a performance except
we don't pay enough attention to tell
now we think the image is the same on
the laptop on our thumb on the big
screen but it's not
now have you how do you keep pixelate
disaggregate anything different there's
a difference between the image and I'm
sorry I think that the image is about
what you see but I'm interested in the
production of the image as architectural
thinking and it's very different it's
like I don't care what it means we don't
mean anything something else tomorrow if
it's green I mean I chose from for
instance CD of the same picture I don't
know who did it I don't know it was
sound they were not digital
all right maybe they were you know a
photographed and then printed different
with a filter or whatever what does it
mean you can see what it means but what
is interesting is why they chose to make
that collab why is that plan like your
nation planned for all these ephemeral
things you know why make that kind of
image for that kind of concept as
architects want to recapture to me
that's a lever will recapture their
level of the specificity of the
production and the coding whether it's a
coding the indexing with the programming
for the coding done with sketching in
what are we working with that it makes
it architecture even even if you're
doing something else all these are
things that we can do it's not all the
same because any price was using system
series to think architecture from that
perspective matter and how you would
think that and because it was the
extreme function
it's over there's no more student to go
he said no forum he said you know he
only wanted to do the inactivity season
which is attention planning by the way
from systems and so what do you we live
to it nothing as architects right
Fermi's come functions gone because we
have no power over a duty system so what
are we lifting zero right that's what he
said he did us in he's the one he's the
straw that broke the camel's back a lot
of drawings about through in my book
something for me okay that's what I said
you should go still there was that but
it's why he did that at that moment it's
it's not about interpretation there
concrete things he produced consciously
in a certain way he chose to draw that
in a particular way people draw
beautifully in any other way they are
the most beautiful stuff in a certain
way they're still producing this object
accepting instances images later much
later you know which is already
influenced by both venom and price of
course as idea rose but I think that for
us you want to recapture we have to
recapture there enough production not a
consumption everything because you're
talking about consumption because you
mimic just we get images click boom damn
I've denied lead from my thing all the
time I collected folders of interesting
stuff and one day have too many to get
them all like well who cares yeah but we
consume a lot we can make those you meet
diligently
consume stupid - we all do both you know
so I think for us being here being in a
school and thinking about these issues
to me the question is how we bring these
modes of representation to bear as in
their own specificity in relation to the
production of particular architectural
concepts now this is the thing and if
you focus on that at that level I think
learning to see is part of learning to
produce and that were the reading is
important you know when we do analysis
you know we have to teach students to
see because you know the things just I
think you know we don't have the type of
time or training or whatever so that
they are the we focus on that constant
you know how do you see if X economies
have to be set right and we have to be
able to really look closely not read
that look flow so you think that's a
good way of getting to these pathetic
lives
you can bring things you know I'm a
great believer from outside right
architecture from with that I'm a great
and even advanced knowledge and ideas in
architecture from not remaining locked
in but from outside you know all of
these do I mean certainty earnest is
playing archaeology right
doing all these things and Rossi's you
know he brings a lot of things there
look he's in most some architecture more
traditionally painting but we have
partnering all social economic political
issues at times for price bring systems
theory or you know there's and trying to
advance these things so I think we are
you know photography or film or you know
I think it we enrich what our discourse
by bring the question is which are the
mechanisms of transformation that we
develop to incorporate them and
representation is the different mental
representation are the ones that I think
because our tools that help us do that
one thing picking up on that and also
still kind of mulling through Tony's
question I think one of the things that
has been happening with Internet image
culture is even though I'm describing it
as as a daily which is something that's
moving so fast and is continuously
coming millisecond by millisecond but it
has also produces it producing micro
constituencies of different groups that
gather around the specific aesthetic
desires and you know they they they come
and go pretty fast as well but they all
have kind of funny names like a vapor
wave and seapunk
and zeno feminism and afrofuturism and
and they're amazing things actually and
maybe at some level the we need to pay
more attention to actually the strange
pockets and Eddie's that are forming in
this flip and try to find out if and
when and how architectures involved in
it the lecture the all the kind of
joyful is coming
next week in he's an incredible image
maker as an architect not a builder but
what he does with imagery is as
incredible as speculations and he's kind
of in a way on this edge between art and
architecture and I find that's right I
guess I still find hope and I'm not
ready to give up yet well maybe
following die on this point we should
produce those pockets in architecture in
every website on architectures so while
we producing pockets of freedom which
allow for us to be you need to yes sir
we have the reason you know pockets of
being I think that I'm not against it at
all I think it's a great thing but we
have to have I believe the question we
have to
why would anybody I'm not saying artists
can do whatever they don't need to say
normal entities my end I'm going to do
that by the entity Spurs I mean there is
there any critical criticality to that
do those pockets it's some of them you
mentioned our political straight poetic
straight this has an old history of
using art or different modes of
production visual production also
performative of production directly
related to politics relate the content
to content
what about form to come they say what to
one architecture firm twenty20 one to
one you don't know right is there
feminist architecture I mean I've been
asked that many times
mister female architecture somebody said
that saga made characters use woman
that's been great this BS ever you know
so the question is that architectures
conflict so the relation with these
pockets that are directly related to the
political these are an activist many
instances discourse easier one to one or
what is a relationship between the
issues that are specific to or
architectural questions or not I'm sure
they are I believe that but the question
is so have we formulate them that sort
of thing maybe we should work on
formulating those
I wonder for one of the issue is the
fact that in this kind of flow of images
the seams without hierarchy without as
you kind of or in addition reality
because of the economic objectives of
the Internet we should not be naive
about the fact that the like bottom it
produces in fact groups and hierarchies
on its own and I think that this leads
me to another consideration
there is a reason for certain images to
be perpetuated into the internet because
they are like about more people than
others and so that made me think about
the fact that the question between image
and another thing that I call out the
DCT for lack of better work is a law it
has a long history if you think about
you know the polemic of the modern
movement against the neoclassical
architecture is the fakeness of
neoclassical order innovation two
buildings that they are actually for so
there is an image they're supposed to
seduce or track for whatever reason
political or economic a certain public
and chrome beans have seduced that one
versus the modern architectures of God
which was supposed to be attempting
conceptually informal so maybe this
issue of the image can be also
considering that way a question about
for example in relation to the collage I
think that there are you know the water
you show there are like a kind
collage I mean I may say something a few
problems said right there is the one who
seemed you like the reality like that
like the Arctic I mean it's the
landscapes that are supposedly realism
is so so because of the techniques of
the time will be done very well today
there are architects of design projects
on the net and in lecture that everybody
believes they're built in fact they are
not so there is then another kind of
collage that is the one the rosie has
done easy in a sense a construct in
relation to a necessity that he is the
concept that the cons are supposed to a
spread is a concept that Diana Diana
probably would call the discourse that
is verbal
it is the conceptual theoretical
position then it doesn't an
automatically an image related to that
so the question of built-in unreal
reality in the in the collage is a way
to suggest something in the realm of the
visual that has to do with that concept
and then there is this IP a real
simulation that is the one of the phone
thank you presented that I think that
because it works on the fragments of
images that are available
it seems to me to use a metaphor to be a
kind of hollowing it doesn't have
anything to carry except the latitude
so thinking about image in a fantasy
team I think that in a sense they
recharge to something that seems to be
not consider or considered old in a
sense that is the discourse to build a
conceptual theoretical support for a
production but you were saying but I
will just want to suggest the state of
maybe looking at the problem of an image
in relation to our activity in the
ductility of seductiveness or persuasion
connections between aesthetics and
ethics and a certain level that's what
you're talking about right yes yeah many
I think overstated
are there any questions from any of the
students yeah
[Music]
and has something that was created it
can something that was created with a
difference
no I think it's how I like or use that
word I was talking about the consumption
and not the per there's not a difference
in the production and there may be any
difference for values or whatever
whoever did it you know maybe a lack of
sensibility to a lot of issues but
there's no difference anybody's
producing something for consumption and
particularly types of things that are
pretty I would assume there is an intent
at least of some kind whatever that may
be
I'm saying because of the accumulation
the amount that you were talking about
of images were flooded with in
everywhere all the time that in the end
one developed certain there's a certain
indifference that develops because it's
kind of I am fortunate can't be
indifferent at my problem but there are
people who take on the aesthetic effect
of indifference you can see it in
slacker aesthetics normcore it's
intentional it's done with intent but
the intent is to have a kind of
effective hand nonchalance yeah just
sort of happen that way did it oh really
it's in punk-rock it's in
so many things that's in the dark I can
listen to the number of architects as
they don't care so much
but I think there's they're not all
drunks in the same way but I think that
you have tools right tools are tools and
then it's you so you're gonna use the
scissors to cut the image is to select
the use the glue that paper everything
it's you and he shoots a pencil the pen
the brush whatever in the paper when
you're drawing freehand but and when you
use a computer computer is just a tool
and more sophisticated a lot more things
a difference is that there is an
intermediate right you don't have your
studying Dixie cup you know you have to
know what you're gonna tell the computer
to do before you can do it so that's one
thing but if you know your tools the
computer would only do what you tell it
the problem I think which is a problem
is a software the braces software the
software has the hidden offers their
authors of that software that allows
some things to happen another's not
right I'm the author AutoCAD I will have
that person you know they're everything
it's criminal wasting everybody's mind
energy and time to decode and recode and
so on - imagine a thinness in some
stupid color I mean and that's not a
drawing you know I know
we invented that but there must be a
reason why they never changed which is
really always personally why they have
never changed that it's a crazy system
somebody has invented that perfected it
always keeping that method of coding and
decoding constantly right there must be
some reason what I'm saying there are
authors hidden authors there you know so
that Photoshop has for instance I'm
because I'm the computer idiot so I
learned everything by myself so I can do
what I can do and I can't do what it
cannot do sometimes I make shortcuts
just because I don't know better and
they work but the Photoshop the more
advanced Photoshop by having my country
my office the one that I had for a few
years ago my laptop has a lot more
features for instance has a lot more
features that allow you more nuances
with the colors with a lot of things and
the face the one that's later has
eliminated a lot of features I also use
Photoshop there's things that I knew it
could do can do colors are not the same
some other country would say I remember
when I use it and I realize I can't do
this I can't do that it's a procedure so
anybody wants to look into that and some
people are actually some people are
coding right that's what people call
coding alright looking into the level of
the algorithms etc etc to see how you
can affect them to do what you want to
do in a productive way or look at them
critically or accept them the way that I
would answer the question is there's no
representation without technology all
the way back you cannot go to any place
where there's this
Medical mythical authenticity total
unmediated contact with representation
always its built-in it technology is
built-in all now
there is something withdrawing in to me
you got to distinguish two things there
are arguments that we make through
certain forms of representations as a
discipline that are tied to modes of
representation that like a plan
we need plants it's that's not going to
go away but that does not mean that you
have to draw that plan with a pencil you
can draw that plan produce that plan in
many different ways but you need to
understand the ways in which that
conventions of the plan communicate in
the arguments that have happened through
history that have been tied to those
modes of representation that's that's on
one side on the other side there is just
a medium itself of drawing at some level
always produces differentiations between
figures and grounds just the the line on
paper does that whereas the screens
we're looking at are much closer to
paintings they're marks in a matrix the
differentiation between figure and brown
is just color contrast between the
separated pixels so they don't actually
work through lines on grounds their
marks on matrices and that is different
conceptually not better not worse
really is to make the plot so once
always interpreting in your own head is
you're constructing the drawing not the
thing itself but the thing is it will be
what is plotted I think it always has to
involve whatever that output is correct
so you're just your time with the
disjunction of the evaluation in working
methodology between working on the
screen and the strange thing is that
somehow as architects we've always done
that we're designing buildings through
mediations thinking about a thing that's
not but um yeah I mean this is also why
every first plant looks bad and why
every student needs to remember plot
twice first one comes out is not going
to be the one that you want to say but I
have to say that when they start at
Columbia and they're amoebas I was there
the paper is studium and they still do
it they still do it and I think it's
really sad you know because first of all
when you see reviews that are and I do
Phoenix with students they're not
peanuts but she'd say inter reviews
digitoxin what speaker and timing go
fast and I'm a project ninth grade I've
been to find out reviews like that and
it's not the same it's not the same
because it's carries not the same they
simultaneity of relating went wrong to
another you know the
and apparently I think even the quality
of the longtime delight in the drawing
you know whatever whether it's good bad
or medium it doesn't matter
I guess there's bigotry you spoke I
think the trick is not to imagine it's
not to be fooled by the digital looking
like something else and I remember going
well now in the seventies or eighties
and it was the great guy I can't
remember the name now was trying to
invent a light and looked and work and
was exactly the same as a graphite looks
looks like a graphite schedule what's
the point
it's like the arguments that I'm going
through all the time on my block between
digital photography so all these cameras
that are producing black and white
photographs monochrome looks like a g1
and in we make the mistake all the time
I'm only calling these things cameras
well we used to call them telephones but
this is not this is not a camera it is
not inscribing in a chemical emotion
focused light this is a photon detector
that's just detecting energy that's it
and then making it discrete and pulsing
it as signals and we call that data
there's no image it's it's it's not a
camera well but you know if you think
about all the national photograph which
I have many folders full of all the
things I use are the originals like I do
have originals ever printed very old but
you know they're all done through
computer nobody sees that imagine nobody
sees the thing we see them when you see
one that I always remember there's they
have to read because many have been
worked on as imagined by as
so the colors are those gases you know
on the purples and yellows water that's
we don't know those are colors they're
been assigned colors it's up computer
data all right for a long time I think
the distribution is probably the major
change and that there are potential
intentional distributions and really
pretty much non intentional
distributions and was very indifferent
in a lot of the redistributions of
images which is redistribution of data
is being done not by people but by
machines and is not actually viewed by
people it's only viewed by machines and
the massive amount of images are not
seen by people nor produced by people
nor distributed by people that are made
by machines distributed by machines and
support on aquiline is read by machines
which is image still projected out into
the universe for aliens to find on their
visitation all right should we have
sandwiches
[Applause]
[Music]
