so very very curious how you guys take
it yeah thank you thank you yes so I
think today do the focus on their like
the size of our general philosophy
philosophy we will focus on basically on
two things and it will be not only space
and time but basically how cities can be
observed through space and time I will
try to make my lecture short like a 30
minutes and then I want to participate
in the discussion if there will be any
questions and then we want to demo you
our software basically because I think
it's better to show on a live software
how our concept of blending space and
time together works and how it can be
used from the users perspective so the
cities are always were observed as a
flat objects and in this history of
drawing city city maps I mean it goes
far beyond in the history but we really
started to look into this the dynamism
of an urban environments pretty recently
and previously as a man as a spatial
concepts context concept and the time as
a temporal concept were completely
isolated from each other and Italian I
was usually Illustrated as thanks
serious so for example when money flows
from your banking account to another one
banking account we can represent it as
time serious so a series of time stamp
when the value is changing and that's it
but while they are serving how City
landscape changing we always look at it
through like a number of statical
snapshots of its map and it I think is
it pretty much workable concept but the
modern urban analysis it's too
complicated to be analyzed we were like
esthetical layers because as
environment can be looked like it's a
Multi multi dimensional thing because we
have a visible layer of a city like
we're sitting and we see these walls
roads we can hear something but at the
same point we have this I don't know and
money transaction layer when we I don't
know some internet service charging
money from our bank account right now
while we are sitting here and at the
same time we have an opinion so example
if I say something I don't know good or
bad you can post your opinion into
Twitter and there will be also some kind
of an environment layer this we're
sitting right now so there is like a
hello to flares like a temperature in
this room it's also an informational
layer and those layers are co-exist
together and create this what we call a
basically a palimpsest an overlay of the
different informational layers on each
other the problem is is that all the
slaves are dynamic there is no static
things in a modern urban environment at
all even our buildings which am was the
most hardest thing in a Google
environment are still not static because
they age and we redevelop them and then
we reuse them there how a usage of a
space it's evolving constantly for time
so there is no static aesthetical option
at all so what we start to try to fuse
all these different informational layers
with each other we are getting in turn
some kind of problem because all these
layers are dynamical and we need a
something of a tool which will allow us
to blend and merge all these different
layers together but using an essay like
hell thinking concept how to think about
these layers and this is how kernel talk
emerged
it's catalysis image I think it's a real
mess so it has its three different data
layers as you see right here it's my
beauty layer so how people smooth
through an urban environment a sentiment
layer how people think or talk about an
urban environment and the spend layer
which is basically how much money they
spend but I mean when we look at it we
don't understand it at all but basically
what we are looking at it's a
three-dimensional map a conditional map
but with the time axis which goes way up
so hour by hour we draw the new map of a
city
I don't know which city this is just a
fictional city so one row per hour with
roses steady to map over and over again
and finally create this spatial temporal
view as we call it I mean really hard to
get everybody just get lost here but
let's reduce dimensions let's just look
at the flat map for now so here we said
our discussion target this is that
overcrowded Barcelona or traveled by not
a local people but the tourists who are
not belong there
we used add Twitter data to analyze this
problem and he right now we see this
third player which are probably local
people a little bit more right but our
widespread and the green layer which are
tourists and we just put all these
things on a conventional two-dimensional
map just to see how the Slayers are
correlate with each other so as the
problem was can locals and tourists
coexist into a single location together
because that's a conflict right because
when as they call this in a different
location in different special dimensions
zel finds they don't see each other but
when they correlate or intersect into a
single location in single cell because
here we see cells like 300 - 300 meter
cell just the special green so I mean
when they started to intersect with each
other they started to see Charles isn't
to talk with each other and they
having to share a space with each other
so let's like a little bit deep inter
and a structure of a Twitter message so
a general Twitter message actually told
us a lot about an population because
this can be used a proxy of an urban
activity we have a lot of location where
Twitter was used which is I mean it's a
good one
data it's ours to see with person used
he's a geophone deposit message but
there is much more in this message there
is a sentiment in this message it can be
a hashtag for we can extract the
sentiment we're a neural network so
basically we can say is the sentence in
the Twitter message was good or bad a
binary really simple thing or we can say
complex thing about which place person
are talking right now
so we can measure what we call as a
non-symmetric connectivity so we can for
example connect the place where stayed
and at the same time we connect this
place about which I'm talking about so
for example when I talk right now about
Moscow Sam st. Moscow I'm connecting
this place with a Moscow seven Christian
a semantic linkage and those are there
is a story so for example when I'm
talking about most I can say the muscles
called so I'm talking about building in
Moscow and this is a topic of a message
so to get previous slide
we analyzed just and allocations in
Twitter data it really really basic
started was already more complex we
extracted our the meaning of this
location so we extracted is this person
because tourists
Aloha we did it by analyzing how often
this person travels a world so if for
example I true I must stay in Moscow and
local if I was in Moscow three times and
most of my trees are from Barcelona
I'm versland tourists
came to Moscow and on this slide we see
a correlation between this two different
data layers so basically we just overlay
tourists and locals and this is that
there is a little place where they
coexist so the problem of an hour travel
Barcelona is yeah it's here
but is it really here is here in space
and time together because as people are
coexisting in the same temporal
dimension while they coexist in two
spatial dimension and hundred hours to
closest thing we can just introduce this
third dimension here and now it's
already MS but still we see a pattern
here right so we all see this strange
rectangular object we can go down also
all the way I mean it makes a slide like
this the purpose because it's illustrate
it's not our finding here which we'll
see later what it is to its structure so
would be a look at a special temporal
structure
Rosalind Sorrento we see this Greece
alliant in it in a time so basically
each this rectangle here is a space-time
beam which are collected in itself an
aggregation of an area for example 200 -
200 meters over time for example for 1
hour so if we sit here all together like
a 20 of us for an hour we will see a
brutal load like this with a number 20
inside of it which we can measure and
the doctor this rectangles among people
is this special temporal thing let's
move to this more illustrative picture
here so basically this is how our
space-time self and our space semb√®ne
can be visualized or think about
what is a fascination here is that by
reduced these three dimensions into just
two dimension or one dimension we still
come to a conventional thing like a map
or a time series which I showed on my
like a second slide so this blue blue
thing for example it's a classical time
series so we measured a cell on the
ground for two which is two hundred to
two hundred meters and then we look down
through time
so basically distance show us that in
the same area in the same cell was
twenty people in one hour 10 people in
two hours and so on and so forth so it's
a conventional time series but while we
removal and time dimension completely
we're getting a snapshot of a map a
conventional map which is marked a
yellow because it's abstraction a tiny
slice so he filled in agency spatial
temporal view where we have this all
concentrations often people I don't know
events some kind of Twitter messages or
just persons who move through the space
and time we can always snapshot it and
give a single time slice of it a single
map and a conventional classical map
really complex but look at this and you
see the cube and this cube is the same
cube here so you can somehow correlate
it but let's get the findings let's see
how it's all all of us to see what is
going inside of this overcrowded
barcelona landscape so what we see here
is the same matrix of a concentration of
twists of local users of Twitter
basically the National barcelonian
and tourists and this is how we how they
code
this in a space and time and at the same
time so what I am for example here is a
time which goes up and at one I am we
see only coexistence in a conventional
city center and then when times goes up
like - I am prayer for my fam he started
to grow in diameter but still we sees it
through all day the wall concentration
of locals and tourists in a city centre
it's basically I mean it's in
conventional central borders and we see
this are some kind of sparks of
activities of existing locals and
tourists across the city but they're
like who one hour or for two hours so if
you go forward here and filter failures
so this like a shaded image is what we
had on the previous slide and this
bright image is a filter each one so we
filter it all low valleys and keep it
only high one and now we see that during
its first time through a day the locals
and tourists intersect in in a really
small part of a city it's it's it's it's
almost like hand I don't know if I've
hundred to five hundred meter even maybe
a little bit more so there is no so I
mean if you return to this one well here
it is basically the central green dot or
maybe a this one and that's it series so
there is no real intersection and we can
see it here
so some way basically there is no such
thing like broad coexistence of all
locals and tourists in Barcelona they
are all spread out but not spreaded in a
temporal dimension I'm sorry
no not spread in a special dimension but
read in a temporal dimension and many
usually people wondering how we came up
with this strange idea and how we is it
really usable to analyze cities through
such concept as three-dimensional matrix
I mean how they can use it at all
because I mean if you compare this car
commercial Maps it looks completely
crazy
but what we have in a medical imaging we
have MRI right so when we scum people's
people's body and we can go inside of
this body because we can check by the
density right by passing race and as
dense area as small value we have as
less than less value so we are able to
remove lower values and see inside of
people's by and we did the same for
intervention and so basically we we use
it the same format as people using for
medical imaging the same concept
one-to-one and applied it for events or
people's concentrations inside of the
season in a three dimensional special
and temporal and here's another example
of Barcelona but we did we did just cut
it and get only one street just a single
street here and will show us the
concentrations of tweets on this street
proton so based this darker area the
more tweets this area has and the
lighter area is less art with this area
has but if anyone knows where is a bull
a computer software which tweets other
basic messages can you spoil it here
a column that's correct yes because the
software has not in human behavior
because for example here we have a
classical day/night break right so
here's the 3m and here's a 6:00 a.m. and
people are sleeping in this area
probably so is there is no date at all
and here we have equipment which is
changing over time so we have like an
intense moment can we come outside
moments well nobody used it at all but
you have a constantly a constant failure
which almost that doesn't change over
time so it's it's like a tweeting
tweeting tweeting because it's an
automation because people can make its
most moments those are needed and it's
really easy to spot this visual and
somehow I don't see my slides changing
ok we'll do the mouse so and for us the
other question I think which comes here
and stops our understanding of canto is
a battle between a classical shape as a
definition of a space and a grid-based
system and what is interesting for me
here is that we can just look at these
two pictures and put this space a
classical a j-shaped file on the of this
grid
it will fit in so basically this great
concept it's ours to explore or draw
more complex thing not not only like
greet grids or squares so we can
actually here in this rectangular grid
we can put any kind of pair of
the shape of a city wouldn't it and
encoded into this thing so here is how
our current of works again we have this
ma dimension which is basically a
conventional latitude and longitude and
the times dohsa in huge degree so but
basically we are separating the space
again into the small cells which will
fill with the concentrations of any kind
of data which has obviously only two
things Jill each and time and this allow
us to correlate and actually end our
betrayal data with each other so for
example we can see at the same time when
people spend data in a space time and
still see how they move in a space time
of how they feel about the space because
every information which I showed in my
likeness first of two slides are encoded
into this matrix here so basically using
this the same concept of thinking about
information in more unified way we can
correlate it with each other really
really simply I mean it creates as a
some kind of a universal universal
thinking environment where we can not
only limit ourselves for a single type
of data but actually use almost any
detail available even if you think about
classical Greece of cities and then we
mentioned a building's inside of the
cities we can just illustrate the city
cities and building services like a
static instruction which goes up and
never change over time or change or if
you have like long data set and we know
and we see how buildings are demolished
and
and this is an actual Colonel talk this
is an interface that we are created
which works in any browser it's easy to
use and we will show to you in like five
minutes after the questions thank you
probably you have some questions right
if you know I can talk through all of
that but how if traditional Maps when
you look at before dimension is okay
geology geography in cities as well I'm
in data how do you resolve the conflict
between times the third dimension energy
mm-hmm yes that's an interesting
question which everybody asked us and I
I don't have an Alec there Task Force
which solves everything
because SN urban experts we don't work
with Joe Kjetil almost because we work
with this hard urban environment and
thus we work as it with a soft urban
environment which is inside of this hard
environment right like how people moves
well the top house they spend money and
if you talk about George is about like a
single layer which changes over time it
can be integrated but if we are if we
need a third dimension like the how deep
some materials are no we don't actually
wondering is there any example maybe you
you can name which really needs this II
I mean in the general study but in some
ways we can do it
simulate it like let's say it was
building height we would just use a
static layer that's one square
represents 10 floors in one square of
since five floors but to do that
visually and like a really a base map
that had this grid of New York would be
kind of misleading because the grid
would be ours and building heights would
be kind of confusing but you could maybe
represent a visually with some kind of
post processing by merging these
together but we're not integrated with
like right now or anything like that
where that is something you could do
but yeah I mean if you do have any idea
let its nest it's a it's a great that's
a great question
I mean I think about the same things
with these use cases around like global
warming in and like coastal flooding and
things like that so I think that's super
relevant and that has the whole hmm do
you mean like an unexpected splurt
things I think the culture is an
interesting thing to visualize and
analyze we did a single project about
Leichner cultural analytics when the
research and then the Performing Arts
Center I think yes and there we
visualized how people talked about the
culture and to different data sets
we analyzed the Twitter data set as an
example of like a general culture or
culture that everybody is used to and of
course in a social efforts projection
and at the same time we analyzed the
Wikipedia textual corpus so again we
compared a Wikipedia and the Twitter and
we did a simple thing we extracted and
multi dimensional representations of how
words relate to each other in different
purposes so we basically we're analyzing
how for example term culture relates to
other different terms in this
multi-dimensional space so basically we
can visualize this like a dots in the
three dimensions and every dot is the
world and realizes clusters of these
dots and in a
they said it was really funny to look at
because for example when people talked
world culture they usually meant like
her let's go to see cinema it's obvious
but at the same time it was like hey
let's have a coffin near the theater or
let's hang out in a museum
so basically culture for some means not
only by conventional terms like a
Wikipedia later said like when you enter
a culture you see cinema or you see I
mean advance show something exists
culture possum means a certain lifestyle
which they used to and for for us I
think creating some kind of a universal
tool which will be able to analyze
culture in all its dimensions I can be
visual dimension and in textual
dimension is almost as a next frontier
and the second thing that we are working
on right now is an lower scale analytics
because this software on top it focused
on a city level but we are really
interested in a analysis of smaller
things like office spaces for example
because the model office spaces are
almost like a series I mean they have
the own structure and they have
especially because it's a really
communicational device for people I mean
it has a special format of communication
and if you compare it with cities and
the mutations of communications while
they're changing the landscape are
bigger I mean it's you can change us how
two seats are connected with each other
or how it's located in a space and
office space and we will see the
communication change between these
people who previously seated close to
each other or I mean how spaces are
intersect with each other how they flow
into each other they all affect
communication and it's affected an
office culture or working culture and at
the same level and for us it's like a
next frontier to analyze
because it's really hard to get a good
office data right now what one other
example that I've been thinking about
lately and talking to our clients about
this identifying groups that are
difficult to identify in the city like
the unbanked during that people use cash
for all their transactions and using our
common denominator you can find several
different data sources because although
people may not have a debit card you
know cell phones are ubiquitous at this
point even among those people to some
extent and so you can use that layer and
abstract that against the spending
patterns to identify these people and
not only like where they are but where
they're spending or not sniffing so
that's one of those kind of hidden gems
that you can find when you're when you
dig a little bit deeper someone else you
had a question yeah
today from information I heard in
perspective the entropy of the city is
increased because the best repair
business
but but if we rule is kind of
technological information is like well
do not reuse that should be in these
containers so how do you see balance on
it an exact question is you using the
matrix to simulate the situation in the
city but how music
permanently like building a matrix
because this matrix is more like
three-dimensional we presentation of an
air have taught us that data dependent
ation means to be over
interesting okay so I can answer I can I
haven't brought it back under and the
first one was that entropy is increasing
right but the structure of an urban
environment they're showing it s'mores
it's not so in tropical displaced let's
named like this correct and how we can I
mean and what we are what we're dealing
with an increase in entropy entropy at
all so I think it's a hard question
because if you think in our mind about
in always increasing and interfere we
mentioned an illogical environment I
mean something with a lot of Annika
sparks object right that are flowing
through this three-dimensional space
visualize them in in the queue as we are
talking about and here we are like a
lamb aggregating everything into more
structured cells and it looks
not-not-not so how take at all so what I
think is that this visual representation
doesn't illustrate entropy at all and
when we think about entropy and why it
is increasing I think it can be
increasing at some point because we are
introducing a lot of input parameters
into this system right so basically what
is it hardik function is a function
which really really depends on an input
parameters and when we are starting to
illustrates it in a somewhat a
multi-dimensional model it's really easy
to go into this how it'll function of
how vertical model right because we if
we're like a stack too much layers here
that's at some point we will not
understand the consequences if we change
one value but this is why I think
predictive analytics are not working
well on a city level because as you say
entropy is increasing and
it's increasing not just over time it's
it's increasing while we add our
understanding into a system so basically
while we were at you know medieval ages
and there were no there was no data at
all it's still water but we didn't
analyze it I mean you can measure the
drug level the drug usage of a
population by analyzing the water in how
to synchronization case the city water
yeah and the thing
so our the I mean our data-driven cities
they're not data driven by technology
they data driven by our understanding of
a series so we started to think about
cities in this data models so we started
to think houses different data layers
are laid out in a world system and this
is why we started to understand the wall
suddenly is the system is too complex
and it and while we're introducing new
and new layers into this system the
entropy of it increasing but it was
always like this
we just didn't add these layers
additional layers and these layers are
they're not always digitalized because
if you also analyzed the garbage SNR
population growth proxy it's the same
thing so you can Allies the amount of
garbage which people drop to Street and
it will somehow correlate with the
growth of whom the urban environment as
well and the second question I think is
totally related to the previous one
since this structure it's fully read and
read it and how its grid in the of this
matrix our rhythm replicates or force us
into morphological decisions correct it
doesn't for the forces at all because
there is a field concept in it which I
didn't introduced
but thanks for the question because I
mean this presentation it's more like
her consequence place of hope so we are
trying to show a single constant but
what we came up with at some point is
that for example when we work with the
Twitter data you listen it right now in
previous example right we work this is a
sparse data
so basically when we visualized a
Twitter in these three dimensions we
didn't get this beautiful field pew
right
we get a lot of small dots and that's a
coolest thing ever to stuck with because
at some point when we are understood
disease tool it doesn't work because
it's done for this good-looking dense
array of data at all and this is how we
came up with a blue basically so blue
here you see how users of the software
applies blue it's something like a
Photoshop blue so if you get any which
way you can blur it and make edges of
this image more I don't know how to say
it in English blue so but basically you
what we are doing even in Photoshop
you're taking air strict
structure right and blurring it you're
converting it from a structure to a
field excellent and this is how a field
thing works
basically we are not illustrating a
direct impact in a space-time
illustrating a field of an effect so
really straight and how possible again
in a space-time or even on a map when we
see it hit map we see like a possible
dimensions and it's always not a strict
a grid structure it always feels a field
doesn't have any boundaries at all
because it's a soft structure and it's
reliable correlates with our
understanding of modern and reusable
space because as a space usage can be
changed
for example we can renovate old factory
into offices right this is the same
thing we can can work with an urban
structure so for example when we apply
an effect into an urban structure for
example I don't know just build a
monument we didn't create an event in
exact place in exact location and in
exact time you clean it a field of an
effect which grows through space to some
point and through time as well and this
is how it's I think effect as a wall our
urban morphology so it creates a bond
for you but it's not creates as three
bounds it creates a soft bounds which
you can even not touch I mean this
bounce even not not guide you in your
forms or inform decision or urban
planning decision you just show you the
possible way to go and this is I mean a
really new concept for us it's like when
do I think you're familiar will a
familiar with Christopher Lloyd
Alexander works right so there is a
series of the three where we illustrate
a serial as the consequent consequences
of one object applied to other objects
and so basically it's all you can
imagine the same thing but in there like
three dimensions like in a second time
so when you apply some kind of an event
interspace it's gross because it's
always correlated with other events with
other movers through this space-time
landscape and affects them
Christopher's Cydia that she does in his
his article mr. every contact as a yes
indexical information and let me
technical information it's been actively
activated the scenario described but in
this way I feel like that you said is a
softer Mecca process yes I understand is
as a deviation of the soul of you on the
study question is you process some that
brings about that maybe amount ever
level is just beautiful of all that the
transformation you manipulate with that
there is no fun if you metaphor this to
a city level it could be our very
specific City strategy like
sour specific scene but buttons and this
because it's yes yes there's something
to say so for example going through I
see 3 and this 3 somehow affects my
understanding of this is 3 this one is
so basically I can be not right and not
next so I again so basically with
animations is a lot of intersections of
different events so positive perform
what my vision of it is it become a
different Johnny's all time this is the
second from the same speed but this one
was in 13 or 1 p.m. and this first at 2
p.m. when I went back home and this is
like a two time slices but this is my
security
so all events are happening
simultaneously and at the some point is
tempted to look like a mess because
there is no structure at all this is why
we mentioned in SM films satellite
system which is really hard to draw on
this members of image but if you go to
example in a 2 dimensions again but not
into events but instead we can go to men
like this one and this is again and we
just are not happening in time for just
in space and here's a few
and now you can skill suit in three
dimensions so but basically when you are
getting to them over and over again more
time and this is how I mean the
unresisting
strict structure a relatable one in the
something we should even I mean I cannot
draw it
it's a more or less like achievement and
traditional shift matter when we
calculate a concentrations of something
right example of people motors but when
we go from a light physical object like
cars or dogs or whatever a hitter first
satellite an urban world which was
introduced by Christopher a person here
son the children who actually invented
this is a special temper of reason and
it was a concept of an urban murmur that
object moved through space-time but then
we can go to more recent works like an
our members name there is a very
research and three-dimensional
visualization actually is based on that
with the same name and the enter key
first beliefs and Joanie and he us
introduces there is not not only but the
object can move through space-time but
also an event for example I don't know a
tweet right a second in space and time
but within the third reason and not only
we visualize the subject but also go to
this place in the back greatest
beginning and to this the emotion among
emotional things like how old is
correlate with each other and as we know
it
is it still so in my bank places but I
didn't any more questions it is a
standalone - or these interactive
visuals are the exportable
to other applications websites things
like that as part of other analyses or
is it just you have the data you have to
stay inside this - yeah it's can't be
exported into classical jazz software
example as a shapefile
you can also export data in a tabular
format but it's not public yet
also you can export the screen source of
course but the problem with this one is
that you can just embed it into a
website but like with a carton example
map because it has a little bit
complicated technology underneath and
when we saw visualizing this is a
special temple view we should really
actually need a lot of computer power to
analyze it interactively and because of
this we are rendering wool this image on
the remote server so it's assumed it in
the browser as a picture and this is why
I mean for us it's really expensive to
build in that high level websites and
also this is the reason well the
software for a long time was a super a
corporate or in-house tool and only
recently like where basically they
opened a like in form just a freebase
ago four days ago it started to become
public sorry I really early-stage asleep
yeah I hope you give us demo will show
how it works
where are other real-time applications
that you mentioned analyzing various
offices and I know you have analyzed to
say that's Parker's office in London
yeah what did you discover we not I mean
it's an there's another project was on
the called walkable London and that was
about understanding what streets are
best for pedestrianisation we discovered
that some of the areas they're proposing
we're not necessarily the best where
like the kind of obvious ones the Oxford
Circus area did make sense and that's
being used to kind lobby for the
pedestrian ization of these certain
areas that was a hybrid of several
different data layers I believe mobile
phone data too as a proxy for density
things like Street with and believe
there's one other idea anyway won't we
can share that in a minute
some of the other projects we've done
recently event impact is I think a
pretty interesting one
Chelsea stadium this one's on our
website but you know what's the impact
of adding more soccer matches is it
something that is just overwhelmingly
positive for the community or is there
something underneath that that should be
further explored so we used Google place
data overlaid that with Twitter data and
try to see on the streets where there's
local businesses what is the activity on
a match day versus a non match day and
so this Z X is here which is time
doesn't have to be strictly
chronological a normal sense it can be
divided like on a rainy day person
it's not like that and what we found was
on match days all the activity was
focused in touristic sites and the match
and so the theory is basically that if
you add more matches you'll give more
money to this greater area I mean to the
area that it will be concentrated in
those places so the local economy for
the people who actually live there
doesn't actually truly benefit so the
way we solve it has to be correlate
regular day versus not match day there's
tons of activity on these normal streets
that have all the regular business and
on the match day those streets are
somewhat empty but both spatially and
temporally but typically even more so on
the normal operating hours so people
tend to actually be kind of avoiding
those areas any other real-life
applications that we haven't done yet
that I've been talking to you know
emergency response I think could be cool
like identifying you know populations
that are difficult to identify like the
hidden like cashless transactions
refugee populations and things like that
I think could be interesting other
projects that we've been working on for
cities I think again like just urban
infrastructure decisions on where tax
dollars should go like should you build
a new stadium in the first place or as a
museum in this location versus other
location practical does the audience
have the capital and are they spending
the capital necessary to facilitate the
museum's like
attendance and instructure how much
should you charge the use cases are
really broad and if you look at our work
anything you'll see that our focus is
pretty broad as well so trying to narrow
that down from a business perspective
this kind of where my work lies and I
actually think I left your question
completely we operate on that so for
example you have serious are many many
parking structures in the city
everywhere you know they're really busy
during a week and then there's empty on
weekends for example would those be used
as markets which is you know something
we'll see on that saddle the 26th Street
structure that does not produce examiner
or are there you know restaurants that
are really busy at night and then
totally empty in the mornings and then
the spaces are used for time is becoming
more of a commodity yeah we work shows
that it's company spacious actually does
exactly what you're just talking about
they use restaurants as often spaces
during the day they're based in New York
pretty interesting
so yeah this whole idea of the time
autonomy
I think it's brand-new and I think
prototype is prime for that exact
business model but it is it's quite a
new concept right now the idea of time
and its use in cities most obviously
applied to the traffic and congestion
and protests and you know what this
means the city how do you react to them
you know how many like people do you
need to support a parade and stuff like
that and that's in the whole tournament
event impact scenario but this time
economy I think there's a new
opportunity that something like this can
really be helped before yeah absolutely
you know in a small scale and in instead
of offices if is some day come up with a
scaled-down solution it's all
September's pretty much available
because this especially if we're talking
about huge offices for an IT companies I
mean it's the city's in itself and how
we are like reuse time and spaces it's
also important and our houses is
important thing for us at communication
self-assess which is also what patrick
is focus on I mean it's clearly a
difference from time of the day and Zen
and a modern communicative communication
devices is also question is not only
about how the static structure works for
communication South's a matter of how
our communication evolves through time
in this structure and this is also this
concept can be used for it and but I
think the general idea is that as a use
cases are much more broader than just
reusing sounds a space over time because
this tool it's more complex it's too
much complex poses passed and I think
that he wanted to create went up as
something like a general abusing block
for a various analytical solutions which
involved time at all so I hope that like
a different use cases will pop up over
time and we will have more use cases
which I know some marketing oriented
because I mean marketing I think is like
our static point and now we're starting
to go deeper into this effects of for
now our interventions and finally when
salmon will use for a little support his
planning decisions for example over time
I think this will be a groundbreaking
because we will finally see how a person
or a group of persons can use our to to
guide some project or changes over time
and if it's period it will be long
enough I think the use cases with the
because we feel like we're looking at
different different subjects let's say
if it's already slots without the day
then it's more like a collection of
individual habitats were over action but
if it's if it's daily or or weekly
that's kind of like a generous gesture
for a population there's problem-focused
I mean if it's our we software is built
to be adaptable for that exact reason so
we can have our z-axis be daily hourly
monthly weekly or whatever and I mean I
think it just is based on the problem
that people are trying to solve I mean
obviously if you're talking about
commuting it's going to be an hourly or
minute breakdown where a daily breakdown
would be a lot less my mind makes sense
of you're talking about the impact of a
holiday or whether but if you're talking
about just the general start time of a
commute then you need to look at an
hourly a hybrid of those two I'm not
sure I think there might be like some
use of that and we do that by using
approximated layers which I think like
Nikita everything could speak to a
little bit better than I can but
essentially like if you wanted to look
at the hourly breakdown in January
altogether you could push the pull all
of the data from January daily and show
the 24-hour distribution there and then
do the same thing or February and play
them against each other so you can see
that February the commute arted at 6:15
and
you have adjusted at 6:20 mm-hm end up
kind of making a hybrid in that way
otherwise you can just do a sequential
study which would just be hourly
overtime which would end up having just
like way too many slices and be hard to
comprehend but sometimes that can be
interesting too like I did that with
Airbnb data at London and you ended up
seeing this tornado like from its grave
which is super obvious cuz the company
grew but it's something that from a
visual perspective you couldn't see if
you did the approximation so it actually
takes a lot of hands-on manipulation to
truly find what way to look at it so you
kind of start with the challenge
approach it in one angle but then try
some other angles and you'll find maybe
you undiscoverable or less readily
apparent insights just by exploration
and that's kind of one of the core
principles behind the reason we build
this web tool is this idea of dialog
like the way we see data right now even
in the kind of New York Times types of
visual visualizations which are really
beautiful it's still very prescribed
even over curated to a point where it's
like there's some slight you know I can
turn a filter on and off and see like
we're a different demographic slope but
I can't really truly manipulate the
underlying structure and then really
configure it so we've tried to put these
two I've tried to build something that's
highly adaptable so that you can you
know push your use case in whatever way
makes no sense
mm-hm and and if you talk about like the
value scale inside of the cells right
like we'll have talked about a temporal
scale but also if you look at this in
terms of of various we designed these
tools that enough as the value inside of
the cell and also important as the
correlation of this cell value and
nearest neighbors of the cell because I
think we don't really actually need
something like okay is this spot has 20
people or this spot has 10 people we
need to know that this spot has twice
more people
this one and I am next we can scale it
so we are always thinking relative we
always can extract the real values from
it but we for purpose hidden this
feature and I will based always there's
no physical map so it's basically in
terms of how it's obvious on there
and they have yeah but this question of
understanding and I mean how you
envision it is so for example if you
look at this landscape not as an
physical landscape but the communication
landscape you still can visualize it I
mean Kanto currently it's so big to map
but I mean you don't need a real
location to visualize a landscape of
some kind of us communicational
relationships because you just need to
but when you're visualizing it you just
need to decide what is your like a
spatial imagine I mean what the pro
project onto it and temporal dimension I
mean it's obvious but I think your
concern was that your time and temporal
dimension tow will not so affect like
the real usage of this
I mean don't affect a real users right
don't show how they communicate because
it's this time don't relate to space at
all but I think it's a little bit on
really depends on how we think about
this
imaginary landscape because if they I
think is this post was all done in a
like a single environment and is this
user sources system
closes it in during the single minute
timeframe this times this time are 100%
relevant and yes they not like I existed
all in a real space this just wasn't
this communicational abstract thing
where they communicated with each other
but still time when they communicated
it's really matters and thus this
fictional locations that you will create
will illustrate 100% how I mean how it's
related to time because it will always
be time related so if your dataset
doesn't happen in space it doesn't mean
in real space in the physical space it
doesn't mean as it doesn't have an a
special dimension at all for example
when we analyze Twitter for a first time
we did a simple 3 we not we not
visualized when people used to it
because in muscat that thank you it was
like a 2013 or something was not so many
gelatine twits at all so we just felt
all twisted we was able to get and what
we did we extract the place names about
which people are talked in a Twitter and
then geocoded this place names on a map
and by using this trick we are not
visualized a map of when people over
used Twitter we visualize about which
places people are topped and even we
introduced a temple demand energy it's
actually was a perk top of a prototype
of a frontal part of a cruiser and we
aggregated this Twitter data layer by
layer during a weekly period or
something like this and it was our
temporal dimension so we created what we
then called like that most most moscow
semantic period which we obviously think
when are all tweets about locations was
so central so
only about the center of Moscow and
didn't talk about creepy at all which
was for for us a little bit
counterintuitive because we thought
previous is that it will be more or less
quiet spirit but we have a clear center
as we I suppose person actually but it
was different but at refer it was empty
but delivery in Moscow takes me even if
I'm wrong if contains around like a 70
or 60 first most population right but in
terms of communication or layer it was
completely desert it was emptiness and
that's a rice have a question about how
we can analyze this because enemy it was
in terms of a tutor analysis this was
completely empty but it's not only it
was a problem of my analysis it offered
its it's also was a problem of Anna for
example public activism in this area it
was nothing like this because people
didn't discuss this place not only in a
Twitter dimension listening to exist but
Alcina I mean public talks because this
project it was connected strictly
connected to an Moscow open forum where
one of the government representative
told like a phrase it changed my
understanding often such their analysis
he told it why you are so concerned that
in Moscow we have an culturally under
development theory theory so there is
only a residential buildings there and
no type of activities of other types and
he told that nobody complains because
everybody so I think that everybody
likes it because nobody complains and I
mean it was hard to argue with him
because there was no evidence of such
thing as a complaint and this like her
for me like a merge of the semantic
landscapes and the real ones here that
you have so when we have a desert in
terms of communication about landscape
we also have some kind of problematic
environment because nobody communicates
about it so the problem is not only when
environment makes our communication
harder inside of it the problem was when
we don't communicate about environment
at all because it's all set
don't allow us to so spot problem
section yeah I think you mentioned time
zones with the red of data and that
sense like if there's no of geography
attached to the time and it's just an
hour at 12 is in one place and hey isn't
the same and you don't know the
difference then I think you'd be just
stuck with more aggregated because
there's no real correlation in there
right like unless you can do it nobody
was liking button and pull out some sort
of location value I don't know I was
thinking about an idea of I saw this
better or worse in the doll map the
other day and I thought it would be an
interesting thing because it's like
looking at the tennis court and you can
maybe like apply the same type of logic
to different types of geographies you
think of the tennis court as like you
know the reddit tennis court or
something but that's maybe getting to
has been a bit of a reach but anyway I
mean you should do a trial first of all
and that type of use case would be
perfect for us to explore like we've I
don't think we've ever done anything
with reddit the reddit or Yelp or
anything like that where there's lots of
text data trying to assign a space to it
I think is definitely like within our
interest I don't know we're running
short on time on the demo part but if
there's any more questions happy to
answer them otherwise Nikita maybe like
a really quick run through just so we
can look at New York or something yeah
does the technical visit peeking yes
[Applause]
but how do you adjust the cheese in
privacy we can be used to fit the newest
providers be part of that for force
because they have their rules they have
MC by country basis like for cell phone
data for example it has to be already
aggregated to clusters of 15 people and
some companies that's 20 or more right
and so you can't track individuals in
that case and you know transaction
companies have their own ways of
extracting the data and then on our own
side like we can take the data and then
convert it into an aggregate form into
these these voxels which further obscure
it and kind of makes it almost
impossible to reverse engineer and
that's that's a requirement for almost
any of these companies we're using their
proprietary data and actually one of our
selling points this is in the end of the
box itself is like just I'm going to
beat them fiction yeah yeah this is a
great abstraction that's our unit like
the fundamental component of our
software is privacy focused by a design
our security focus by design yeah it was
which has like its time limitations from
being going to be nice to the other
these things and stuff like that but
again with the data providers like we're
working with yeah yes so base basically
as we told you before our tool in front
of it's open and you go you can go to
upfront Ohio and set up for like a trial
period it basically allows you to trial
it for fishing days if you do not enter
your credit credit card or you can try
out for 30 days if you into the credit
card and after 30 days you will be
charged I don't remember how much it's
around 29
use them yeah and for students we also
provide some kind of an educational
grants so if you do it and research for
a project which somehow involves kinda
and urban environment you can always
write us an email and ask for a like a
free period of usage for causes project
I think this is so nakita opened shall
read register here and when you open our
on top we always have this what we call
environments it's basically a series but
can be something else now because it's
just a groups of projects like a folder
and Olympic rap London Moscow and New
York environments also have some some
kind of melon environment but no
wireless here you will not have it and
in New York environment with hands-free
projects and we just open in a first one
and you see how it's loaded it is
basically an multiplication you see
right now of a social media activity and
points of interest social media activity
is a Twitter data that we go to collect
from Twitter
and the second layer is the points of
interest
it's basically show us when places are
open over time so for example if the pet
hair cafe is open it will be here and if
it's closed a little bit emptiness so we
collected this data over New York about
which places are opened and where and
when and where of course and now
multiplying it so basically what we are
see in this composite layer is the space
and time when both of this type of
layers are coexists so when we have an
open businesses of a specific category
and at the same time when people are
using social media what is what this
illustrates us is that for example we
can have a place in a space-time where
people are super active but there is no
open businesses for them so this is a
classical opportunity to open some kind
of when you shop or something exists but
otherwise if our shop is opened but
there is no people in this space-time
area it means that maybe we can reduce
its working hours or reuse the space as
we discussed before so for example we
can leave our shop for a temporal office
space during the time when there is no
active active community around we just
can be clearly observed on this
three-dimensional map and we can
manipulate this histograms the windows
of histograms on the right so basically
we are filtering wages and we see you
can filter the lower concentrations and
high concentrations so for example when
we key to move this slider straight to
right he is still treat the places were
not so many it is open and right now we
are looking at
the sports were at least to hunt places
are opened and up to a eight thousand
which are still also anomaly file value
and it's gonna be also filled threat so
while Nikita is still turret it's so
much
we found this like bright spot where we
have blue to the fire socially that it's
something like seven posts they were
flower and all right now which one but
at the same time with them and a little
things we say art and entertainment in
the same time so but basically for
example he want to open a new art venue
we can look at a high concentrations of
media activity and a lot of the
situations of our cleaners and this is
can be an opportunity I want persons
like that it'll be too simplified
because of course we cannot create this
type of business in isolation well we
could click like to this kind of marker
here we are able to see a full
statistics over three different players
in Corrado so I always forget this close
in inspector so but basically this means
that in harsh life interval there is it
doesn't make much sense specially in the
special dimension hmm
okay yeah so but basically we see here
our different statistics over this
selected region and we can select this
region not only as special so our right
now make it created a classical like two
dimensional object a marker which hits a
specific area on the map but we can also
select a temporal area to see as I
showed you before the advanced slice or
a single period of time statistics and
also we can select a special special
temporal region so for example if I'm
interested in a specific place and I
want to see how much people water in a
certain hour I can also do this whereas
this special temporal marker as well
discussed before we have different
instruments for map filtering like an
classical J's primitives like polygons
radiuses and all these things and we can
our international okay yeah and we
cannot supply this type of objects on a
map to select areas of interest or
specific regions that are important for
our research I think that's like course
all the basics because it's a really
simple instrument actually and the
hardest thing is to understand this
special temporal concept
environments yeah yes so basically right
now we're working with the project be
published be called an approximating
project so this is a project when we
have a data from a different periods of
time but aggregated in the entry single
day so basically we can manipulate visit
a Mac a time axis and I will get data in
terms like a virtual day right when for
example when we have one hour I am with
two data from a different days and from
one hours of these days and calculate a
some of this data or an average this
allows us to see and as William
described before and activity patterns
over time but through the different for
example Monza's so we can create two
different players here and compare each
of this layer but the slaves will be not
a different data sets this will be
different time periods and we can
correlate this approximated time periods
with each other to see how for example a
march time usage over a single abstract
day compares with a favorite time usage
Nikita is show it right now and we'll
wait calculated yeah so I'm this year
you guys want to talk more about this
I'm happy to have you guys to our office
or come up here you know we're kind of
open to doing creative things with the
academic world so just please reach out
I'll leave some cards and stuff like
that and you know I'm gonna cut it off
but we are I think about out of time
thank you onion for putting this
together it's been awesome speaking of
all you guys and things were all the
great questions yeah thank you yeah
[Music]
