[Applause]
thank you I stand I'm gonna sit down I'm
gonna stand up to show you how the whole
person I don't think it being fine great
I guess you all had midterms this week I
feel like you've been on a perpetual
midterm because we're on deadline for
log that one of those issues that won't
finish so you're tired I'm tired so
we're gonna just have fun tonight I'm
going to give a talk not a lecture and I
hear you ask good questions so ever ask
the best question gets the most current
issue the issue you might just want to
leave
there's no point staying for the door
prize right right
you might take to write a question down
or we could think of this even as a
seminar because we're a small enough
group so that if I'm saying something
and you poke that question right into
the conversation raise your hand this is
Friday night so the slow space of the
page this is something I've been talking
about for a long time but I've it's
never been the title of one of my talks
so I thought I'd try it out tonight
I said I'll say one more thing before we
really start to thank Brandi and
Mauricio and Jeremy and everybody who's
been working to bring me here and make
sure I showed up I last spoke at Cooper
I think eight years ago and it was also
at the invitation of the students who
organized
conversation with me I believe in this
same room I mean I could Lizabeth you
would know where these things take place
and one of those students then applied
for an internship with me at log which
he was hired to do for three months
and then it just so happened that the
managing editor was step was leaving to
do something else and so he moved from
the internship into the Managing Editors
spot and stayed with me for almost three
years before going on to get a masters
degree in comparative literature at City
College
his name is David Huber and he now has a
podcast called interstitial a very smart
guy like all of you a California
transplant who now lives in New York so
there is a history of Cooper in the in
the log office so it's nice to be back
and who knows maybe one of you is going
to be the next managing editor of log in
a couple of years for tonight's talk
will convince you never to apply
okay reading writing and the making of
magazines so let's go back and look at
what reading has been in history a very
short history this is actually a diagram
that I stole out of a New York Times
Sunday magazine a number of years ago
when they were talking about the change
and how we read but I find it useful for
thinking about what the slow space of
the page is initially if we disk if we
discount carving in stone as a way of
recording things when we started when
humankind started writing they were
writing on Scrolls and if you needed to
find the scroll you can see on this
thing
I mean Randy's right I may have to jump
around and show you things but you see
that little red mark in the in the
scroll on the top right image if you
knew you need to find something specific
in that scroll you may have to really
unroll a lot of linear feet to find it
and you'd have to know it was there
prior to looking forward so that could
be quite time-consuming quite a slow
search of course obviously this whole
reading device thing is about searching
and then the codex which became the book
but the codex was a kind of map or guide
when it initially was formed the codex
you would have to turn pages and as you
can see again for the point of this
diagram in this article all the times
you know this thing that you're looking
for might be buried in the middle of the
book but as far as I'm concerned that's
the adventure you're on that's the
journey that if there's not an index or
a table of contents that take you
directly to where you need to be your
paging through looking for it and the
opportunity for discovery is expansive
and then we have the tableau or the
e-reader the Kindle the iPad
whatever and if you need to look for
something you just type it in you just
say Davidson and maybe my name will come
up there's another Cynthia Davidson by
the way if you do that who writes books
about the insurance industry it's not me
I don't have a double life but if you
I've only ever googled my name on Amazon
to see how my books that I bet it have
done and or how long is doing because we
sell long obviously to Amazon as well
and there's another Cynthia Davison
anyway it's it's hyper efficient it's
very fast yes we all talk about going
down the rabbit hole when we're on the
internet which can lead us to all kinds
of places which might be as valuable as
turning the page of the book but I don't
know if that's slow space and it's
certainly different from the page in the
kind of work that I do so log is not my
first magazine it's actually my fourth
but it's the third one I've been doing
in architecture I was in contemporary
art editing and writing before I entered
architecture in January 1983 in Chicago
with the magazine inland architect in
1993 I was part of the team that started
any magazine which was a tabloid that we
did through the anyone project
throughout the 90s and in 2003 I started
law all under the rubric of umbrella of
annual incorporation what was
interesting for me the first time I was
ever
to do a lecture and I put these together
they all started in 83-93 2003 so think
of that which what you make I'm not sure
what I think about it so the first issue
of inland architect I did not being all
that familiar with Chicago I had just
moved there it's a great city for
architecture it's probably the most
knowledgeable city as a population they
probably have the greatest knowledge of
architecture in Chicago of any American
city the history of the skyscraper the
competition between Chicago and New York
in the late 19th century etc in fact it
was that sort of post-fire rebuilding
Chicago iron construction fire proofing
etc and this this desire to build taller
between New York and Chicago that led to
the founding of inland architect in 1883
some bound copies of that magazine are
still available in the Newberry Library
in Chicago which is a private library
and not knowing quite what to do for
inland architects for my first issue in
January 1983 I went to the Newberry
Library and I did research on these
issues
and its really the research I did there
that January that led me to form an idea
about what an architecture magazine
could be what a journal could be and
it's not an original idea it's just
about copying what they did in 1883 the
editor at that time wrote architects and
builders throughout the West Chicago was
at the Wild West will confer a great
favor on the editor of this journal by
sending him news pertaining to the craft
and there
section of the country particularly
items of new buildings with those words
RC McClane introduced the inland
architect and builder in February 1883
and then I went on to reproduce some of
those articles in 1983 the people that
wrote for the magazine where the
architects were practicing at the time
Daniel Burnham who of course did the
Flatiron Building here in New York Louis
Sullivan William LeBaron Jenny who built
a building that I lived in actually that
had been converted to residential called
the Manhattan building which for six
months was the tallest building in the
world this is how fast things were
changing in the 1890s 80s and 90s in
Chicago and in New York but it also
proved to me that we think today that
discourse is a new and newish invention
particularly bound up in architectural
theory since the war and in Europe and
the United States but in fact architects
were always producing what I would call
discourse John route was writing about
color theory
John Holabird was writing about Egyptian
history when LeBaron Jenny who's in this
picture here is writing about the
history of architecture part four so he
was writing his own history of
architecture for this magazine and so
yes they were reporting on technological
advances building taller publishing
drawings of buildings but they're also
talking about the history of the
discipline and their ideas about the
discipline history and theory as we know
is not a new thing it goes back to
Vitruvius and now Bertie and all the
French theorists from the eighteen
century so it was just sort of
reinventing the wheel but for me it
meant inviting architects to do right
before I invited so I say critics the
second issue I'm just showing you a
couple of covers this is Dan Kiley's
design for the garden at the Irwin
Miller house in Columbus Indiana dan
Kiley was an extraordinary modern
landscape architect but his and we we
devoted several articles to his work in
this issue but what I liked very much
about kylie is his motto which i think
is even more applicable today in the
climate crisis that we're facing which
was stepped lightly on this earth and as
a landscape architect someone who's
planting lots of carbon absorbing trees
I thought this was a really
extraordinary way of thinking that
architects should probably do more to
adapt or adopt an interview I did in
that same issue which also I'm just
trying to put into historical context
where we are now for some of you here is
that the called architecture and the
museum the Art Institute of Chicago
which is Chicago's primary art museum in
1982 opened its department of
architecture and design and it was only
the second department of architecture
design in a major museum in this country
since the Museum of Modern Art had
opened its department in 1932 so there
have been a 50-year gap in thinking
about architecture and collecting
architecture and design from the moment
to this department in Chicago and of
course there's been many since that time
which is all good for architecture I
suppose it's
recognition of architecture is making a
cultural contribution to civilization
one of the things I did in inland
architect was really focus on the on the
Midwest it was no longer the West the
Midwest so states surrounding the Great
Lakes but there were things going on in
the 1980s that really warranted
attention even in Chicago this is
Bernard Chuy's competition for la
Villette in Paris which was on the cover
of the issue that also covered the
deconstruction show at MoMA which was in
1988 this is Catherine Ingram's article
milking deconstruction or cow was the
show a lot of play with words when we do
titles in order to try to catch your
attention shall we say and seduce you
into reading the article so in 1990 I
left Chicago and came to New York at my
mana to tell the personal story I
married Peter Eisenman in 19 December
1990 and as as part of the deal it was a
deal he had to lure me out of this great
situation now is it in Chicago Peter and
Hirata is misaki in Tokyo and man an
architect in historian theorist named
Ignasi de Sola Morales in Barcelona had
been thinking about doing a kind of
think tank in which they would convene
international conferences one a year on
the undecidability of architecture
end of the millennium so this was meant
to be a ten-year project that would run
through the 1990s into the year 2000 and
they called it anyone because anyone is
undecidable in fact the entire ten words
in the English language dictionary and
you want anywhere anytime anyway are all
undecidable they're not specific it's
not that one it's any one any one of you
could do it not that one
and so this was clearly in the following
of the kind of undecidability that
Jacques Derrida the French the
philosopher and theorist had introduced
into architecture that led to the
deconstruction show at MoMA is Ozaukee I
want to make a brief footnote the first
conference was called anyone by the way
and that was the book the second
conference was called anywhere the first
one was hosted at the Getty Center in
Los Angeles and the second one was in a
town called youth lean and southern
Japan but none of this would happen
without easels Aki and this is a rather
I was extremely pleased that he's Ozaki
got the Pritzker Prize this year because
I believe the Pritzker Prize should be
about recognizing architecture for much
more than just building or good design
but also architectures cultural role as
Ozaki has always been a writer a curator
a critic a teacher a mentor and a
designer he's a really rather
extraordinary person and had a huge
impact on my life because he is the
person who single-handedly raised all
the money to support ten years of the
ne1 project this is a photograph from
the
at English the American version
english-language version of the any one
book we would always take a group photo
here in this group photo you see dairy
dog bottom front row artist ego good
thir behind him Arakawa and Madeleine
kins so the idea was that architecture
in this moment of undecidability was
going to be the host of conferences
inviting other disciplines to come and
talk about architecture so how is
philosophy how was critical chiral
theory how is art history how are other
disciplines thinking about and talking
about architecture at that time and
here's a photograph of isa sake of Toyo
Ito in 1992 in you flame and this is all
the ten books we did do the ten
conferences each time the the
english-language word was redefined for
example if you were to use the word
anywhere in any place they essentially
mean the same thing in English so we
would have to just redefine them so that
one was about low sigh another was more
about urban conditions we would we would
redefine what these meant anybody was
also obviously about the body in art in
space and he how is about pragmatism it
was hosted by the Dutch and in time was
was in in Ankara Turkey everybody every
year wanted the word anytime and I kept
holding it out for the year 2000 but
when the Turkish hosts wanted any time
I thought it was a good moment to give
to them that that that idea of time and
space and time and architecture you you
may not know but the Ottoman Empire
essentially fell when the the Viennese
the Austrians would visit Constantinople
and bring them clocks and the idea of
Western time had not been introduced to
ottoman culture and they were fascinated
by these devices that would cook click
click click click and with ding ding
ding at the hour and it totally changed
how they kept track of time and some
people some historians believe that's
what ultimately led to the fall of the
Ottoman Empire is this adoption of
Western time rather than sunrise and
sunset so while doing this annual
conference and producing this annual
book we realized that there was a kind
of gap in time between May and May or
June and June and that the conference's
themselves really only allowed us to
talk with 25 people because it was just
cost prohibitive to do anything bigger
and so we decided to started another
magazine or start a magazine and it was
called Annie or also known as
architecture in New York and the very
first issue number zero was called
writing in architecture which comes back
to this reading and writing theme and
the space of the page the magazine was
conceived as an activating magazine not
something that reflected what was
already going on but something that
would create activity that we would then
record and disseminate further and so it
was a tabloid format
and the first issue ironically there
were a lot of interviews about writing
and not a lot of writing but we also
talked about the writing and culture and
the different forms of writing from
hieroglyphics to not to carving in stone
and obviously to some sort of coding
that was becoming more and more
prominent in 1993 I mean you probably
all think that or maybe you don't I
think so the culture today is moving at
an extremely rapid pace or not just
culture politics economics everything
and that architecture takes so long to
design and build and finish and occupy
that it seems slower and slower which
perhaps relates to the idea of the slow
space of the page but writing itself
takes time and culture in the 90s was
also moving very fast because I was
doing the all the organizing of these
international conferences with a fax
machine particularly when I was dealing
with Japan or Korea or or Turkey because
the time distance the time changes were
so significant it was very hard to
communicate during a New York workday so
we were using fax machines because there
was no email and there was no internet
yet all those things were about to come
an interview that I did with REM about
why he wrote delirious New York this is
an example of one of these pages the
magazine was designed by the late
graphic designer Massimo Vignelli
and he did this warm red and red and
black thing which
kind of Massimo's pallid REM very
noticed he has a lot of hair back in
nineteen three he also talks about not
about why you wrote delirious new york
but that it's important for him to write
down what he's trying to do even before
he designs a line of the building the
writing was integral to his practice not
just as discourse but even as part of
his design phase the first event that we
did with any magazine was a discussion
of seaside the gated community in
florida a project of new Urbanists new
urbanism and Elizabeth Plato's I Burke
and Andres Duany and others of their
camp came to talk with people who were
not in their camp who were critical of
the idea of the gated community of of
design guidelines that weren't really
guidelines but almost mandates and so
here's another example of how we treated
this material whenever we asked somebody
to come and speak they also had to
provide a piece of writing afterward and
so this is Mark Linder writing about
seaside and I had to broker a deal with
Andres Duany who wanted an opportunity
to review each critics critique so that
he could critique the critique so the
red is Duany essentially commenting on
or correcting the black of market winter
but in fact when I look back at this now
I think this was it's really great we
did this because you see here on two
pages which you can hold on your hands
in your hands or laugh
table a conversation between two people
and you're the only active element here
is another for me example to slow space
of the page we have slowed down this
whole discussion here you don't have to
push any buttons or flip any pages or
switch windows or switch screens
everything's right here an entire
conversation between two people this is
another issue and it's kind of a pivot
pivot issue this is an issue we did on
Colin row that was guest edited by
Robert somal every issue of any was
somatic whether we had a conference or
not I had come under well we did this
issue of Bob Hope with Bob on Colin row
and we made it yellow because Colin row
always typed his his essays letters etc
on yellow paper and so we blew up one of
those sheets of paper one that I thought
was quite great because he's making
corrections he's crossing things out
with the typewriter but he's also
writing on it by hand something he wrote
about a lot is actually on here
zeitgeist worship that he was always
talking about the spirit of the age so
we were trying to capture the essence of
row but also move away from the colors
of Massimo Vignelli here's a another
spread poets inglese instructions for
modern parlor games in the architects
country house was which is really about
Poe's purloined letter
so a brief thing about design Massimo
Vignelli had also been the graphic
designer for the Institute for
architecture and urban studies which
Peter had been director of starting in
1967 through 1982 and there were a
number of people my generation who had
been at the Institute of Students and
they suggested to me that I really
needed to abandon Vignelli because his
colors and fonts even though the size
that the publication was different we're
too associated with the Institute and
that what we were doing in the 90s and
this idea of undecidability was very
different so I hired two young graphic
designers named michael rock and susan
sellers michael was teaching graphic
design at yale at the time the first
issue we did together was called the
bigness of from koolhaas urbanism versus
architecture and this issue served as
the unofficial catalog of OM a's first
exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art
I've mentioned moment now several times
in this conversation I do not think MoMA
is the center of the universe far from
it but they do do interesting things
from time to time and have a long
history in architecture exhibitions here
is an inside look at what Michael and
Susan did they also worked with two
colors like Vignelli but they changed
the two colors every signature so we
would if you know about publishing you
know that paper can run in 8 16 and 32
pages and we would usually run 16 page
signatures as economical and so for 16
straight pages you would have this deep
blue and orange and then you see here I
did two other different colors are being
introduced for Charles Jencks is 39
steps to surfing where he goes through
39 steps like the Hitchcock film about
REMS REMS trajectory his career and I
was happy to put this image in here
tonight just as a kind of homage to
Charles Jencks who I'm sure you realize
passed away about about ten days ago
Michael and Susan by the way if you
don't know their names went on to become
the firm called 2x4 who's and who then
REM then sort of adopted into the OMA
studio and they've done a lot of
Protestant the McCormick Student Center
at IIT in Chicago with them this is
another issue that they did called
Meccan tech chure this was guest-edited
by the architect West Jones in Los
Angeles and was in response to an
earlier issue he had done called electro
texture and this relates to everything
that I just suggested was happening at
this time with change in technology in
electro tech chure term coined by the
philosopher and historian of religion
Mark Taylor electro texture was talking
about the spaces the virtual spaces that
were being developed online and how are
these virtual spaces going to change the
physical spaces of architecture would
people no longer be interested in this
physical space because they're more
interested in the space that they enter
on these screens Meccan texture was a
response to electro texture and in
responding Wes and Neil Denari another
California architect held a three-week
event in a virtual space called the well
which is running this event that was
done online is running in these boxes
here all through the whole issue so that
you have an article here at the top in
these kind of funny Filofax like pages
which is very analog and then you have
these conversations from the well
people got passwords if they had the
right kind of computer and they could
login and type things into the well and
have a kind of conversation across time
not really writing the writing is above
that the second color here this is black
and copper copper being the filament
that's in wire that's transmitting all
this electricity other things happening
in the 90s were really the kind of
beginning of terrorist acts on American
soil which I want to do an issue on
public fear because of architectures
reaction to things like the first
bombing of the World Trade Center or the
bombing of the Oklahoma City Federal
Building and how architecture or even
how government and landlords let's say
we're responding to how are we going to
protect buildings what was public fear I
agreed to do that issue with Tony
viddler as the guest editor this is his
piece the exhaustion of space at the
scene of the crime which was far more
historical than it was contemporary at
the moment but talking about issues like
agoraphobia and other acrophobia all the
kinds of phobias that people encounter
in the city or in at great heights and
buildings and so forth
this was the 27 issue run of
magazine the different themes that we
that we did and then the last issue in
the year 2000 after we had finished the
last any conference anything we really
had no more money the money is the sake
and raised was gone and there was really
no way to continue to publish any
magazine we did it on the cheap but even
the cheap we couldn't afford to do so
the last issue as you can see is quite a
bit larger than the others one of the
things that Michael Rock had wanted to
do while we were doing any was an issue
that was only folded and this is because
the long about issues 1920 or even
earlier actually the blue issue up there
number 5 that John Reichman the art
historian guest-edited art historian and
philosopher it really is yield to lose
and his ideas about stratification
rhizomes and the fold or Luke tea were
being very strongly adopted by a younger
generation of architects they were
rejecting the undecidability of Jacques
Derrida and the sort of deconstructivist
and thinking more about flow and
movement and connection which were all
embodied in these ideas of rhizome and
folding I had said to Michael at the
time that I thought it was far too
literal to just fold an issue that had a
lot of discussion of shields or Liz I
didn't want to do that but I remembered
at the end when we did any that maybe we
should just fold the issue and not trim
and bind because then no one would know
if it was unfinished or coming apart and
so this is what that issue looked like
every essay was on a poster size
you see here the folding and the sort of
the what the color bars that run on a
press that get trimmed off and this was
I always had a page the front of every
issue called dear reader where I would
write about whatever I felt like writing
about sometimes was about the theme
sometimes it's about something else but
so they simply centered what would have
been my page on a poster sized article
in fact in this issue it's more Cooper
not just was John Hajduk had a number of
poems that filled one entire poster
sized sheet of this issue and this
really was flow space you really you had
to unfold it you had to deal with are
you gonna hold it you're gonna put it
down you have to refold it just to hold
it like you used to have to do with a
broadsheet newspaper on the subway it
was a real exercise a real real tactile
exchange between the reader and the text
after in the so the last issue of any
came out in the fall of 2000 in the last
any book called anything came out of the
spring of 2001 one year after the
conference and the news osaki was here
in new york and we had dinner and i said
we have ten thousand dollars left in the
bank at the any one corporation what
should we do because you're not allowed
to disperse money to board members in a
not-for-profit organization or do
frivolous things you have to file taxes
and you as members of the public are
entitled to see what we're spending
Howard's spending our money Miyazaki
said to me leave the money in the bank
you'll think of something so this was in
the summer of 2001 then as you all know
in September 2001 we had the terrorist
attack on the World Trade Center and the
towers went down and there was a design
competition in 2002 and these were the
further for the site and these were the
two finalists competitions the one on
the left was by Daniel Lee Baskin and
the one on the right was by Rafael
viñoly
working with other architects including
sugar Rubin now if you're good Cooper
students you know that there are Cooper
alumni and both of these projects the
Libra skin project obviously one even
though what has been built the World
Trade Center doesn't much look like what
you see in his competition entry the
discussion at that time was very Center
the image of the of the proposals I if I
remember correctly there were 77 teams
and the newspapers around the world were
plastered with images of these seven
proposals with a great deal of focus on
the skyline and very little discussion
about the relationships with the street
with the site and all of the other
complex issues and I thought damn I have
to do another magazine I have to do a
magazine that resists the seductive
power of the image that goes back to
discourse and writing and what better
way is there to deal with discourse and
writing than in a literary magazine
format so the model for log is a
literary magazine that had started I
don't remember exactly when let's see 21
years ago they're having their 21st
anniversary I just read so we're on 17
years for long so I guess around 19
around 1999 or 2000 they started 1999
sorry - magazine called Timothy
McSweeney's windfall Republic and it was
a literary magazine and it I was an
immediate subscriber because I I liked
these kinds of things and I really liked
the format and I really like you don't
see it here but McSweeney's after they
had done about four issues they actually
produced an issue that came in a box
where each article was saddle stitched
and folded and put in the box but not
bound perfectly like the first several
issues and then they did some that were
bigger and smaller and I thought well
this is very spacial very architectural
we could change it all the time and so
long and this is the physical copy is it
the same size as the first issues of
McSweeney's with this emphasis on
writing but of course if you're going to
emphasize theory and discourse and
criticism and history what do you put on
the cover because architects
architecture is a visual discipline so I
thought well the first the first time
images of architecture really started to
circulate was on postcards I mean yes
you would have engravings in folks and
those circulated to a certain degree but
when the public started circulating
images of architecture they did it
through postcards so we put postcards on
the cover of the issue as a way to
attract your attention but the idea was
when you opened the issue can't you open
the issue takes a while you open the
issue image falls off and you're left
only with a story you're left with a
text and that was the conceit the design
conceit of the whole thing and so it's
made ourselves a challenge because to
write this text so that it exists and
makes sense without the image it's not
so easy because I thought you would all
mail me back the postcard it's a nice
issue etc but not until I told my son
this story did I get a postcard from him
I think one other reader in the 17 years
of blog has sent me a postcard people
actually keep them someone recently in
Australia wrote and said I'm a postcard
collector do you have all your post
parts I want to buy them
so we thought wow what do we charge so
decide one dollar for each postman so
they had their own life so this is not
quite what you would call the rejecting
the well to reject the seductive power
of the image or to repress it meant we
would only publish in black and white
the one and two that the images would be
small but when catherine ingram did this
piece on ellis island and the
relationship of architecture and
immigration which she wrote this in 1993
would be very timely to revisit today it
was obvious that we should put in New
York Harbor as a map because Ellis
Island is here and as well the word log
is stands in for the ship's log so the
sub had observations on architecture in
the contemporary city really refers to
observing rulers in architecture and I
don't mean moving buildings I mean
changes of direction changes thinking
changes in technologies et cetera guest
editors played with the issue they did
different kinds of covers and then we
had different kinds of texts and I want
to just take a few minutes to read you a
little bit of some of the texts that are
in here and to show you the kinds of
things that have been published in log
that are taking up the slow space of the
page that are meant to slow you down in
thought-provoking ways so this is
Sanford kwinter confessions of an
organist the term architecture is being
used more and more today to refer to the
conditions of possibility of what takes
place around us rather than what is
actually empirically there and if you
think of a building is being empirically
there what are those conditions right of
all the rogue uses of the term the one
that amuses me the most is one I picked
up for my wife a psychiatrist once when
recommending a medication to me as a
remedy for insomnia she proposed an
agent originally developed as an
anticonvulsant but that had demonstrated
an impressive array of secondary effects
for which it was becoming recognized the
medication will not make you sleep she
said what it will do is restore your
sleep architecture in almost every field
that has been touched by the epistemic
epistemological revolution of the last
60 years and what field has not
engineering and design they've become
affairs of aligning and managing
relationships not only within a single
scale of reality but across many scales
at once quite curiously the explosion
and the ascendancy of the information
theoretic model have endowed an
architecture with a new life a life one
must be quick to add whose challenge has
not exactly exactly been taken up
courageously this is quite a challenge
to architecture quite a lot to think
about just in two paragraphs you almost
don't even need to go any further in
this article of course this is pretty
much true of Sanford kwinter
but it requires for me the kind of slow
space of the page and is one of the
importance important things about
writing in architecture introducing
ideas into the discourse about what is
architecture and what does it do what
can it do log started out white the
first 10 issues with white the second 10
issues were black
the third ten issues are gray the first
postcard contest was on log number 18
this is a wall of a residential building
in Algiers that some people thought was
a beach with umbrellas and towels
because they didn't know how to orient
the postcard the other does anybody know
what the other is it's a very important
building in the history of architecture
Parthenon that's right very good Eve
Blau curating the architecture with
architecture again something very
thoughtful she's writing about sage amah
Nishizawa and Sanaa I don't know if any
of you have been able to go to grace
farms and New Canaan but there are
relationships clearly between this
museum project of Japan and grace farms
in saunas hands the museum is not only a
site for the consumption of art but also
for the interactive production of
architecture curating in this context is
staging the conditions that make that
production possible what happens inside
the museum sage Allah has said cannot be
easily predicted in fact we have to make
something happen
make something that realizes the
unpredictable every encounter will bring
forth another new image then the critic
says how is this achieved again more
ideas
or the tid Tower in Tirana in Albania I
told you that we refused seductive power
of the image but on our tenth
anniversary
we ran colour photographs and brought a
number of we brought ten architects to
New York and for critics and put them on
a stage we tried to get them to talk to
each other it didn't work out too well
but the conference was nonetheless
fascinating here we're talking about not
curating architecture or effects of the
word architecture but politics in
architecture communism collapse and
Albania around 1991 even before the
collapse the country operated in severe
isolation even from other socialist
countries the violence in the regime
found an equally violent successor in
the way the country opened up to a
so-called free market regime in which
reality was a destructive mix of pyramid
schemes widespread corruption a daily
struggle for survival the urban
environment in Tirana suffered from this
being overrun with illegal developments
and squatters in other words they're
having to produce a tower in a very
difficult political situation and it
continues to be difficult
interestingly in log 47 that we're
working on now there is a critique of 51
and for ease work in Tirana or Peggy
Deemer who actually wrote about the
problem of architecture criticism in
crisis after this event we had at MoMA
which was called in pursuit of
architecture the in pursuit of
architecture conference organized by law
at the Museum of Modern and New York
class of Modern Art in New York last
September was an amazing display of
critical crisis while Sylvia Laven decry
that there was no
prices for the theorists to discuss in
other words she saw no crisis in the
work that architects presented the
wretchedness she acknowledged and which
was so palpably felt by the audience for
both the critics and the architects and
log editors Cynthia Davidson indicated
that a crisis in fact exists so what is
that crisis we have to go through to
find out log 31 was called new Ancients
now we've changed from grey to warm red
they recalled this color because they
were trying to imitate the magazine
opposition's that Vignelli had done at
the Institute but they put a geometrical
analysis of a church in Rome on the
cover and then blog 41 when we changed
to a sort of 12% warm read which looks
very pink and had a postcard on the
cover of a log cabin in Idaho that had
been wrapped in in metal to protect it
from the forest fires the smoke of which
is intermingled to those clouds you see
in the background and then we have
another issue a contemporary issue
self-promotion and self-image or Thomas
Kelly writes the architect of Chicago
self-promotion begins with self image
amid the many socio-economic tidings of
Renaissance self portraiture who's this
to act the part you must first look the
part and of course this is part of the
pressure of social media today with
Instagram and Facebook and websites and
how you represent your work is a little
bit it's not just self-promotion that is
also a part of your self-portrait
this is just a silliness I mean I
brought the real thing I have to give
credit to my managing editor Patrick
Hamilton for that he he really likes
making that card fly but it brings us to
a discussion of the cover not only
because of the cover story which you
just saw the chapel fly off but also the
bad cover because for as much as we are
producing writing that's meant to be sad
with quietly or that we hope you find
the space to sit with quietly and read
we also have to promote that writing in
some way and so on the back cover we use
action verbs to show you how hard these
writers have worked to produce these
texts Davey Ames inscribes a matrix
Pierre Vittorio really surveys the grid
George Baird reacts a fred bernstein
takes stock Ludovico gentes reconstructs
without chang classifies Davidson
questions now he reads heart dig talks
Imperiali navigates etc etc etc it's a
great deal of activity and
in motion and research and thought that
is going into these quiet spaces of the
page
another thing that happens in these
pages is we cover a great deal of
territory this is an interview I did
with Liz Diller also a former Cooper
student a cooper alum and the mile long
opera that door Scofidio Renfro did on
the High Line last year do any of you
get to see him or go to it I found it a
rather extraordinary act and this idea
of sort of quietly taking up space to
critique the city and its changes was a
sort of physical critique very different
from the space of the page but using the
space of the city and the space of
architecture to make a similar kind of
critique this is where we are today
white black gray warm red pink pink is
fading if you're paying attention so I I
want to really get at the heart of
slowness here in these last couple of
images so about ten years ago a Natural
History Museum in Canada decided to get
rid of their dioramas dioramas as you
probably know our constructions usually
in and it's in a space and a kind of
Katrine space the depth of which one is
never quite certain that involve
painting and taxidermy in other words
ways to try to set and match
scene so that you can see things like
mastodons or buffalo in their natural
settings and this museum said you know
people don't like these anymore
we're gonna get rid of them does anybody
want them and the Peabody Museum of
Natural History at Yale up in New Haven
said yes we want them and the reason for
it was about slowness the a lot of
research has been done by museums about
how much how many tablets and how many
screens and how much interaction they
should be introducing into the museum
and in the Natural History Museum this
of course could mean you know video of
animals in the wild which you can
already see on the Discovery Channel or
public broadcasting and so forth or it
could mean things like these dioramas so
they had done a lot of studies about how
people interact with screens and they
come to a screen and the screen is
moving and it sort of agitates them it's
like what do i press what do i do next
what am I supposed to do here am i
seeing everything we're supposed to see
and their heart rate goes up and their
breathing rate goes up and these are
scientific studies by Natural History
Museum's and then they studied people
who stand in front of dioramas and
people stand there because they're
looking at everything there is to see
they know there's nothing
hidden there's nothing else they need to
find nothing they have to push and in
fact I'm certain you've already guessed
what I'm going to say our heart rate
goes down and their breathing rate goes
down and I'm talking in both instances
about what your natural breathing and
heart rate is so when you encounter a
screen in these situations the studies
show everything goes up there's a kind
of adrenaline rush perhaps and when you
encounter something like a diorama or
for me you encounter the slow space of
the page versus the activity of the
screen something else happens now no
one's done research yet to determine
whether that means you're thinking more
clearly or seeing more clearly or
retaining more of what you see I don't I
can't say that one is better than the
other I can only say that slow space has
some kind of respiratory and cardiac a
benefit and so I want to end for your
great questions with this piece by the
South African artist William Kentridge I
find it relates very much it's I hope
you can tell what he's done is taken the
pages from a book I think it's a
dictionary or encyclopedia and done an
art piece with it with text and color
and geometric shapes and for me this
very much relates to the opening image
of the scroll and the Codex and the
reader where you have to move through
the Codex in particular to find what
you're looking for
and that there's a journey in that it
does a journey in here we never know if
you're going to start at the beginning
and read to the end if you're going to
start at the end and read to the
beginning if you're going to read one
thing or nothing we don't know we can
only provide it for you
but as Kentridge says which ever page
you open there you are and that
somewhere is the slow space of the page
thank you very much now I didn't talk
about how we do all this because it's
really pretty boring but if you want to
ask about it I'll tell you or if you
have any questions at all we can talk
for a few minutes
comments critiques
yes a question about the you mentioned
the slowness else they came about that
and highly distracted in relation to a
quantity or quantity of information that
was given pagers and then I thought
about diving relationships or magazine
the way they operated let's say a
specific anywhere who issues and then
log in a way there is a multitude of
discourse inside English page and and I
kind of questioned that in relation to
slowness
sort of how I think my generation
operates with information the quantity
and relations by which we consume words
I see that
quantity I don't I mean okay a log
usually has between sixty five thousand
and seventy thousand words that's the
quantity right it's like a book each one
is like a book but I'm not so interested
in the quantity as the quality and
that's not to say that the quality of
thinking here is better or worse than
anything you could find out line when I
was in a discussion this week with an
institution about how they can there
were several of us at the table from
different institutions about how they
could reconfigure that institutions
publications and one person just said
well I love a flux because everything
stays on e folks I can go to the website
and I know it's all archived there but
chance remember it's there and you just
remember what she's looking for
etc but that's she can find you though
but I said to her what are you gonna do
when they turn off the electricity
because if the high-tension wire sparks
a fire you're gonna have to leave your
house like it's happening in California
right now but everybody started laughing
maybe what I know yeah you're right what
happens when they cut out the
electricity can't get to our efflux
archive I'm not providing something for
you to read what lights are out
this either but the you your generation
is going to be very different and one of
the things that we wrestle with all the
time and I mean in terms of how you
process information but I think we
wrestle with all the time is should this
go online if it did would you but if it
did would you read it any differently
and it depends on how you read I mean
the people who work for me here all in
their 20s and they don't want it to go
online which is I think funny because I
don't know one who says well maybe it
maybe it should be and the back issues
are online through JSTOR it's just that
we don't publish it online and we don't
have a I suppose we can have an apt and
you can subscribe and get the issue read
on your phone because it's easier to do
on the subway but I'm the kind of person
who likes to underline when I read and
write it but margins and I I can't do
that here but I certainly can't do it on
my car know if that answers your
question
so well we have two kinds of issues we
have issues that are open which are and
most of them are open which is meant to
be open to multiple points of view and
we aren't necessarily inviting them some
people I mean I always have to invite
some peoples that I know I have
something to polish but anybody can
submit the deadlines are posted on our
website we disseminate them to other
outlets so we ended up getting a lot of
points of view but what's uncanny about
it is it often when we're putting things
together we realize four or five of the
18 articles are all sort of addressing
the same thing that there's always
something in the air that many people
are thinking about and it's surfaces by
accident and literally every issue we
also do thematic issues like the new
ancients or projective architecture and
so forth some of those special covers I
showed and the next issue that Alisa
Iturbi who teaches here is doing with me
is called overcoming carbon form which
is about climate change and how
architecture can think about grappling
with that
so all those people were invited but
people could still submit and I think
that she chose two pieces that from the
general submissions to include in the
issue and then there were some people
she invited and I said these aren't good
enough and so they're not running so
there's that given take two we're always
trying to keep the bar pretty high so I
think more quality than quantity and you
could say who are you to decide what's
quality but I don't know you either read
the magazine because you do think it's a
value or you don't because it's not a
value or interest or a lot of times I
think it's slow compared to this it's
the only way I can compare it because
this this can be so fast and this never
speeds up it sits on your desk for a
long time and collects dust it doesn't
ever speed up only you could speed it up
by skimming versus underlining
it's a different object for me this is
very fast-paced we should go so many
places so quickly and this this has
limits but I think those same those
limits also have a their own value yeah
the tercel this is that their different
implications of what school is because
depending on how you interpret that word
so I think that based on my
interpretation I feel like the slowness
that is being described here what long
as it is like
they're what we talked about the diorama
and the buns net versus the buns in
discrete there is this slowness that is
derived from it being curated to be
deliberated or like having specific
focus right but I feel like slowness
could also be interpreted in the sense
of the quantity or not quantity or the
speed of consumption and that kind of
also he brings up the case that perhaps
what we perceive has the infinite it
kind of brings up the possibility that
the infinite we might perceive that as a
fast-paced medium actually kind of all
these a big slope simply by the nature
of how we consume because while it is an
interconnected network how we as users
music is discretized so we use tabs we
use their woes we now load files a cyber
center and all these things are
disjointed from one another so and
because of that it forces the user to go
through these obstacles of shifting
those two different types especially
your comment about going down to wrapped
a bull as facilitated purely because the
internet is formatted in such a manner
so I feel like yes it is fast-paced in
this sense like in the experiential
sense I thought that buttons in the
screen I thought that was a very great
example of that it is it does feel a
space in that sense of ugly but there is
a slope there there's a there's a case
of slowness TV made for the usage of the
you here or the computer as well so
basically here for sure it's very book
line right yeah but even even even a
computer so I member this different
interpretation of slowness that is like
a slowness in consumption this is
deliberate clicking of different types
and navigating through their work better
when cosmography already mentioned cover
there's been conversations about long
has long ever considered reformatting
itself for the online media in this man
we have it mmm
people only recently started talking
about it partly because we're gonna do a
lot 50 next year and that sort of a
significant number so the question is
this log stay like this or just become
something else
precisely because you are reading online
for the large part but we haven't made
any decisions and it would also mean a
pretty significant investment in
figuring out how to go online and hiring
designers to make that work but i think
i listening to you talking about the
tabs and so forth I think maybe when I'm
thinking about slowness I'm thinking
about where the eye rests and that on
the page there's not a lot of
distraction and that feels slower to me
yeah I don't I'm not saying it is slow
it just feels slower and I don't know
how else to describe it that's when I it
feels it feels quieter and and so it's a
different kind of reading and maybe your
heart rate goes down and maybe that's
connected maybe I mean think more slowly
I don't know what's not circulating
that's it
but I mean I I'm not a scientist I just
found the whole thing about the dioramas
fascinating and I thought there was a
correlation
to be clear I think that there's like
three distinct types of slug isn't these
two things are not necessarily exclusive
so in the sense that there is like the
act of reading having it all the entire
content readily available to you at that
moment with the ability of highlighting
hundred
um that that's a slowness to me that is
different from dis lowness of gathering
the actual information in and of itself
so which is what perhaps the online
media is beneficial and so I guess like
what it's like I'm trying to like meet
the distinction between if log wish is
worse to go into the AMA yeah it would
probably be redundant necessary to
conduct a literal transcription of vlog
but what as long as we format it is in a
sense that I don't know I can't answer
you right now
what if yeah oh yeah we always do that
okay here's a good example our titles
are always on the right-hand side
because even though we left to right in
the West we tend to look at the
right-hand page first when we're paging
through things so the titles are always
here you always know where our that's
really easy to navigate sometimes
there's a picture that goes to the
article and sometimes sometimes
something else is on the other side we
have these little one-page observations
that unrelated to this and so it's color
coded in a different way but it's very
quiet space maybe I should say quiet
instead of slow but I guess I would
think quiet and slower are pretty
similar
now there's a whole Michael Bay route
that it is great for us sometimes
another article is ending on the
preceding page and we try not to have
too much this page is almost too busy
because this particular article has too
many footnotes which start here huh it
would be better if that were blank it'd
be less to distract you I couldn't I got
them to cut some of those footnotes but
you can't cut a lot when you're talking
about Dante
but is that is that what you mean it's
not how you make it
it's
it's interesting always trying to figure
out what's going to catch your eye and
that you'll slow down and read it and I
suppose the same thing it's true up mine
I don't know I don't it's a gamble in
law a lot of the pieces I think the
reason a lot of people get the magazine
is not for what it looks like it's
basically not designed it's a template
we just drop it into this template
Beirut did for us and in the office they
read it because who's writing in it and
I mean I would throw the question back
to you all I don't know what you do here
at Cooper but I know that in a number of
other architecture schools students are
creating all kinds of little printed
pieces to communicate with one another
whether it's open letters at Harvard or
paprika Yale or forget the name of the
one of Princeton I mean there's all
kinds of publications whether that's
whether it's a broad sheet that comes
out every two weeks or a public a
journal that comes out once a semester
and so forth there still seems to be a
desire for print for that object and I
think that that's that that could have
been a completely other lectures do what
is the what is the attraction of the
object still to us today and why do we
want something to hold in our hand maybe
none of you do but there are a lot of a
lot of people your age who are producing
that kind of material come to you all
the time to ask me
do it and they're probably not doing it
for any kind of reason of slow space
it's something else I don't know if it's
because they can show their parents or
put it in a portfolio or what but they
do do it there is still a lot of
interest in printed paper yeah
our question and it kind of connected
the first one is throughout
first started barking discourse on
diversity content that's being talked
about in different parts of the world
and how architecture is being shaped by
new audiences audiences that are now
being heard because of the presence of
addressing question with acidity and
accessibility and then my second
question this is kind of the
the slowness or a quietness the object
versus digitization I guess this is warm
of a statement or kind of thinking of my
own but I think in terms of
accessibility
I think to a certain degree when we have
a personalized participants in fact in
some way making more excuses which I
think in terms of audience and in terms
of the bog I think the audience bridges
from the skin that is studies right now
I'm going to approximate and yourself
you know other patrons what does that
mean I guess I'm just speaking to me to
digitize some literature of some sort
and how and in some way that can
contribute to a dismantling of an
inclusive a subject that
well people have access to
okay so first of all let's not kid
ourselves not everybody has access to
the Internet
period there's all parts of the world
that can't get online certainly not at
home and maybe at a local library so
that we aren't there yet right so I
don't think that's the answer and as far
as these these sort of new histories
that are being written inclusivity etc
there's nothing about law that excludes
anyone or any view but I don't know
everybody in the world so I can't go out
and make sure everybody knows that they
can submit there's an article in this
particular one by Dave Adkisson white
male ok but he's also has a prosthesis
one of his legs so ok he doesn't get
around like I do with my two legs right
and he does a lot of work on alternative
architectures and he has piece in here
on revisiting classicism where
everything wasn't white it was painted
there were many figures that were
painted dark colors that there were
temples that had ramps they didn't all
have stairs etc so that this sort of
reading of classicism of antiquity
ancient Greece ancient Rome has been
revisited its logs job I believe to
recognize this these changes in
historical research but I can't
necessarily know they're going on unless
somebody like David says he said yeah
I'm working on this what do you think
and I said this really interesting send
it to me that's great and we ran the
article I mean I rely on all of them and
all of you if you were writers to tell
me
was going on because there's no one
person who can know and the three of us
have do log three of us just can't know
and the whole idea of log is very
different from the more sort of formal
issues that any magazine took up because
it's meant to be observing the changes
and when I look at what we did in 1989
2003 compared to today it's completely
different there are critics of what we
do who say were anti feminist because I
will list the names on the back cover
and they'll be let's say 18 authors and
only three of them are women so suddenly
I'm an anti-feminist I have tried very
very hard to get more women to write for
some reason not as many women write in
the discourse of architecture as men and
I continually challenge women that they
will never be leaders of the discipline
unless they also write because writing
and discourse has power in ways that are
different from building and yes Jeanne
gang can put up all the towers she wants
and get MacArthur grants but if she's
not doing more writing she's not really
going to change the discourse yeah
[Music]
now I know you're not I'm just telling
you about the situation hey I've said I
had I solicited an african-american to
write about the lynching Museum in
Alabama I solicited an african-american
or not to write about a J's Museum in
Washington now we're always
conscientious about things that are
going on particularly in building and it
comes you know things that are getting
built so who should be writing about
them and should they be in our pages so
we're not just writing about Frank Gehry
[Music]
you know what I'll tell you with the
answers the answer is when enough people
like you demand that we go online it's
that simple
and then I'll say okay I guess we have
to go online now we got to figure it out
because you guys don't want to read this
in paper anymore but you do think what
we're doing is valuable but why are we
doing this edge bid format I could only
only say we could only respond to
audience demand this is no way we can
figure out what that audiences yeah
somebody else has a question
these topics I guess for instance
reading we always are concerned about
what we see on the page and how that
slows us down I feel like there's always
a a sense to drift towards things that
we know about and try to speak on that
we know about in our soul
I guess confident we know like for
instance you bring up this idea that you
know bringing all these people to write
about what they know have you ever
considered thinking about the fact that
what they do not know really significant
and how they write about the things they
do not know could be significant too
a new discourse I feel like for me I
think all the problem with diversity and
inclusion is that were so caught up in
what
we think that we forget what we don't
think
I think there's a lot of my original
training was in journalism and I first
job was working on a newspaper so I was
constantly behind stories to write about
things I had no knowledge of and so you
have to go out and do the research and
write the story and you had basically
eight hours to do it is all very fast
which might be why I like slowness now
super fast right I don't I think that
what you're talking about is a really
great thing to do in terms of
conversation I and I have to say for
example when I asked he's willing to
write about the the lynching Museum and
the music and the memorial and the
Museum in Washington neither one of them
had ever been hadn't been to suck either
site they were challenged by the
assignment and they learned a lot right
and they were really happy I had forced
them to do it but I can only do that
randomly I can't do it across the board
I can't say that Dave Adkisson
you do turning work you know why don't
you do some work on Greek temples it's
really different so there's a mix I can
only do what you're talking about with
the contemporary it's happening right
now that contemporary research but
contemporary architecture and design and
urbanism that makes sense
I guess within what they're already
talking about is their information
because I'm sure we all we all are self
editing all the time because you don't
want to sound like a fool you know what
you're doing what you're doing is
describing my job as an editor because I
get an article from somebody I assigned
and send them somewhere and I see lots
of holes in it and I start asking them
questions I say can you fill this hole
what do you think about this what do you
think about that ultimately you can only
push a writer so far before they just
throw up their hands or say no I'm not
interested in that no I don't want to go
there there's no such thing as as
complete knowledge and complete honesty
and lack of suppression and repression
in an author's work it's just how we are
is functioning psychological human
beings there's nothing I can do as an
editor to get someone to write something
they don't want to write and ultimately
then it comes down to me to say you know
what this isn't good enough we're not
going to run it it too many too many
open questions and we'll get somebody
else and then that takes time and then
we do it later or we end up not doing it
at all I mean there's a lot of stuff
that doesn't ever get published that we
work on but other people like questions
no no you tell me I I have an answer
I think I'm inclined to say yes but
obviously I think so but I'm a lot older
than you are and my 20 year olds who
work for me I'll tell me it's my
generations fault the world's going to
hell and I say hey you have no idea how
clean the air and the water are compared
to when I was your age and how much my
generation did to change it so the
problems are always ongoing right all of
us are always dealing with the problems
of the world and yes if we want I mean
working on this climate change issue
with Alisa is depressing as hell I'll be
honest I mean I have kids right it
doesn't look good but you know there may
be things that can be done but it it's
not gonna happen fast I mean what what
is fast I mean let's talk about slowness
versus fast what is fast
even know if if we have to turn around
whole systems of thought and economies
and so forth in order to stop climate
change
what's fast I have no idea but slowness
isn't a perpetual state of being
slowness is that moment where you sort
of step back and sort of read focus
reconnoiter and then step back into it
with some sort of new idea new energy
but it's that need for that moment
I think of slowness like I hope to
capture a moment this weekend of
slowness it's that it's that moment that
allows us maybe to come up with a new
way to Mitaka something or a new idea
other questions yes
[Music]
and I thought you tried to record the
yeah conversation into
Pushkar something and you try to
use the taxes and different colors and
geometry and the space between the tax
to explain the concept of time in the
company for further readers to this
thing and the readers so it creates
opinions so it's like the like to break
the systematically reading process in
this moment I wonder if like what is
that based on your reading experience
word and what's your reading process for
billion we're starting the first page to
try to like the experience
I personally read something well if I
were reading a book I start on page one
if I'm reading novel let's say I started
beach one and I read the last page if I
liked the book Peter on the other hand
he starts in the beginning I says well I
think this is going to happen and he
dumps me and he starts reading backwards
so everybody reads differently right if
I'm reading architectural history
somebody's monograph philosophy whatever
I don't necessarily start at the
beginning and read through I look for
what I think I'm looking for like
somebody will recommend something by the
way I'm really a fabulous fabulous book
called the overstory which you can
probably read it's a it's fiction but
it's about trees anybody who's concerned
about climate change read the overstory
it's just beautiful every chapter is
about a different person and a different
tree and I can't figure out yet how
that's all gonna wind up together or if
it doesn't so that might be a novel that
you could jump around in but when I'm
reading other kinds of things it's
usually for work and so I'm looking for
something in particular
a bit like searching the scroll or the
Codex or going online and typing in inks
I don't have the book it's Fred
Jameson's
such-and-such here I mean that's what's
completely changed in the magazine
between any magazine and log when we
started any magazine when we needed
images or information I would send my
staff to the New York Public Library and
then these big super stores called
Barnes & Noble moved into the name
we didn't have to the library anymore we
could go to Barnes & Noble to check
things out and now of course there's no
Barnes & Noble we just check things out
on Google Books or Amazon or JSTOR or
Scribd or any other number of places
that supply you with books so you read
them very differently if that's what you
mean and I logged me is just following
the tradition of reading it's not my
personal thing you know we put things in
a certain order about how we feel
there's a rhythm in the writing in the
different voices but that's something we
decide amongst ourselves in the office
it's not me alone and I have no idea if
anybody picks up on us because we have
no idea how you read we just hope
somebody reads still yeah I I would like
posit that in your careers you've proved
a certain awareness of mortality meaning
that whatever your intention your
community your career hasn't resulted in
the leaving behind the several cultural
artifacts in terms of publications and
was there the persistence of ideas I
wonder if you have that same concern for
persistence when it comes to the
institution and this institution like I
refer to long as an institution
I wonder then
think about building your team we're
building this well that's a good
question
I mean log is a product of an
institution called the anyone
corporation which is not an institution
it's an independent entity not
affiliated with any other institution no
school no museum no nothing right so
it's very hand-to-mouth existence I like
to think that you know somebody like
using to come along and say wow what an
opportunity let's push Cynthia out the
door and we're gonna take this on to me
that would be the greatest legacy but
I'm not sure and I don't say there to
get kudos I'm not sure anybody would
suffer as much as I have to do that it's
really hard and I don't just mean the
work I mean the money and it's hard if I
didn't have somebody else supporting me
I couldn't do it I the institution
wouldn't exist if I didn't have a
partner who paid the rent
so there's that problem and that's the
problem of being independent it's far
back as 1991 right even with all the
money he's the sake raised those
conferences cost money those books cost
money I had two full-time employees etc
it's it's a lot what you say it's very
interesting about mortality I have
always believed this is a real
confession I've always believed that I
had to do something I had to leave
something behind for history that was
like my whole reason for being alive was
to leave something for history I was an
avid reader as a kid I grew up in a
small town the library was open three
days a week I was in that library all
three of those days I read every Nancy
Drew Bobbsey Twins Hardy Boys
etc any anything that you know a kid
could read and I wanted to write books I
wanted to be in the library that was
gonna be my legacy and so I don't write
books but I produce this thing and my
name is in it but that doesn't mean
anything in the end right if global
warming comes in the planet blows up
that doesn't matter that I did anything
at all so I think you can only do in
life what you feel is rewarding and for
me and for architecture there's always
something else to be created there's
always something else to do there's
always something to learn in the process
but I love about what I do is I learn
every day from every author I work with
so I am as much a student as all of you
are and that is a great gift in life to
be a perpetual student for me more than
leaving the legacy it's while I'm alive
I'm just a student that's pretty great I
think we should stop good plan maybe we
should stop cuz it's like Friday night
guys thank you for being here
[Applause]
[Music]
okay I liked the question I don't know
any of you but I like the question that
you asked about slowness you guy in the
blue shirt so you can
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
