good evening welcome to the Cooper Union
lecture series thank you for tuning in
my name is James louder I am faculty
here at the Cooper Union and it's my
great pleasure to introduce and welcome
Hernandez Alonso Hearne on is the
director of CyArk Southern California
Institute of architecture and founder
and director of HDA design
formerly known as severe charge having
or non speak here at the Cooper Union is
incredibly exciting for me for a number
of reasons and not only because I'm a
product Messire can I think it's I'm
always excited when there's any time to
exchange in the two institutions as I
feel like there are a few places like I
think we are sister institutions I feel
like there's a few places like this in
the world so especially in moments like
this I think it's important that we
reach out and engage one another and
discuss the ideas what architecture I
think also I'm excited to have her not
here because you know I was I've no no
known for 20 years I I was I was this as
a student I sucked her nose very first
studio at CyArk it's a summer studio and
right afterwards I worked in his office
and I was his teaching assistant so yeah
yeah team Adam 20 years later Here I am
introducing exactly at Cooper
introducing her not as a director it's
fantastic so and I can tell you you know
I think my know'm first came in he
displayed a lot of the qualities and
traits that that I think he still has
that makes him a great director an
educator uh we didn't know much about
him and just this young guy who just
come out of Columbia he had a university
he mean usually worked in eight
medicines office and in at Peter
Eisenman's office so he name was a
strange guy and he didn't disappoint I
mean I think he came in he was
effortlessly charismatic he was
provocative
he was pinion ated in a really good way
he had a definite discourse it was
dialed in he's also a very passionate
teacher and I think as time has gone
forward and I kind of looked back at my
influences I think a lot of my teaching
and pedagogy is actually heavily
influenced by by or non so yeah so I
again a little quick bio information
about or non stated he is the current
and fifth director at the Southern
California Institute of architecture
from 2007 2010 he was the graduate
thesis program director and then 2010 in
2015 he was the graduate programs chair
he has taught at the Unga bhante in
Vienna at Columbia University here in
New York the Knowlton School of
Architecture at Ohio State and Yale
University where in 2010 he was a con
visiting professor of art design 2015
Saren and professor of design in 2005 it
was the winner of the MoMA's ps1 but
she'll show that project and in 2012 he
received educated award educator of the
Year award from the AIA
and the American Academy of Arts and
Letters a marketer award and 2019 he's
recently released a monograph his work
called surreal missions at HDA which i
think he will also talk about this
evening all right thank you
in introducing her 90s Alonza thanks hi
I'm doing and we are recording this
lecture for all of you watching in
Cooper Union we're recording this on a
Sunday morning and I think this is gonna
camp we're gonna be doing the Q&A live
after this on Thursday so thank you for
having me and these are extraordinary
times is an understatement
the world is upside down so I'll try to
do my best to replicate as much as a
kind of lecture in this classroom in the
way they if I was there so
it's always a pleasure and an honor to
be at Cooper and one of the true
extraordinary school of architecture
with one of the best pedigrees with a
lot of friends there and people who I
love dearly and I'm really really happy
to have a chance to do it even if we do
in this way I think in this time it's
great for us to keep communicating with
each other and to be interacting as much
as we can and to keep the debate alive
even though we'll be the first one to
meet the body of my work is now maybe
the most suited for these times but here
we go
so I've been doing a whole series of
talk from my kitchen so I thought they
said they set up it the same so this is
one of these quarantine talks from my
kitchen since like a really cool place
to do these conversations so to get the
ball going the original the original
mission of this lecture in the way was
promotional one about introducing a
monograph and things and had some
publish it and it came out in February
of the the work of the last 12 15 years
of the office our second monograph on
this was supposed to be the original
cover which are my x-ray of my teeth but
the publisher decide to go with this
cover and also the camera title call
this real vision so Fernandez Alonso
which I was not so into it because I
never been so much into several ism but
then I hear the explanation there was an
understanding about that and I think
that it's a form for interpretation of
the world through those eyes which i
think is an interesting idea but in many
ways I think doing the book which is a
painful process for anybody who ever
done one of these is some kind of an app
Topsy and it's not different than a
lecture so we went back and forth
multiple times to think about how we
will do this again it's part of my job
to promote it and to keep things and
read soon another publishes keep
engaging to do a reject your book so
it's an Amazon in Amazon it's way
cheaper than anywhere else so in these
times of quarantine is a funny time to
get it if you want I
promised when when I come back in the
fall or whatever one another get me to
do the thing or something in person I'll
sign it for you
so the book in many ways the way that we
understand and is very similar to the
way that this lecture is which is a trip
to my head inside my head and it's not
necessarily chronological but it's much
more driven by a series of obsessions
and recurrent things this is that is a
full MRI of my my skull which means
inside my head is basically nothing so
in a way as I said we built we built the
poke around the same logic that we will
build I built a lecture we whole series
of obsession that has been riding along
what I will call shifting paradigms in
architecture in the last in the last 20
years or so this is my own version of
those 15 paradigms I'm not necessarily
the one that you is for the whole
discipline at large but is the way I see
it and I think that you appropriate
within this with our one form follows
form this is something always been
interesting with I'm a formal is I mean
I've always been very open about that I
am very very interested in the notion of
the grotesque and the horrific assault
on the mechanism to the production of
beauty a little in terms of composition
architectural process is collapsing so
the collapse in the the process
technology as a new form of craft I I
don't think the technology and software
and all the things that kept happening
the last 30 years
eliminate the notion craft I think it's
a different one and I think it requires
a different kind of atrocity I'm and
then the notional system as an
alternative to the problem geometry to
manipulate form and the most important
one I would say is the image for the
vehicle production for I'd really
embrace that that it came from this
offer that are mostly animation
softwares the other thing to say it very
very important to mention in that front
of the lecture is I have our office our
practice is a very speculative one is
not a traditional commercial as
um
I'm commercially-driven
you
but it is a practice built on the notion
of the speculation which means is it's
always very clean intertwined with my
teaching and now the director of the
school but with an academic practice
that allows us to interact in a very
dynamic way when a speculative practice
which is built what I will say in the
most important argument they came out of
digital technologies which I will call
its new coherences the possibility that
you can overlap very contradicted
concept like if you think in the 19th
century in romanticism rationalism
philosophy you will not be able to
Merson I think the computer one of the
most interesting thing and the most
important thing from my point of view is
a possibility at least capacity to
create new coherences and they are all
these other mechanisms I was talking
insisting paradigms and in a way has
defined the word and we will do in for
the last 20 years in the office and with
this ordinary group of people that
collaborate over the years there is it
that he said that he said they was in
the early work in the 2004 2003 there
was a clear kind of a partnership with
technology in which we were I would call
it experimental phase because we were
experiment and we didn't know exactly
what we were doing we were bound by
whatever was that the software would
allow us to do that the single surface
spline and and all that time but as us
as you get more comfortable that
territory you understand that this is
the dialogic to work with you I was very
interesting to embrace the notion of
image and the cinematic effect this have
to do with a long story which I get into
today but in the interest of time that I
really wanted to be a filmmaker boomer I
wanted to be an architect so the
animation software it really it was an
idea to start to merge these two worlds
so when we did appear as one moment in
2005 we won what I'm showing you right
now is an animation from that time what
you showing you to you now right now is
what we showed to the jury at a time and
it was very choreograph design he was
not afraid through but he was to start
to use a camera and animation as a way
to construct the project
as a way that the project was a little
bit like use in alien or real Scotty
which you can never get to see the whole
monster until the end
so before we shouldn't drawings or
models or anything we showed this
animation we were trying to understand
that what we were trying to produce was
a cinematic effect and a series of
quality that even belong to the
traditional space of architecture but it
belongs to these it came with a lot of
interesting by-product consequences this
is the model and this is a picture of
the pavilion a couple of days before the
opening it can with a whole series of
consequences there what kind of
interesting because a couple thing that
happened in is this is this is before
text message Instagram or anything like
that I took this picture from the
terrorists and I send it to a bunch of
friends by email and that resolution at
the time was nobody is today and a
couple of that responded to me that
there was a super cool photo montage and
it was interesting for me to say that it
is kind of a parallel reality it started
to emerge in which the project are you
trying to build it tried to replicate a
simulated one so the notion of
simulation and the national
representation is thought to get much
more blur and I think it has another
quality this was one of the first time I
will use the scripting for the structure
it was a kind of a stupid idea to have
almost 1400 pieces for structure they
were all different and we will never do
that again but at the time they was a
decided to do that and to try to figure
out so there was a combination of high
tech and low tech there was a lot of
handmade and customization among machine
driven thing which also again start to
put unravel a lot of byproducts that the
world will keep evolving one of my
heroes one of my true favorite
architects ever immediate which is Ilona
another Bunawan talking about and many
others would do to I there's a lot of
things I stole from him one of them was
the idea that the projects are always in
continuing that you know work in a
single person you're working on with a
multiple project and in a way it's a
notion of a species but at the same time
also it gives you a sense of again
autopsy which the end of this project
will begin the next one so a lot of
things that we we on this
thereby like for example material
effects that of compositing ejected
benches that we did in LA in dry weather
when we moved to New York because we
were going against against time because
you only have two months to do the
children installation when we put in the
summer called humid weather of New York
is start to develop bubbles into the
thing and I'm Nicola euro soft who was
that at any other time architecture
critic he will mention you're interested
in the grotesque on the ratio so you did
that answer yes of course it was but
there was an interesting notion and this
idea that the material time frame and
decay they start to became important
issue so I would say when we did the
next installation and the San Francisco
Museum of Modern Art that we call it
Sandra blood we took that into
consideration and because it's a
practice and we don't get to do many
buildings or so on and he says it's
attracted my current practice is called
HDS alone some creative agencies because
we work in architecture our product
fashion and many things but everything
then we get to the exhibitions another
time like many of my colleagues we were
relying on this new category of
architecture art installation so when we
did this and they in the SF moment San
Francisco Museum of Modern Art we offer
to convince and to let us do fabricate
and build something and not just do in
this case a pedagogical showing would
use old models of drawings or whatever
so we will show the cells we were really
interesting at that time you'll sell the
scientific in which we're using
cellular system to grow and after one
cellular system you can grow multiple
projects and so on but also the
displaying in this case we didn't
purpose that they will develop bubbles
so the fiberglass will not be stable so
the notion of decay the notion of
mutation the notion of species tend to
became much more in a specific thing for
us again always obsessed with the
parameter of the statics and alternative
mechanism for aesthetics but it's slowly
moving from where I will call for an
experimental
into a much more precise effect to
speculation I don't like the word
experimental because as I said it seemed
like you don't know what you're doing
and I think by now we start to know what
we do it there was a version of
they went to their teens to do in
Chicago which also showed the capacity
of the thing to mutate and change with
that something that interests me a lot
but at the same time we work in in
parallel and this maybe is rooted and
the work in the office is a lot rooted
in in my own in my own inability to
focus in one problem the time I have at
my lcd quality so for me to work in
multiple projects and a scale the same
time is interesting one again this is
something I Stauffenberg molasses so in
parallel to that we were doing
competitions so we'll be doing another
installation in the MaxEnt and in Vienna
called pitch black with space on the
very bad movie we've been diesel that
the monsters appearance in the dark
I love intellectual art movies as a
human being as a designer a much more
prone to a much more prone to popcorn
shitty movies I find it much more useful
I like I am absolutely committed to the
idea that simple ideas and even banal a
stupid ideas have the potential to
produce very complex project and I think
if you start with very complex ideas the
project almost never lived to those
expectations I think for of course there
are different rules about that I think
somewhere in courses is exactly the
opposite of that anything is brilliant
at it
my brought my my brain is no wire like
that so I feel much more comfortable
operating the opposite direction but
well we did a show at a Mac in Vienna we
were learning things and so the
animation big didn't became or the the
film if you think it's just a way to
navigate the project but it will begin
the pushing himself so in a way the
installation was to have almost like a
frozen animation but unlike in ps1 each
piece was basically the same and we were
just simple manipulations of the angle
of the legs he will give us effect of
variation so we learn things along the
way at the same time it was the first
project I would argue that we start to
operate and really in an art object
scale but it's an architecture idea with
artistic effect so I don't think artists
will never have said architects and
artists and artists and when architects
does are the say something else but
there is a kind of interesting
hybrid territory and we start to
navigate so this will have artistic
effect but if thought through the eyes
of an architect so you will think of a
simple Asian people and the assembly of
pieces and still full of tectonics which
again a product designer will never
think it's so much in tectonic gotta try
to avoid tectonics as much as possible
and an artist will not be interested in
that neither it will be interesting in
the Pony pure artistic effect so there
is an interesting territory there and
again I will consider myself first a
designer and an architect but
nevertheless my training was as an
architect and eating eating your bread
the other interesting byproduct about
this project was there was a safe
abortion that happened ten years later
in Shanghai there is a 3d print Museum
and they liked it this piece and they
commissioned get involved in it for the
lobby for the main lobby installation
but like the project in Vienna we were
not involved whatsoever in this one
which is sold and the copyright of the
3d file and we send it to them and then
divided the opening and they did this
version of this the only reason I
mention to this especially when talking
with the students it's interesting for
all of us to think about also the notion
of commerce and the notion of business
in relation how these things are
changing so the way how we can start to
operate there is a whole series of
possibilities that you can we cannot
events for say and it goes we are saying
that in there incredibly horrific crisis
we're going through it's going to
reshuffle and we change a lot of months
of operations and I think architects we
have a couple of edges against other
people because we are one of the last we
are one of the last if not the last
human is profession in which we are
generalist we are experts and being
generous we misunderstood and
misunderstand and misused
everything we give us an edge because we
have a kind of a holistic way to
understand problems that many very few
people they have so when we're in the
moment like this that is going to
reshuffle all the things keep in mind
that the way that we think it can create
opportunities for architecture that goes
beyond buildings and it goes beyond how
we operate so I like to
I'd like to to talk about those things a
little bit as opportunities in which our
tea that we need to learn how to have
much more control process or the
financial side of our issues so going
back to the project out of the bank in
parallel to the mag we were we were
invited to its competition for the
guesthouse outside Paris for Natalie
SaLuSa which is an art collector and so
what we were kept evolving with this
notion of a species and again you start
working with with singular entities that
can be loaded with information and you
can add it but in this case we start to
learn that we can have only three or
four different cells and they knew in
their combination would produce new
effect but the other thing what happened
with this project is I'd rediscover my
obsession with line drawing some plant
drawings that can be came from villages
but one of the things that I always I
come to terms over the years is I love
computers and I love technology because
I project the new coherencies and new
aesthetics and all that but also any
biographical way I liberate me from me
to figure out the past for were from and
bring me roses which I even when I was a
student I was copying huge work a lot
and I start and I still think that
melash is in many ways was the last the
architect on forever 2d drawings for me
was impossible to think what else you
can do with that so in a recent lecture
I gave him Princeton I will keep talking
about my completely abandon of drawings
and and that I'm not interested in
drawings I'm interested in images and as
a way to produce and Sylvia Laven give
me an interesting inside on that talk
and she says I don't think what you're
doing is not that you're not doing
drawings anymore I think you say you're
doing drawings without lines and you
rethink it and I think that's an
interesting take I haven't figured out
yet exactly how to navigate that
argument but there is an interesting
idea which i think is more productive or
more useful than being negative to say
okay lines run it's over it's more to
say it is it Tipperary mutation so i
don't do it and ruins of what we do it
they are like MRIs they're after thought
after the totality of a three
dimensionality they are not really
generative like they used to be
people like me my generation and 51 I
learned to draw by hand
honesty Lotus on paper I know super
precise but I was never somebody who do
your sketches I never like a sketches
even before computers I never I don't
like a scheduler I don't respect your
sketches I haven't known interest my
students know that they can now show you
sketches to me because I've funny them
precise I will say the sketches it's
like dirty underwear everybody acid but
you don't want to see it because there
is a lack of precision there that I
never introduce yourself again something
I learned from from my dad's idea the
precision geometry so I'm right now
thinking about this notion of image of
not drawing a drawing with outlines it's
an interesting conversation but what I
can tell you for sure I have no interest
whatsoever in the fifties in the
fetishism of the celebration of line and
so on that many people are doing now I
think it's important work I think it's
important that people are thinking about
that I'm much more embedded in the image
so in parallel to that we did this chair
for the Art Institute in Chicago that it
was one of the first time I will use
contaminated algorithms so the idea to
start agencies of contamination which i
think is what you bring us to the more
contemporary work that we do in the
office and we took the canonic Eames
chair and we infected with a script and
we produce it in 48 hours we didn't know
what we were doing and this is not a
render in a manufactured it is a chain
yourself I don't like it the project but
it was a good lesson that you had to pay
attention to all of them because you
never know which one they're gonna get
produced before they happen so it was a
good it was a really good lesson to
learn but the other thing which it was
interesting is the notion of agencies of
contamination I think around 2009/2010
many of us who were part of the second
wave of digital of digital jockeys or
the booster for example myself I'm I
jumped into pure velocity and to develop
a velocity of the digital and in a way
serve a romantic idea and even
classicist idea but I thought at that
time they will start a lot of people
start to use external factors of
contamination to really reshape and to
reclaim a saint of
she with some she was a scoop they say
this was around the time that we were
doing our first collection for Alessi
uninstallation Selfridges in London but
part of part of the thinking about this
was to really to really reshape this
notion that almost to rebury if you
think about that in a way if we take the
Renaissance as kind of the beginning of
architecture as a cultural practice in
the Western civilization at least there
was a desire to produce in perfection
perfection through imperfect techniques
probably because it was a lot of
religious of each age of one and so
forth and now we have these computers
and this technology will produce perfect
equations and there is a decided to
start the Blues in perfection with them
and I think I think it's a humanity of
it and I think is the claim of out of
shape despite some people would not like
to talk sorry my daughter starts
shouting around because we are in
quarantine so my two girls are running
around so it's more real than ever but
but I think this is an important idea
because I think no because it's my idea
because I think many people are looking
into it is the idea that the spice about
best a form is passed the best for the
manual section culture to really
diminish out worship something
architectures a natural consequence of
ABCD I think we it's not true I think we
all crave for that and I think we start
to look and unleash our tools were to
look through issues of contamination so
if we organize it chronologically in our
own work the early world was
contaminated by biology then we had
ornament and cinematic effects
artificial nature breaches and butchers
of the more recent ones and we keep
using them but mostly there is an
overlap and there is an accumulation of
them I have zero and we have zero
capacity in the office to editing things
out so any new agency of contamination
and we throw he pies on the previous one
he piles and piles and piles so
minimalism is not our Forte I mean there
are three people do never we don't know
how to do that we don't know how to edit
things out
and so there is a layer on of it so as
we keep evolving and this was a
competition with
a museum in San Sebastian in Spain there
was an interesting innovation in here
for us internally which was it was the
first project than we did then we had to
negotiate the in existing one so it was
an expansion of a monastery which it
forced an interesting idea because the
notion of friction it was the first
process in which our objects are not
floating in the space doing their own
thing but start to negotiate with the
dirtiness of the accumulation of
evolution of things so in this case is a
18th century building that we need to
add this extension with all the
implication of that and in terms of
returning geometries where the
geometries that we want we want to work
that lets define and to really start to
incorporate our own pattern in geometry
which start to produce a slightly change
of moon with the pressing start do we
came Lester refine and it became much
more animal or pet like understand to
have a certain funny qualities than we
think is I don't know I thought it was
an interesting revelation but again you
can see here maybe more than anything
else in the plant and again I really
think it plans to me used to be x-ray so
I'm adding their MRIs the multiple thing
that you do so we do it because you had
conveyed there is a certain kind of a
collective memory what what plants means
in architecture and so on but they are
not generative anymore and sections they
always there may be that Buddha or
sections I never been really good on
section and you can think is totally
architecture divided in plans and
sections they're very few mr. David both
well I am NOT saying that we are that
good but for sure our plans are better
than the sections even though they're
after thoughts but in parallel to that
again we always working three or four
projects and different scales in the
same time we will develop in the same
context the second collection for Alessi
in which we were much more interested in
it can we affect social behavior with
our extreme formalism
so this objects particularly silver will
force it to eat like this and to change
is part of a collation that Alessi does
without any expectation and people who
use it that they biased objects or for
decoration it isn't happy with Alessi
but is back now in
life will see after after the Kobe 19
crisis but it came back back to life in
China and we're doing a different
version originally it was supposed to be
silver and metal polished and now we can
do anything like we did a Mac
installation there's no plastic 3d print
and they we will Chrome them and so
there will be like a low-end high-end
thing with the glasses and Trey's figure
cutters candleholders in parallel to
that this idea the Platonic geometry
start of tiara have repetitive elements
we distort the thing we keep evolving
this was a competition for another
Museum at the same time that we were
dealing with platonic geometries
parallel realities and parallel
realities became very important one we
got another installation for the Mac in
LA in the monkey apartments garages are
for garages so architects and artists
were commissioned
installation some what we did was a
cloud of particles and we assign a
flower to each of them and then we have
your people that they do flower
arrangement for funeral so we build
these installation of flowers structure
of flowers and we hang a couple of this
plastic this plastic spheres with with
at a time about DVD players with
animations inside the show was supposed
to go for four months or three months I
don't remember exactly in the summer so
by the second for the second man's they
start to smell like a cemetery start to
smell horrible and by the end of the
second or living in a thermal the whole
structure collapse and so this idea of
time base design but I start to compose
decay humidity model and all things and
he came the up top see for the warning
we will do moving forward so when
Francesca moon hassle for the same born
Ibiza
Foundation in Vienna commissioned a
small small pavilion our retreat in
Patagonia we came with this idea the
decay and flowers and colors so the idea
was to have the cities of pavilion that
will be surrounded by this this is the
model to have these ornamental structure
that we keep doing and get IVs and
flowers to grow which people give us a
couple of Felucia for a couple things
one it can be seasonal so architecture
can change color over time because of
that and also it helped us we deal with
color which we always be horrible at it
I've never been really good with colors
I don't know how to deal with color and
so this was an easy way out to it and
keep doing shiny thing with colors and
so on that also generate the whole
series of furniture to that we came more
and more about the impossibility and
also to intimidate the they decided to
use so I will say there is an underlying
condition in which we want to produce
things that provoke you and challenge
you like dare you to use so is maybe too
extreme aversion to say form for the
form instead the form following function
if maybe forms follows
fear of use or something like that but
at the same time we want them to be
things that you can use if you choose to
it so we did this use of Rose chairs in
which there was also more
more about this contamination in which
the full integration of digital we want
to separate now the structure from the
skin be more convention so we did this
version of this bench for Allah pump in
Argentina but also we did this for the
same the same woman the Commission the
competition for the guesthouse outside
Paris is a beautiful house by club
parent so we proposed this bench for her
garden which brings me to I think we
doing okay I think I'm interning for 25
minutes so that it was another 20
minutes or so it brings us to the most
recent work which I will say is really
embedded with the impossible pursuing of
the literal as a way to rethink the
prana form I think architects we always
rely and always will rely and it's
impossible to break away in destruction
but this is something I became more and
more obsessed in recent years about the
little that seems to be little this is
something an artist can use in a way
that architects will always struggle
with but it was only spa it was really
inspired by Frances man man which is a
super famous Argentinean chef right now
thank you to Netflix just chef table but
this is well before he became known in
America but he has been the most
important chef in ASEAN for years and he
was trained in conventional traditional
culinary French style but then he
decided to get rid of that and revisit
traditional model for cooking Argentina
like like barbecue the whole barbecue
the whole cow things like that so the
year the lowest high en and rituals
reach was became really important and
they literally do the ritual so when we
did a second Bursa for the December no
miss a pavilion but Ionia we decide to
go literal and to really deal calls and
sheets and to really make lovely check
to be literally like he will be doing
that we will do an artist a butcher in
attack organization this is something
and I'm very obsessed until today and
the students a cider maker in society
are dealing with these products of
literally they're in different ways that
were interesting progress again
understanding that achievement or
through literal is impossible for
architecture the same way that through
originally
is impossible I think architecture is
always built in the genealogy of
concepts I think if you're working in
subjects and nobody else is working on
it you're wasting your time so as much
as our best efforts of my best effort to
forget about presence and to forget
about typology or to try to overcome
typology and replace it for a species or
replace it for genders of generous you
always trap by that but should that
should not a behavior of the pursuing to
try to avoid her and to try to to try to
erase it as much as you can so for us
the literal is a it's a contamination
it's a way to amend its possibility to
break away from where I consider the
trap of certain traditions or certain
prosaic qualities of architecture as a
discipline so even though I consider
myself a disciplinarian as of knowledge
of architecture like like Florencia said
remind me about this Einstein quote that
imagination is one more important than
knowledge
so we always try to figure it out that
as forms of disciplinary knowledge can
be challenged into something else again
understanding that you're limited by
that you're never gonna fool because
became free the same way that you can
liberate yourself even through
psychoanalysis or your own by your own
biography or your own history as a human
being you cannot liberate yourself from
your past but that doesn't mean that you
can not produce - inwards so we chosen
Bocelli became a really fancy cheese and
an obsession and again we almost driven
and that my brain is driven by obsession
so we start really looking and I bought
every book I think that I can find on
budgets of different cultures vulture
butchers and this became super
interesting for me because he said one
of the most interesting things to
understand how to carve a money play 3d
and also the idea of the decay and the
idea of the region and the deer life and
death and all the metaphysical things
that we always tempted in the back of
our head just an architect's still
present there so we really went with the
literal and Boccieri so this was an
installation of beta we were proposing
to do in in in Ohio working with Jeff
kidneys so
you die how will meal the meat and so on
and how we can I say something but then
mr. to three whole series of families
about butchery architecture or little
cow cow this typology with our I will
bodywork there's a typology of cow
oriented ontology that we were working
and part of a multiple ontology so we
did this little porcelain lamb that they
look at little cows that will be for
kids hopefully we'll get the prototype
tsunade's but also we did a chandelier
for a guy who has a very interest in
sedima so his objects collection in
austria let's see if i can make it work
yeah he's coming so one you can think
some reason those animation is not plain
but anyway you can take something killed
by its killing a baby came grotesque
vice versa so the scale is another thing
that fascinates me about computer this
idea the scale is something that you
assign different for those of us we
learn to draw in one 500 one to two
hundred one to 100 in which you have to
predetermine eight the level of
information and a little of precision
and sophistication sophistication is
something that upsets me to became more
and more sophisticated in your own
language and to create an alphabet and
to create a repertoire if you wish but
the notion of a scale is an interesting
one because you can go up and down in
the scale you can be working and
building an object this is a this is a
holder for remote control that we did
for GP to be Morgan Chase in LA they did
20 of them and at the same time after
the same family we produce the user
traffic apps
espresso cups and this is this is the
metal prototype of it or also art pieces
this was something that we did for Tom
manor his wildly wanted to have an
option for now so we did this is a three
print is another render is this deciced
we scary popcorn with ornamentation
that's it that was a little of popcorn
but also what else you can add and how
you can bring things of your own
repertoire so you start to became a DJ
in a way or a sampler of your own work
so yourself
I mean and right now we see a lot of
it'll reveal intelligent about something
and all that but you can do that with
your own work and I think you start to
build a notion of robotoid in parallel
to that we also work in the $10,000
version for social health for in front
of it in Mexico that is made at the
three water tanks with a with a fabric
with the fabric roof and the during the
day is a show up and a 90s house which
you go back to all their ideas to reduce
it died or earn for ashes from people
will after they die and it's embedded
with flowers or a competition for a
theater in Bogota Colombia in which the
notion of butchery and carving became
really really splitted this was a tricky
project was an expansion of existing
theater and you had to fulfill the whole
the whole blueprint of the side and then
we will carve this career so the
animations led be deceiving but the fact
was to produce this kind of a glass box
which is very typical Latin American way
to produce architecture if that's what
pass by contemporary architecture so
it's a little bit deceiving but if this
was expressed barely and you will able
to see nothing from sight and when you
walk into the courrier you will find a
monstrosity or not the beauty of not of
the butchery carried into that into that
courtyard the this other time but this
was a deviation of the multiple genetic
manipulations of similar project
Barcelona retina which is agency
who deals with the region port projects
of Barcelona so is Barcelona with all
the cities next to the Commission has a
pedestrian bridge to connect Barcelona
with sundry debris sauce so we went back
to some of the regionals ideas flying
curves like in ps1 and we were this idea
because it was only for pedestrians so
we can work with flexibility and
movement and so on but unlike Imperium
we came with only four modules of a
structure that you can rotate to produce
effect that is different it also have a
bridge have an ecological reservoir to
observe birds so allows us also to span
the platforms and the platform will be
booed it will be Putin is still very
simple with with these kind of micro
spheres of petri dishes of a species in
danger
unfortunately the the party was ruling
the city lost elections we lost the
commission of the commission of that but
we were pre advanced in the development
of this project and they were trying to
rethink this notion of the bridge that
they will be a next ability almost like
the bamboo bridges that you might find
it sometimes in India in Asia so we were
missing in that I'm working with close
Bolinger the phenomenal German engineer
who were with Zaha Hadid and gold Fritz
and many others and to come with concert
that will help us to do that so you can
see here what I was talking about the
bridge part is only the other half is
the the bird platform thing and again
promise it in the drawings and figure it
out how we build this and how to have
literally only four modules and how
their formulas can be reassembled we
went pretty far down the road with the
project so we enjoyed all the way to
construction the oil but we were already
in D D but when they lost election the
same agency Commission and a project
that we do is much more far-fetched was
another platform to connect the personal
zoo with Barcelona de and we wanted to
do this one goes to Ella Bay at the park
and to have an elevated Park an
artificial official garden elevated
garden and to produce artificiality that
project didn't
and nowhere but we took a small piece
for another project in Mexico's
outskirts of Mexico City joshula
we took a part of that and the original
Commission was to do two little classes
and one little bridge and we told them
why we don't consolidate all the budget
into one project so we can do like an
elevated class a public public domain so
it's not just a park is it's multiple
ways to cross from one neighborhood to
another one but they both are allowed
for engineers parties or weddings or
mariachi festival so whatever else so if
we came about the notion of Ludwig and
the idea that you elevate the
neighborhood not only because function
but you elevate it because you created
losing quality or you trying to produce
an effect of a static condition that can
create enough pride for the neighborhood
so in a way for those for those people
who think that the formal project and
the social project had not go together I
don't said that it distortion I really
think that beauty and aesthetic of
design is a human quality that it should
be tackled like affordability and all
that the project was done would be done
metal and wood and it will be using
local companies even milling machine
that now is very common there but the
idea was again that you can create this
ludecke public space that can operate as
a functional bridge but also it can
operate as a destination and it can
become a place for people to congregate
and celebrate their communities this
project is not dead we'll see what
happened with after this this situation
I think of course all this project will
take a backseat for a long time but we
are willing to keep working with them
and we are happy to work pro bono and
really try to get the project to do it
to be done a couple of quick projects to
wrap up before before we end this was
another interesting project of the
opposite of butchery this was more like
pimples or acne but a similar thing than
what we did for the reversible towers
and this one he was a stinky library he
needed also get to consolidate whole
blocks so we did we decide to do a block
and then fill
with Faberge eggs so the library happens
in the fabergÃ© eggs and the in a block
you like a winter part and people can
use a second sink and as we know public
libraries today more like social
agencies and libraries himself so we
thought it was a much more interesting
way to think about and use that as a
winter garden under libraries in a plan
you can see everything that is kind of
an egg shape is where the library will
happen and then the rest would be this
internal typography some people can use
as a Winter Park
another project that we did working with
info now with a social housing agency
Mexico's an emergency house in which the
idea was a simple one it was to have a
concrete block of a kitchen and a
bathroom and then the rest you can
expand like a ten like you can make it
bigger or smaller according to the size
or what you need to accommodate on the
product from we were working we were
commissioned a while ago to do alarm and
then we switch to this idea to have like
a like a life issue like a light bulb
that you can melt a bunch of them and
you can plug it so you don't need to buy
alarm you can just buy a light feature
I'm putting in whatever you have in your
home and you have it again leased it off
it's a light bulb
let's take light balls Melda flower ways
in Milan I don't know what it is here
more recent work in terms of
contamination about artificial nature
and natural dye fixation in office park
in China they will operate an expanding
door as funding outdoor space for people
toward is not a public park is an office
space
posing as a park and so it will be
embeddable low technology so the idea
again to produce a moment of
acceleration and it will be premature to
official they will no be grass they will
be all astroturf and it will be
customized but again it also with agents
of contaminates your hair here and fur
became an issue and certain things that
we're doing right now in Latin art in
China we have an agent trying to work on
this and work in this bamboo and trying
to produce land art public equipment
tables baskets chairs all of the same
family cheap and fairly man able to do
this is one of my favorite recent
project is a garden it's a garden bench
that he will have a hydroponic thing you
can grow grass so you will not know if
this is a it's a plant or animal in your
garden or in the park and the idea is to
have this notion of here
on it but it's really grass I mean it
should be more green and it isn't
animation but this idea that can change
and also you're gonna do freaked you out
a little bit but other saying time is
very friendly somewhat like a pet so
when you see in the garden you don't
know if you're looking at the plant or a
tree or an animal and that tree get a
whole series of things I'm going working
with chairs we call it I call it a sharp
a chair they shall pay collection
they'll chair they're like sharp a dogs
we are well before before the crisis we
were talking with a company in Mexico
that we're trying to figure out how to
prototype one of the any we can do one
will come to our home and so there's a
whole series of different version of the
sharp a chair but again the little they
literally the hairy thing so if we think
in flowers we put flour in here we put
here we think in sharp a it look like
sharp a so this is one for kid is it
chicken chair so it's like a chicken
skin and they will be small and in
plastic my kids love this one but my
kids have a peculiar taste in the same
time a big competitions that we did
human blood they were doing a called
master outside change n so he asked us
to work on the on the flower district so
we literally try to do these towers they
look like flowers on the top it was the
first one of article of day to
collaboration and we did wake up Cayman
blah and Wolf bridge the other one was
for a water park they once then we did
the Parisians and we did another one
with bubbles the other ones are the coop
the coop versions so it was a phenomenal
experience about kind of a by fire
because we work only for ten days in
these competitions and you had to submit
it and figure it out to it when working
with them that they have experience and
so many brilliant project that they're
done over the years it was a phenomenal
thing to do and in keep trigger
different ways and to understand your
own limitations it's not only about
conservation yourself
but it's the idea of contamination of
working in parallel with somebody else
this is one of the recent competition
and we did for the museum of writing in
Korea and in this one accounts they
began with nature and artificial nature
is the museum is hidden in this
three-dimensional garden so all all the
museum components is inside and outside
will be cover but it's kind of a grass
panel like so in the outside there is a
certain convention or hidden thing in
which the the complexity of the project
is hidden inside this was something that
evolved from a previous project that we
did for sorry for the going kind
Helsinki in which we were trying to do
almost the opposite of Frank Gehry going
he'll Bilbao in which the public space
will be the normative space and the
radical or the speculative space will be
the exhibition space which is clearly
seen a stupid idea and no curator and
director would like that but we thought
it was an interesting idea to challenge
that they are to catch up with
architecture not the other way around
so again but again it was operating this
notion of butchery but also with certain
over simplicity of materials of both and
steel this was up and still shiny thing
we do anything is one of my obsession
that I share with fish I'm attracted to
shiny things
but shine is interesting because allow
you to undefined edges and I allow you
the phone to be less readable even even
as much as I'm interests in being a
formalist I have an obsession in which
the form cannot be read something that
you can understand where it begins and
ends so there is a certain level of
infinity and continuity that is
something that I has been a recurrent
obsession so that project
they also lead to that with that I'm
gonna speed up it's okay we do I mean I
can do Q&A for as long as students one
Jimmy so I'm okay I had the time to do
it on Thursday anyway sorry taking
longer than I thought
I always forget the animation take some
time but you can see this idea again of
carving inside and hiding inside and
almost like a
they gave mamushka toys inside inside
inside anyway we
I guarantee walls by accumulation and I
think every person and we do we keep
assembly so this is one of my favorite
competition that we did was for a
competition in Budapest and this one has
pretty much everything that we've been
obsessed with the idea of distorting
form by species the notion of
[Music]
the notion of
oops sorry let me see if I can
accelerate it the notion of platonic
geometry there is the idea of a parallel
reality with a movement that it will
never happen real but the notion of film
and the cinematic effect as a part of
reality that you can operate not
different let's say and I'm going to
comparing myself for quite forceful for
for Bob psychic which I forgot it but
not different what Sokka was doing the
contract explained in a malarial as a
way to liberate whether key gesture
could be so it's not that one we use
cinematic of animations we think in that
these animations are gonna be the the
they did the project himself but he
create a puddle a parallel life that
allowed these things to exist and I
found that to be a crucial condition of
it in how we operate as a way to again
agencies of contamination in but also
liberate in your own the preconditions
of the camera feature out so almost like
it's a permanent association of friction
I'd really like the notion of friction
and conflict of ideas all the time again
I'm pretty sure that many of the things
I'm mentioning to everybody is not new I
mean many architects am an insider of
operands like this the difference is
always it come to what you do with it
and how it looks what you do so the last
thing I want to show you some of the
most recent word that will embarrass
augmented fashion this is something that
we are working on developing right now
with partners in other parts of the
world and this this was way before from
a year ago before so we didn't finish it
in time but the idea was this was a
pollution mask they had the capacity to
change color according to the pollution
but also can reflect your world so if
you're smiling it would change the more
colorful color and more inviting
colorful dialogue and so on again this
was before Kobe 19 and of course today
these have a complete it's an
implication and what we did a year ago
but many of the segments and fashion
come from the an idea to produce a work
of fashion they can relate to health and
health care
this was not done out to be honest at
the would we love good card anticipating
any crisis like this one it was just
advice of people who are interesting to
invest this but there is a whole market
there's people that need fashion that
relates to health care so this one this
one is a corset if you have broken
Balkan briefs this is a little circles
but is it just bottom so you have a
shitty jacket you can buy and put a cool
button so it will be in a way to augment
your existing fashion or the same with
the zipper but these are ear plugs
I suffer from tinnitus so I had to be I
always breathe I have 24 hours seven
ringing in my ear so you have to walk
around with earplugs because I'm in a
loud place I need to put in they always
look so ugly so I thought it would be
nice to have like explosion jewelry
coming of your ears
I say we also not to celebrate your
health issues but also the way to don't
be embarrassed by them or not to hide
them so this was different versions of
that this will be for the free
Bellator's or pacemaker so you can put
it outside and you can be proud you have
a heart condition and it's nothing to be
ashamed of it this is a little bit more
tricky because there's these are color
knots to be colonoscopy bags embedded in
but again these are things that people
have to deal with it and we have to
think better way how to deal with that
this was more a more complex idea to
have oxygen best so you can have this
best that you can have oxygen in it and
we simplify the version this is probably
the one that we will prototype again all
this was poor and cold we were supposed
to do an exhibition this May but in
China the pronin with Kobe native star
way early so all this was put in haul
we'll see what happened after this but
they again the idea of this oxygen
oxygen best that you can move around
with oxygen the last thing I wanna I
wanna focus is in a series of shoes and
we working on it and that they had to do
with different concepts which is in a
strange way as much as we try to avoid
typology all the time working with you
work with shoes and running shoes and
sport shoes is included typological you
cannot really challenge that match the
thing you can
to add and amended so what we approach
is a difference in that is a scenario
one or the version that we do it is with
hair so when you wear you can over the
box you you will get your hairy shoes
and we will give you a calm and scissors
and you can customize it and it style it
to your own to your own Sensibility so
this is one of the one we're working on
it
[Music]
and the idea again is to be playful and
to be almost like pet light your shoes
could be your pets and this is there
been a lot of stories through history
then we have those things so this is how
we will come out of the box and then you
can give a different series of styles
so you can have a bit I mean you can
have like kind of a how you wake up in
the morning to kind of immortalize you
can have more like a Beatles haircut you
can have a more like a calm like you can
have like a bad haircut and if you will
be cool
and you can have a lot of fairy ones so
again we will we will provide you with
the scissors and like butchery that the
preconception of the forum we will come
with predetermination about things that
will help you how to how to do it and
you can cut it all the way down so we
were looking also the candy version our
[Music]
or a backpack that can hug you I mean
this is for people who dimensional
support or a muscular one
[Music]
oh this is out of luck teapot we also
decided insects and spiders or ants this
is for a new mural that we're supposed
to do in downtown LA but we also we 3d
printing them from doing just and and
the last one is the one that is taking
more shape this is the shoe that we are
gonna be working after this is over
which is to will recycle recycle plastic
we're working with a fairly famous
company of a sports shoe tonight but
this one will be done with recycling
plastic so we are looking in different
scenarios one is to make it literally
out of recycled plastic or the other one
is the scheme who has certain quality
will allow you to cut it and trim
plastic and attach it to it so you can
customize it so part of this is
predicated in a new console it's coming
into fashion and it will see more and
more the idea that you buy something and
you send it back after six months and it
gets recycle and reuse this is part of
some of the things that these companies
are exploring but so anyway to conclude
and I went a little bit longer than I
promised but sorry about that is I think
the warden we do in the office and where
they do as a teacher and I think we
addressed electron sigh again I think
this is a motto that I like to think
that our our cousin or sister insisted
in resistant Cooper Union does - is this
one student right one of my favorite
stand-up comedians and he says is at
first don't succeed then skydiving
definitely isn't for you so the moment
that you understand that you have to
give you your best one attempt there is
a huge level of freedom that comes with
it and I think I mean the context that
we are if anything I think it's
important for each of us to keep doing
what we're doing is Amy Morrison is it
time for artists and architects to do
what we do more than ever and to keep
thinking about how we can aggregate it's
very important for everybody to
understand that I talk in a very
different way that would have done 20
years ago this is what we do
this is what I do I'm not thinking by
any
anybody should be doing this I think at
the end of the day everybody need to
find their own path and tried to be as
transparent as I'm honest as I can with
myself and to really be find your own
way to work and to find your own lexicon
and they find that you feel now you're
contributing on and I stick to it and
don't be afraid of saying it and don't
be afraid of doing it because in a
moment like this it reminds our Seldon
everything that we do is very fragile so
you have to find your way of working
that it justify your existence every day
that make you interesting and get up I'm
going undo the word that you're
interested in doing and that they start
where first by being very honest with
yourself and to really try to navigate
your own desires and your own sense of
pleasure I think I think architecture
design need to be driven by those forces
so that's all I have thank you very much
I keep going on
you
