hi everyone thank you for inviting me
today I'm really excited to share this
work with you and maybe unpack it's a
long book so I'll try to make it very
succinct so we could actually have a
conversation because I think it really
does though this did play out for the
Marxist career since let's say 1934 when
he had his first Commission until the
last deposition in 1973 there are a lot
of echoes to today's world and I think
it was poignant while writing this book
to actually see those play out in real
time
so just for context I'm sure you all
know but still but I thought this map is
a really beautiful one but the little
red rectangle that you see right in the
middle is in fact plotted in the 1800s
as the site of the new capital Brasilia
so even that far back and personally in
Constitution this site has been
identified and what I think is amazing
about this map is that that rectangle
the quadrilateral crus which was it it
was a mission of these uh botanist
scientists and military to go and mark
that rectangle in the middle of the
country and the high plateau it captures
the three sources of the three most
important rivers in Brazil the Amazon
the South France Isco and then the
Parana which goes to the south so the
fact they found a place they could
describe with a rectangle abstractly on
a map but was considered to be the kind
of headwaters of the country and the
site of his future capital is pretty
extraordinary when you think about how a
country establishes its identity
it's landscape and I think it the way
that you see this very riverine place in
the context of this massive Coast which
was the most settled part the striving
to actually reach out to the sources of
that those amounts of those rivers was
extraordinary
so here's Burleigh marks this is just
the beginning of the book and he's I'm
positioning him in this really
interesting moment in a dictatorship the
very beginning of his career so you
Tulio vargas was a dictator of the
estado novo from 1937 to 1945 and was
president both before and after that
moment in another echo but this same
period the estado novo this period of
modernization in Brazil and I love this
image which is 1964 right during the 64
dictatorship so you know another 30
years later after the Vargas
dictatorship of these tanks in front of
what is the Ministry of the army this
art deco building which is built during
the estado novo and 30s behind it is the
tower of the train station the Central
Station which if you've ever seen
Central Station the movie that's the
building of a train station and in the
foreground in this construction image
you actually see the old Ministry of the
army which i think is really interesting
this kind of replacement of this kind of
colonial heritage into this new
forward-looking progress so that's quite
actually this is avenida vargas which
goes right in front of those two
buildings again a kind of big takeover
of the Vargas administration to
basically strike a swath through and
very like beyond house Manian way access
through the city at the same time as
other building a Ministry of Education
was being constructed just across town
also in the old center of the downtown
of Rio which I hope you know it's a very
famous building on the Ministry of
Education and health is its later name
now it's called the Ministry of Culture
it was influenced by the presence of
Makoku CA in Brazil and Argentina in the
30s as an adviser to the Brazilian team
that built this so this was directed by
the CEO Kosta but Oscar Niemeyer's
basically his first big work was being
part of the team for the construction of
this building burly marx comes to the
job a little bit late this is of 1937 to
44 so he shows up around 41 42 comes
down to Mississippi where he had his
first job doing some public plazas and
he designs what becomes and again this
has all of the producing principles of
the briefs away the roof garden and
terraces the PLO tea this volume of the
theater under slipping underneath this
tower building that is louvers on one
side placed on the other to reflect in
the north and south light conditions in
South America this is maybe one of the
most iconic images of Burley Marx which
is his gouache painting of the garden
for that building on the minister's
Terrace so it's the low volume that
projects to the south of this building
here it is seen from above and so again
this is kind of a remarkable moment in
the history of Brazilian culture not
only for the fact that a new building is
being built with the advice of Lucio
Costa that gets taken over by the
Brazilian seemeth they sent him back to
France but the Minister of Culture who
see Ron on the left but Gustavo clapping
Emma is rocking here with the dictator
Vargas showing him the new building on
the upper roof terrace and here with his
men in suits observing the sculpture
before them is only the
can do and so you can see again Vargas
and Vargas is the little guy here and
then this is compañía and their partner
who is working in partnership to create
cultures so again if you jump forward in
time in 1964 sorry this is the takeover
of the military dictatorship and the
first president Costello Broncos in the
foreground reading and the student side
behind him are the other military
leaders who will become presidents in
the years to come so this is this kind
of conglomerate of one after another
dictators who move the country from 64
for 24 years within that same building a
Ministry of Culture Castelo Branco the
first military president convenes a
group of 24 councilors who are appointed
in 1967 in the auditorium this is within
the building that you saw previously
Burleigh marks has selected this in fact
the only representative from the
architecture and design profession let's
say he's a landscape architect he's
well-known in the country has been
working since the 30s on this very
building and numerous other parks
gardens throughout the country and also
in Venezuela so here he is with Roberto
Ferrari a very important anthropologist
from Hesse Fay yema
he marries Rosa who's a author and
Mexican Rachel Pierrot is another
well-known author so certain of the
intellectual elite were selected and
handpicked by the President to serve on
this very first federal Council of
Culture beginning in 1967 so this idea
that as a design professional you might
have a voice in the formation of a new
government is extraordinary it's also
straightened to think of the nature of
that government as a dictatorship but
one in which the country has seen before
and in a country where the military has
always had an outsized role given
actually positivist
and science that came from France very
early on so there's a very interesting
continuum of military and culture
throughout time but again as I mentioned
like often we see echoes of the past in
the present and I'm always struck by
this image I was working on the book I
mean Linda's both right and wrong I
didn't work on the book for a long time
and then I didn't then I start working
on the book again for a long time so is
it kind of funny it's a long process in
which other things created interruptions
but it's always thinking but then during
the elections and you know that our new
president in 2016 a lot of this stuff
started to feel more relevant actually
and I put on put on the gas and
proceeded but this interesting convening
while president-elect of the President
Trump and the billionaires of Silicon
Valley as an advisory group was pretty
extraordinary and I think it was very
well parsed by the press and so it gets
you to start thinking like oh yes of
course
presidents always have people advising
them on all aspects of their domain why
not culture so I moved around I thought
well you know if you use just you know
maybe show it like female architect on
the phone tried that and sure enough
here she has a construction site and
some things happen is bad
imagine if Trump called you up and said
I'd like you to be on that my Advisory
Council first of all you'd probably have
this reaction like I have this can't be
real it's this person actually calling
me and another one reaction might be
like what do you mean like how could I
possibly collude in this and this kind
of you know regime which is not actually
supporting anything to do with the
environment at all in fact your
principles are completely against what I
feel strongly about Mexican people
actually colluded might be a great idea
to get things done or hang up the phone
and think maybe I can do this but it's
gonna be on my own terms and so I think
that Bradley Marx is kind of the last of
these sort of sitcom characters here of
also many of these I forget which image
source El Alamein it's as beautiful
female architect a construction seven
said I mean I thought that was things we
find but I thought it was interesting
that indeed there are these there are
these phone calls you sometimes get and
decisions that need to be made and your
principles are called a question I
thought the whole notion of what really
Marx was doing here as an advocate for
the environment for a regime that
actually was anti-environmental in fact
they were interested in kind of
stripping down forests and other natural
resources to essentially rejecting any
kind of idea of accommodating natural
systems within other agenda so I thought
it was a very strange place for him to
be and the depositions of which are 18
are very conveniently collected in a
series of pamphlets which are actually
the Proceedings of each of the meetings
sometimes every month and then it went
down to a quarterly publication but from
its inception through the 80s in fact
when the council was disbanded no early
marks worked for seven years as a
councillor but everything that he spoke
is a speech and all of the monies that
were distributed by the councillor are
captured in these journals falooda so
it's a very nice record if not only his
speeches but all of the other
councillors on that advisory board
meanwhile during this period from 67 to
73 these were the worst years of the
dictatorship in fact they call them the
years honest assume oh the years of lead
when all human rights were actually
suppressed and so I think this is also
very telling that while he was meeting
with at that table with the intellectual
elite right outside a block away in the
plaza in front of the National Library
in the Opera this is playing out
viii 69 and 70 protests of the citizenry
against the fact that culture has been
taken away by the dictatorship meanwhile
the teenager has created a council
called the Federal Council of culture so
this idea of both massive protests
occurring at the same time as this
advisory board advising the presidency
so it's a lot to unpack but I think to
do that you have to really go back to
1808 interestingly which is this
incredible moment in Brazil when
Napoleon has basically chased the
Portuguese crown from Portugal and they
flee escorted by British troops by boats
to Brazil and the king and queen of that
time at keene region set up their
authorship of their kind of Kingdom of
Portugal from an ER ruling from Brazil
in Rio so they actually have their
palace and they bring the whole court
and all of the furniture and all of the
rugs and everything there's these folks
to Rio and this image actually shows the
king and queen the queen and her sons
are in this carriage crossing this
bridge in the area of Monaco not many
soccer fans know that a famous soccer
stadium not far from the sea
they've moved to this they've basically
taken over it was given to them they
took away a had basically a kind of
fazenda or a large country estate of a
slaveholding Portuguese colonial man
who's on the outskirts of town and just
note this little gate right here which
is a wedding present to one of the
children of the Queen so again this is a
kind of incredible moment where you see
this rich landscape this incredible
weirdness of the royal Portuguese court
arriving in Brazil in this tropical
condition and moving
Palace it's incredible flora this is the
same palace you can see that same gate
that was in the painting here this sort
of platform extending out across the
hilly terrain kohada where Christo
stands in Brazil is on this mountain at
least it's not there yet so it built
until 1930 but the palace itself is
expanded and becomes the kind of seat of
the Portuguese crown from 1808 until the
son of King JA was the first king in
basically takes the crown from the
leadership from his father who goes back
to court you kind of tamp down some
revolts that are happening there and
shortly after his dad leaves this page
of the first he declares independence
from Portugal and establishes himself as
the first emperor of Brazil so he
creates an empire in Brazil which I
think he only is reigning for about
eight years or so and then his son he
passes away his son is given the title
of Emperor at the age of five and his
son pedro ii
seated here in the palace that you saw
in the previous slide reigns from that
period I think it's 1814 until 1889
which is in fact the year that there is
the revolution and Brazil declares its
independence as a new republic he goes
back to France to live out his years so
this is about a year or less before he
leaves the country
he's exiled but he's also very well
loved by the people it's an interesting
conundrum slavery ends the same year
interestingly so you can see what
happens to the palace after the king has
gone back to Europe is a transformation
of all of don pedro ii who actually
brings culture the printing press museum
and the academy's to Brazil as a way of
conquering the culture of this new place
the museum the sorry the palace is
transformed into the National Museum the
Museo Nacional and that becomes in place
that repository for all of the things
that the very curious and wandering
Emperor Pedro too has collected on all
of his journeys even including to Egypt
etc so around the world he spent to
America he spent all over Europe this is
another fantastic image portrait of dome
around the state pedro ii around the
same time in this kind of very tropical
staged portrait so the palace becomes
the museum is the kind of repository of
this incredible 200 years but hundred
years of culture of the portuguese being
in brazil it is the same museum which
you follow the news caught on fire in
the beginning of september so when you
read it in the press i think it's
amazing how poorly it was represented
how important in that place and its
collections were to the brazilian
culture psyche and imagination and to
actually see it in this long runs of
history basically devastated and the
only remaining artifact is the meteorite
which was in the entrance hall is that
of course could handle the fire is very
moving and heartbreaking especially for
a country in it
I think the critique at the moment of
the fire was that of course the
government had paid more attention to
the new stadiums for the recent World
Cup and also for the Olympics and they
were not actually putting investment
into their cultural assets it was a
faulty wiring problem in Latin fire
seizures that caused the demise of the
entire building so that sad note aside
returning to Pedro the second he
actually was an incredible patron of
this man who stood last year who's the
first that's a kind of Imperial
landscape architect of the country so
glassy actually joins the expedition
that goes to plot that rectangle in the
middle of Brazil for future sighted
brazilian for Brasilia they bring him
along as the the ecologist essentially
so he was the documenting all of the
plant and animal species along the way
but he also designs his incredible both
public and imperial landscapes in Brazil
this is the same palace Pedro's and he
creates this incredible landscape around
it which still remains and he can visit
but when you start to see these kinds of
images well as he was trained in France
under Alphonse so he's familiar with the
sort of French interpretation in the
British garden style so that kind of
fish are down angle a like that's his
his style tended reworking of unmarked
geometric sized French landscapes into
these fluid spaces you start to see
early marks in this already and said we
see just from this image and some even
earlier than this this continuity of
culture that really marks preps
represents this is the same park around
the palace around the 1920s another
important project that glad you did was
the Paseo público which is the first
public garden Park in Rio de Janeiro and
it's a restoration in fact a renovation
of an existing Park where everything was
diagonal axes very formal from the 18th
century so he renovates this in the 19th
century as this more pastoral garden
walk with bridges and walkways and in
fact an incredible palette of native
Brazilian plants never before used in
European gardens soberly Marx's career
starts in the 1930s were jumping again
in the north of Brazil and a town called
in his CFA and he's actually there to
renovate a number of public plazas very
similar to what Galatia had done in
Paris I'm sorry in Rio about 100 years
earlier
the jardin de casa for cheese very
interesting not for its formal interest
it's actually quite formal not
you know flute not much like it's later
Guardians but in fact what's interesting
is his plant palette here is to look at
both my logic and Amazonian species and
use them as the planting palette of this
public garden to actually bring
Amazonian plants and African plants of
the Nile to this kind of show garden the
formal garden of course he didn't
actually go to the Amazon he got the
plants and the water lilies and the
palms from the Botanical Garden in Rio
interestingly so it's one step removed
there was a moment when Burleigh Marx
moved to Venezuela this is the largest
Park perfect del Este his largest park
outside of Brazil I'm just going to
flash you through a kind of very quick
history this is an image of Parque the
best day in Rio again in the 1960s a
massive landfill project on this
returned from from Venezuela this is the
the Museum of Modern Art on that
landfill say this is the first part
completed and he creates the garden
around the museum building as well as
the bridges to the downtown this is the
full extent of that park it's got the
perfect of flamingos and the museum is
here that's what you just saw the last
night's imagine the extent of this
landscaping project I'm at the time
which was essentially to produce a
highway from the newly developed
southern section of the city to a
commercial downtown which also included
essentially drilling through some big
granite mountains which were in the way
to create this automobile connection so
burly marks and others actually fought
quite hard to produce a public park and
not just a superhighway so you see these
kind of launchpad these pedestrian
bridges which are crossing that highway
which brings you to the center of the
city and this is looking back in the
other direction with in the foreground a
modern art museum and looking south
towards the Sugarloaf Mountain
across Lana barbae another one I thought
I'd throw this one because this is
actually the cover image on your poster
so in the 1950s for at least the 400th
anniversary of the founding of the city
of Sao Paulo where they Mars worked with
Oscar mee-mah mee-mah to create a suite
of public gardens that were
representative of the flora of the Sao
Paolo countryside and although me Myers
canopy which if you've been to this park
Adobe AIR poeira if you've been here you
know the canopy and the buildings are
where the são Paulo Biennale is held one
of the buildings this is one that
they're to be a series of I think six
ornamental gardens that you see in this
plant and around the buildings that were
early March designed these were never
built that this one is the cover image
and in fact it's the same image as the
perspective on the poster upside if you
can see the this idea of using ground
cover and planting is this kind of
abstraction in the public landscape is a
way to bring that's the plan of the same
garden to bring this knowledge of
Brazilian flora to a public is actually
very typical of early Martha's work some
projects were never built this one is a
botanical garden restoration essentially
of the patina for guarding that South
Paulo which does exist to see it on the
right but the full master plan was not
carried out but perhaps the most
important contribution of early marks to
kind of the culture of plant life in
Brazil is his own home which is on the
outskirts of Rio very large hundred acre
fazenda with a house that he the kind of
colonial seventeenth century house that
he then renovates and he creates his
garden around it as well as this massive
structure to see bottom left here is a
some brow which is essentially it's like
a greenhouse but you don't need
in the tropical climate this provides
shade so it's a way of kind of producing
the right conditions for understory
plants that you would find in a kind of
typical forest transect and this is a
view of that garden looking from the old
chapel down the hill towards the bay
here it's really marks within this some
brow and actually at his at his fazenda
business called heaven what a Chiba and
he actually I think his pictures around
1974 so right around the time of his
depositions to the government
interesting that he never once mentions
the CEO is his home in any of the
deposition so he had a very private life
and a very public life but both informed
each other has he actually used those
plans in his designs so I'm just going
to show you a few give you a few of the
themes for the depositions if you and
I'll read a very small portion of one
but I think they follow a kind of
certain number of themes and the first
one he calls this Brazilian landscapes
is his very first client positioning his
opening statement if you will the first
deposition in 67 where he talks about
this kind of creation myth of his own
forming that he was brought to to Berlin
by his father or quite a cultured family
because his eyes were not doing so well
so the better doctors were in Berlin so
his family moved to Berlin for a couple
of years and he describes having gone to
the Berlin dalam Botanical Garden on the
outskirts of Berlin Berlin and seeing
Brazilian plants for the first time I
guess this kind I opening experience
saying I never had seen those events in
the parks and gardens of Rio we should
actually know having looked back at the
last year's work in fact those plants
were everywhere prophetically most
important Gardens so he's creating a
creation myth of this awakening but
indeed Brazilian flora and its native
its use of native plants and
public spaces it's not a new thing at
all but it's an extraordinary greenhouse
there in dalan and then a number of the
depositions really look at this defense
of the landscape as a cultural position
he looks at the via borough heritage in
Brazil and comments extensively on the
need to protect the landscapes around
these because they are as important as
the cultural heritage of the very
buildings there are a number of pieces
that specifically address forests and I
should clarify he's not talking about
the Amazon forest but rather the
Atlantic rainforest and these forests in
southern parts of Brazil of Otto Katia
pine so this is a softwood pine that
grew extensively throughout southeastern
Brazil that was being devastated and
over harvest for paper pulp essentially
and the regime was very much interested
in that harvesting process so he's very
adamant about the need to stop what he
sees here there's always interesting he
drops plant names in the Latin all the
time throughout the deposition so I'm
constantly trying to find out what he's
talking about cuz he just uses this as
part of his spoken language it's pretty
extraordinary his botanical knowledge is
vastly extensive but you start to see
how it positions the plants almost like
characters in this novel and the other
car is the hero obviously but the - like
the pine that kind of imported
quick-growing pine which is being it's
the enemy that comes in and sees the
enemy everywhere and all of its travel
since there's all of these kind of
descriptions like I was there ten years
ago but now it's completely different
there's a sign that says there this is
once a native force but now a productive
healthy pine forest and speaks about the
kind of backstory of the company that
has purchased these lands deforested it
and replanted it with pinus species a
kind of faster growing heart kind of
softwood species
and selling back those lands at a much
elevated price again his interest in the
kind of colonial interior this is the
Minas Gerais that kind of would have
prayed to and the Church of the Carmel
here he decries the fact that the mayor
has cut down the trees in front of the
most historic church in the town and
that this should not be allowed to
happen there should be oversight there
should be a council that reviews all of
these decisions and that these mistakes
are not made again again kind of always
pushing that argument that the cultural
aspect of the country is in fact
embedded in this very landscape likewise
at the pilgrimage churches Congonhas he
rips apart the fact that there's a radio
antenna that you can see from the church
on this processional pathway the palace
treads are painted in a horrible blue
color there's a lot of winching and
grumbling about things he finds
aesthetically displeasing threw out
another kind of suite of about four of
the depositions are specifically about
the book the Botanical Garden and Rio
which was established by King John Wow
and the very beginning of his kingdom
within Rio and there is an area just to
the north of the garden which is called
the earth to explore a style which is
essentially a kind of seed bank a kind
of a nursery garden for the proper
botanical garden which is constantly
being eaten away by various proposals by
various mayors of Rio the most recent
one being an incentive by the federal
government track the military
dictatorship to create public housing on
a portion of the land
or to floor style so then we start to
get into these very interesting
conflicts between in fact the issue of
housing and this influx of poor
Brazilians from the countryside moving
to the city in desperate need of a place
to live in Burleigh marks pushing back
and saying no that's where the seedlings
for our trees are being propagated
that's the seed bank of our future we
can't possibly eat away at that so you
see this conflict of conflict of both
environmental and social rights which I
think we see play out all the time now
as well so there's a very interesting
lesson in there as well that he has a
very particular lens he talks about this
is the dalam botanical garden that he
visits in 1928 as a young man he speaks
about how after World War 2 all of these
greenhouses that both Hugh Gardens and
here in Berlin were bombed and that
those countries immediately restored and
repurpose those greenhouses right away
and why were the greenhouse why were
this the grounds of the Botanical Garden
in Rio being completely disrespected so
I think there's another analogy that
he's bringing that effect their own kind
of valuable treasure a botanical garden
is is essentially war-torn by neglect he
complains about statues there's probably
like at least three or four instances
where he goes on and on about the
statues are awful they're ruining the
city just anybody's on a horse during
this statue and then worst of all is
this guy who's proposing a monumental 30
meter statue of its duster chiusa was
the founder of Rio de Janeiro in his
garden in parque do Flamengo so he's not
having that it's like this is a
horrendous thing this is a mock-up of a
mock-up of the the statue with the
sculptor here so he's not going to let
laughing his other complaint is that the
city is considering letting the Samba
parades parade through parque del
flamingo and they would cut down 60
trees fully grown mature trees in order
to let the samba school parades go by
for a weekend so he's complete goes on
and languages like who are the people
that cannot ignore the idiots in charge
who can't see that you can't just
replace a 60 year old tree so he's got
no he doesn't suffer fools at all in any
of these essays another point of
contention is the the actual granite
dome hills of the Sugarloaf Mountain are
being defaced by the company that
operates the cable car and they're
building a horrible restaurant that's
ugly and brutalist style on top of one
of the hills and he insists that both of
the complex as the hills is ecological a
complex needs to be preserved and this
is another way of keeping favelas off of
those hills which was also actually a
successful argument that he made these
were landmarks in the very same year
that he makes this speech and his other
kind of really swore point are these
these are called content sell they're
essentially like buttresses to keep the
rock from falling down on the buildings
nearby so Rio is that kind of uplift of
these incredible granite rocks and the
Public Works Department in Rio has been
creating these concrete pillars to
support the fear of that moral cheek on
top top falling down sliding down and
creating a rockslide here and then they
paint them white and he how can they do
this first of all they're ruining all of
the endemics species that live in the
fissures in the crust of those cracks at
those from granite mountains and then
they paint them white just to make sure
everybody notices it's like slapping a
bandage across our city so he has this
incredible repulsion to this kind of
work as well the last image that will
give you just a little bit of context of
this speeches is this great photograph
they found in a
Brazilian Journal which is in fact
enough of military hooter which I've
never said in a lecture exciting three
members of the military who to 1969 so
this is a transition moment between
dictators it's the king of the Army Navy
and Air Force who are together basically
operating the government for three
months in 69 and they actually are in
this very picture they are signing an
amendment to the 1967 constitution of
Brazil in this moment so in fact what's
extraordinary about that image is not
only the fact that this is what was
running the country in this room of
mirrors right and that in fact the 67
Constitution was the most oppressive one
that is then getting amended to be even
more oppressive under these men
meanwhile burley Marx is writing this
position piece about the his basic his
line edits to that Constitution thank
you so much for sending me the
Constitution for our review I have some
suggestions and so I think it's quite
interesting to see what he jumps in on
it's not the human rights or habeas
corpus it's in fact this is the one part
that I'll quote with this commentary I
hope to clarify a shift in position in
previous council sessions in which
motions were presented to this plenary
session it would seem that my position
was drawn solely from my artistic or
sentimental interest in the defense of
nature I now wish to affirm my position
in defense of human life and by
extension a collective security for
communities provided by the protection
of Natural Resources and the provision
of wise planning for urban development
and industrial areas similar pause is
merited for the edits suggested for the
sole paragraph of titles for article 180
supportive culture is a duty of the
state and then he quotes from that
Constitution documents works in places
of historical or artistic value
monuments and notable natural landscapes
as well as archaeological sites shall be
under the special protection of the
public authorities and he goes on I
would just like to clarify my
understanding of notable natural ends
as those that distinguish themselves by
the wealth of their species or their
topographic configuration but also those
that provide the ecological conditions
to protect neighboring community groups
such as buffering natural springs and
providing the recreational resources so
important for reducing the stressful and
emotional weight of urban life so this
is incredible you know he's basically
redacting the Constitution and I
actually I've read a lot of constitutes
there were many constitutions in Brazil
and I've read most of them in fact
through them the most actually through
the last one which is post dictator and
it's interesting that it does say in the
Constitution is that as far as 1889
supportive culture is a duty of the
state and that's an incredible statement
we don't have that in our constitution
and I think it's really important also
that he does have notable natural
landscapes inserted into this document
which is an extraordinary mission at the
same time he uses many of these
depositions to say wait a minute we have
a law about forestry or we have a law
about cultural artifacts and it's not
being respected we have the law but we
also have to uphold the law so he's very
cognizant of the kind of politics and
policy around what he's interested in
meanwhile as councilor and he's also
commissioned by the dictatorship in
who's now residing in Brasilia this is
post kubacheck but two buildings are
built not in the first phase a Brasilia
that operates the Ministry of peace this
one and this one the Ministry of Law and
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and he
designs the gardens for both of these
for the dictatorship which is residing
this is the kind of showpiece for
Foreign Affairs with the roof garden
there and then across the the monumental
axis is the Ministry of Law so again
he's both inserting himself as in
service of the regime as well as
a critique of that same regimes
practices this is the new Ministry of
the army which is these the one that you
saw in the very first slide in Rio of
course everything gets transferred to
Brasilia in the 60s and this is an Oscar
Niemeyer building again they worked
together on many projects and then burly
marx had a plaza that was constructed
across the street so that's the
basically the barracks of the army with
a monumental plaza and then he does this
triangular plaza in the foreground of
that and it was to be part of a much
larger scheme that would have been the
landscaping of that barracks expose the
houses in the landscape of the generals
residences to the north and again he
draws in these kind of strange
crystalline formations within the kind
of mythical landscape of brasilia as
part of his iconography within the plaza
itself so again there are many conquests
and constructs returned to these to this
he was a fun guy and so it's really
interesting to see him being so serious
and straight and his tie at these
council meetings in all seriousness with
this kind of you know what everyone has
written the books about my friend
Roberto it's all about the parties at
the fazenda and all of the dinners and
his friend the cook and so he knew how
to have a good time for sure
as I'm sure did page with a second in
his 19th century way but I think it's a
really interesting notion that even as a
fun person you can be responsible to a
kind of authority of
you know the future of your country you
know but I think it's really interesting
in burly Marxist both his his tenacity
of kind of staying with it always
working for who's in power yet still
trying to purport a message of
environmental protection along that path
which again is saying that culture is
bigger than any one regime is actually
the kind of long duration of that
summation of time so I think he's very
interesting in that regard
thank you
thank you
so how impactful was he because that's
what I couldn't completely figure out I
mean yeah he's saying and it's saying so
articulately like did did I mean you
don't even begin to say how beautiful
the depositions are the language in them
and how how how it brings to so bring so
much knowledge from so many places to
make the arguments but so how impactful
were the arguments yeah so I tried to
trace that because often he ends with a
kind of very succinct like now at the
end of this long some rambling speech
I'm going to tell you what I want I want
the bail agents of Virginia to become
the National Park and that's my
directive to you the councilors esteemed
president etc so so I traced those
statements to see you know did it work
so that particular case is about I
didn't see Brian Jeana did not become a
national park until about ten years ago
but it happened and so I think some are
very long where's the one about my sugar
lows that year became protected
landscape so some things were quick some
things were very slow I think there is
protection the garden now at the
Botanical Garden but a lot of the
comments he makes in the reductions to
the Constitution or struck so that one
that I read does appear in the actual
but most constitution but a few did a
yeah
I mean it's so different than the way
the field of landscape the discipline of
landscape architecture has been in the
United States until I would say the last
15 or 20 years the prior to that it was
really I mean for somebody who's such a
strong designer to also be so strong in
terms of science and in plants it would
be very unusual today
yeah as are usually a separate yeah
aroma specs 46 like yeah so he was
really a Pollock polymath I mean because
the project sir he's arguing for the
natural landscape or the natural
heritage and but he's arguing toward as
culture and it's such a sophisticated
position in terms of what a designer
could be or do I think and the idea that
through the design of a park or garden
what you say he is his mission is to be
able to acquaint the people with the
variety of plants or with this or with
that I mean that's like to constantly be
weaving it into culture you know whereas
in our country is it's more it's almost
always a dichotomy between old-world
arts new world landscape or whatever
like Jack so did you learn Portuguese -
we did yes in the back story like how
did the own here the Baxter yeah so we
all under the bus
yeah so I was in I was working as an
architect in a job and I thought I need
to get out of this job and it was a
great job I was a very happy person but
I could see where that could just be you
know that could go on forever so my
gonna need a way out what do I have and
so I actually had discovered burly
Marxist work when I was in Rome actually
his rump rice fellow at a tough and you
know Abbot are a magazine Italian
Journal he was on the cover I had never
seen this stuff before at the same time
in Rome taking some Kupwara classes
within sketchy Brazilian guy in the
outskirt of Rome and the
communist youth center at one of the
housing projects oh look at all they
commute little martial arts come home
and so I started thinking like huh like
my work is really shifting towards
landscape here's a Brazilian landscape
architecture I'm the architect I'm
really interested in certain aspects of
Brazilian culture and things just
started to kind of cook so finding
myself back in New York and working I
actually applied for a Fulbright so that
actually came before the hell the grant
funding which allowed me to stay longer
but essentially I had a Fulbright to go
down and study the gardens and visit
Mohamed throughout Brazil and South
America the work and I kind of used him
as my straw man to go to Brazil right it
was completely translates but of course
one of the things that one of the
requirements Cobra is you know the
language so it started taking very early
Saturday morning classes at the new
school intention program so be as nice a
mentor to learn Portuguese so I had that
a little bit under my belt before going
and then Brazil is I don't know if you
know any kids or any of you maybe are
Brazilian no we would have heard already
probably but it's a very outgoing and
welcoming culture and I think that it
also does not speak English very well so
it's actually a perfect storm where no
one can speak English they're very
encouraging I think you know hitting the
ground you I basically had to use this
right it's much nicer than being in a
country where where everyone did a build
of seed a same feeling we're naming a
country now Frances like that yeah when
you try to use your best French and you
know they still answer you in English
just to feel bad so it's pretty not like
the order yeah yeah so I did learn it
pretty well I had to get around I had to
get from place to place I met with the
office I went to the c2 I went to the
library where those protests were taking
place and went to like all of the
buildings that are there and went to all
those places they're still there as
important cultural institutions and just
doing all that stuff you actually get it
quite a strong command of the language
yeah which was awful good and I've been
writing in the 60s and Burleigh Marx in
particular is very florid and the
stanzas go on forever and you're trying
to find them like worse than now
like what's the you know what is the
point of this 14 and this argumentative
style so it was pretty hard to decipher
it was like a puzzle you know this was
like they're amazing I think but I think
it said something like that they haven't
been represented even in Portuguese that
this is your the first 3d presentation
of that oh that's crap down so I think
it's really significant I mean you have
to look at the book and get a sense of
the body of their talks and you play
down a little look like that it's better
yes inspector use and stuff like that
but he's there really and it's really
smart six numbers you know and the way
he engages arts and culture and
phenomena you change and all that and
then because we all are you important
he's such so talented you know he made
such beautiful paintings and drawings
and landscapes and you know he's one of
the most talented modern of landscape
architects in modernity and so then to
see this other side you know that an
environmental advocate I didn't find it
to be in conflict and I suppose that
could be my and I every day you know you
but I think you can't be an advocate for
everything but and it's definitely true
that designers are complicit architects
and landscape architects that it's hard
to avoid being complicit because you're
not creating the program unless you're
doing the project doesn't throw a pro
bono thing or whatever so the program
might not be quite as bad as what the
Derrell regime or something like that
but it might be not of expressing your
values and you can make it better by
what you do you can do more for the city
than the project then the institution
would or could on its own but you're not
determined and I think that he would
have had the opportunity maybe maybe the
cons the conflict is in his having
accepted to work for the regime but if
he hadn't done that he probably wouldn't
have had the closeness that would have
allowed you to serve as one of these
counselors where nobody else is going to
protect the environment so it's the kind
of question where you could say well how
you know it's he's really compromising
himself by affiliating himself with this
regime but then if he didn't do it there
would have been they would have turned
out every tree yeah and I think that you
did assess this I don't think he saw a
conflict I mean many people would have
and never left the country or were
exiled right but I think that he he was
no stranger to working with these
structures of power and I think also you
can't forget that you know actually the
regime was supported by a lot of really
smart intellectual
people on in the elite and it was not a
kind of uprising of you know the mass
let's buy any meat so there was an
innate support of the regime in a very
beginning and always had been E and the
earlier periods under Vargas so it's
it's true it was not a populist movement
by any means it had support and why I
didn't understand I just have one more
specific question and then I would like
to open it up to the audience but why
did he I don't understand why he left
Brazil during the president's approach I
okay so that's there's a look offensive
interesting once I determine carry
correctly before ya joins two minutes
there's a lot of hearsay and I my second
meters believe there should be no
hearsay in your book I did have to go
with very much documental things in fact
he was not paid for some of the work we
did at Coolio just a little kind of
suburban Enclave where couch at heavy
summer oh oh so maybe he wasn't paid he
was pissed off it at kubacheck he was
also really angry with me Meyer because
I say probably beginning with that
Ibirapuera project did not get built
I think well coach that was less of a
dictator I mean it was checking the time
that Bertha Marx works for him was the
mayor of rile Horizonte he became the
governor of the state of Minas Gerais
and then he became the president of the
country but he wasn't military he was
not this was a democratically elected
position for five years so there was a
kind of weird period of democracy yeah
that's the weird that he would leave for
that period that's what I did well
that's very interesting because he did
go to corrupt some work for dictator
there yeah so he did not get invited to
work on Brasilia and this is a it's a
misconception a lot of the literature
thinks that Burleigh Marx worked on
landscapers oh he did not he did not
work for pre-check again despite Costa
the master planner writing letters to
the mayor of Brasilia saying please
let's get Roberto on this job how could
a city that we're used to call itself a
Garden City rise without the support of
poorly marked area yeah so he's got the
full support of Costa he's mad at
Niemeyer who should have nothing to do
with him
he takes this whole office and moves it
in 56 and does amazing work this Parker
daylights there was an amazing public I
mean he made public places make for
people he made for people are amazing
places yes I mean so he says there is a
commitment to a kind of social good
benefit but it isn't it isn't about
everything it isn't global right like it
doesn't come first right
well he's commissioned
the park is commissioned by the dictator
right oil-rich Venezuela but then
actually he's Eve Falls and then there's
a newly elected democracy in Caracas in
Venezuela and underfitting core and
that's actually when the park is
executed so it's a kind of weird
transition between a dictatorship and
then it gets kind of put out as the sort
of flagship model of the new democracy
is this Park so it's kind of a funny
transition moment but he doesn't begin
working on a democratically positioned
Park by any means so then he comes back
after that after kubacheck right that's
the verdict you couldn't really follow
so congratulations
I mean it really is a work the fact that
you would have translated you know that
to think of yourself as it does
architect doing this you know like 20
years on or whatever doing a book like
this which is converted so many
territories but it couldn't be written
just like the Berlin Marx talks couldn't
be made without him also being a
designer in relation with there being
his framing that's a cultural so could
you not have written in this book
without having being a designer and I
think that's an understanding what that
is or means and I think it makes you
really point in and exciting so
questions comments
to curiosity what is what was the
relation reciprocal relation with other
this called movement they were happening
in the 50s and early 60s mid sixties in
Brazil like for example suppose go with
a keyguard sanity which were completely
involved in a kind of political project
tied to the Communist Party is wrong one
thing and another more on their kind of
entertainment sign is did he have any
relation with two baccalieri no actually
he's kind of the opposite of Tropic
Palio left the country during the
dictatorship so they really did position
themselves as anti-government it was
more bohemian he was very established as
an elite despite the fact he's an
immigrant too right so he's not he
doesn't have the long Portuguese name
meaning he's been there since the
colonists he comes later he's the
product of a German father and Dutch
mother from the Northeast that basically
moves to Sao Paulo and then to Rio so
he's an immigrant too in the eyes of the
true elite of the Portuguese descent so
the trophy kaalia movement is much more
at the kind of the artists uprising
against the regime and expressing their
dissent through music many of them
actually like literally exiled and then
there's this other kind of kind of what
I call in the book self-exile which
Niemeyer does for he's like I'm leaving
I can't take it
meanness I'm going to Paris but he goes
back and forth across the Atlantic the
entire time he builds all this extra
stuff in Brasilia for the regime with
burn marks since you saw in the last
slides but the I think the kind of
bohemian artist musician group was
really they were tolerated for a moment
by that regime because the regime really
did think that culture it would be
better to have them around than not they
actually saw them as a potentially more
disruptive force if they were sent away
in the end they did become that
disruptive force while present like they
were even giving these artists grants to
go to the US like nobody wait to see
became here on a government military
government grant so you know these
little like he's the you know protester
but he's supported by that regime so I
think that there's this kind of other
group so he's he's contemporaneous
they're a bit younger than him
but not by much not very much so that's
kind of that's one moment of course the
60s have those types of protests 68 it's
very present in those the protests about
the student who was killed in the march
of 10,000 people in Rio they showed in
the early size and then us also at the
school of Sao Paulo and Rio and
architecture they never got along and so
I think they always saw themselves
antagonistic demands me yeah like he's
definitely this there be of school
another I want to go back to something
that this started with I'm still
confused about it but you were very
persuasive in
presenting him as having a kind of one
arms-length in relationship to
horticulture and nature every day he had
to go to the greenhouse to discover the
local species and so if I understand you
correctly but he's always acknowledging
that somehow the artifice of what his
discipline is all about and as you look
at the works you know it's connection to
abstraction to root ilysm and to another
realism it has nothing to do with that
depiction of nature of them you have in
it's Saturday very author one it's also
very evident in his word
there's a the other moment in your
lecture where you show the sculptor who
wants to build a 30 meter and how
against that and so forth and yet I was
unable to capture the photo of the
dimension on the other side later and
you see this beautiful part that he did
which has those blue to this concrete
fragments can exact around them that we
love but we can imagine many others now
and you know and it's you know it's
somehow cloaked in in your message seems
to be an idea that he is using the
political messages of horticultural
nature and ecology to
we open the doors for a very particular
authorship and the rubber-stamping of a
form of modernism but I'm not suggesting
that he's not he doesn't really believe
in ecology but that that that something
that you don't seem to cover is the
persistent and perseverance of somebody
who's dogged me fighting for a type of
authorship when in fact in historical
retrospect we can stand back and say
there's nothing different than that
sculpture and what he's doing in the
face of the idea that matter humans
dominate nature and transform it as an
act of transformation without any regard
to its you know its constitutional
nature but I just wondered if these
characters yeah well I would say
definitely he knew his ecology and his
body so when I said that he plucked the
plants from the Rio of botanical garden
that's because you never had the
capability of going to the Amazon
however he did create these things
called Viagem chocolate so you'd go
around the country with this you know
white folks wagon minivan and collect
plants in far-flung places and bring
them back to the sea to propagate them
there and use them in its gardens so he
was very much a plants man he knew his
plants he describes with incredible
detail a number of landscapes around the
country that he's visited on and off for
like 30 years and
bribes how things have changed and also
connects them to the early botanical
explorers of Brazil's of the Europeans
who came at often at the invitation of
the Portuguese crown to document the
flora like the flora Brazil there a
number of these kind really incredible
expeditions and he's echoing that same
history so he knows his plants I do
agree that his kind of design vision is
to carve out of that untamed tropical
landscape something that is more
aesthetically specific and you could
call it abstract or you could call it
but he's using those same species is
curating that he curates things in ways
that would not be found in nature in
that way like he does look at when he
calls associations of these kind of
group of plants I think it's very modern
consummate ecology brilliant I mean you
don't want to get their discussions in
the book that's the last one gardening
calls yeah yeah like he said some oh
it's amazing
you know this one that starts page 263
we've got the last deposition and he
says well I mean he said so many things
like II feel like it's just remarkably
knowledgeable he says to create an
artificial landscape is not to negate or
imitate nature in this servile manner it
is to know how to transpose and
associate plants by using one selective
and personal criteria developed over
time from intense and prolonged
observation I'm grateful for all I've
learned through my friendships with
knowledgeable botanists acknowledged
their collaboration as independent
indispensable to this personal project
of the profound act of making landscapes
that incorporate the vast patrimony of
our exuberant Brazilian flora but then
he goes on I mean he says despite our
having at our disposal I've met a
selection of more than 5000 species of
trees within a forest complex and so and
so our gardens display
cosmopolitan domesticated flora and our
street tree planting is often done with
exotics I mean but the thing about it is
the discussion of Association on 265
it's super interesting because it's all
about how plant how plants a meaning is
enriched through their judge to position
with other plants that is happening in
nature through the plants compatibility
which factors of climate and complex
factors of climate and soil and so on
and then and so he's transposing those
understandings it which is scientific
but also horticultural but they're
looking at pollinators and looking at
everything I mean he's very um
he is very tuned into like ecological
orders I would say you know and how and
it mmm much more so than a tip someone
who was a horticulturalist or bond is
typically like it's really understanding
them in relation with larger
environments and stuff but largely my
question there was also a corollary that
he was also just as sophisticated in his
manipulation of material specification
yeah yeah hard stuff which is right not
to be confused fast today so I think
there's another very highly developed
sensibility in there that that is
running either parallel to it or fused
with it yes
I think because also he would use stuff
last semester when Jane and not analyzed
the bank's the Safra bank in our class
she noted she felt like all the
different materials that he used for
different materials that were
geologically of the region the general
process in a certain way so it was great
materially it's doing it with plants but
finding combinations his geometries are
super modern but how his combinations
are go back to the Paleozoic or whatever
right I mean it's something so much as
it was really congratulations I think
it's a remarkable project that you've
invested a tremendous amount of time in
and I think the fact that you stepped in
and out of it across 20 years probably
only makes it that we had really an
extraordinary mortise of things but I
think it's fascinating again I would
reiterate the points that have been made
about early Marx's kind of unapologetic
you know on the one hand his arguments
are for maybe greater ecological ideas
and issues but his actual work is super
artificial it's really didn't raise of
the artifice and I'm struck by the fact
that you were all of your photographs
are from me when my gardens were all
first planted and in some ways the
planimetric reading of the condition is
most evident and the idea of well is
this going to stay as a flattened
landscape or actually is there like an
attempt to return it to a forest
condition cannot be read how have these
sites change yeah are they is that is
that condition of the artifice blurred
by the past time fifty years of time for
sure it is I mean a number like it was a
conscious choice to only use the
archival material and the presentation
of this in keeping with the period in
which he's writing that was where those
were lodged so I think that's the quick
answer to that what the gardens have
seen over time is in fact neglect that
he describes in his depositions of his
own gardens were subject to the same
kind of neglect that the Botanical
Garden was where he describes oh but
guys who worked there now aren't even
gardeners and you can't even call them
that they basically are using the plant
label signs as
pans to throw the leaves which would be
better used as compost into the river
and then they stick the sign back
somewhere else you know like a complete
you know this humor of like what's going
on so he has our gradient yes and so I
think what it's like now - yeah l'm Ango
which is the kind of you know Keystone
project was renovated I think in 98 or
mm maybe 2000 it underwent a renovation
it is definitely it has seen the ravages
of time to a certain extent but it is
probably the better maintained of the
gardens the private gardens of which
none are in the book are incredibly lush
because those are the current Brazilian
elite who have you know eight on staff
or vanguard where's their their
manicured gardens so I think and again
like the you can actually see pictures
in the the MoMA show from 1991 when
Burleigh marks was featured as a as an
individual show they show images of the
this one the last garden here and it's
just it's like a wreck in the photos you
can see this has also been restored by
the military to something closer to its
previous you know state but you're right
there's a kind of flatness to the early
photographs of the work that is its lot
not unlike the images of Brasilia and
construction or so that kind of
abstraction impurity shows up there they
do become I mean things grow incredibly
fast and and you've had a tropical
climate so I think there is this kind of
constant you know both excess and
unruliness that happens when you see the
contemporary gardens which is more it's
more clear than the original is there
any intention for to say take on some of
the qualities of
Central Park where the restaurant yes
and the idea goes wild yeah I mean we
have all part of thinking in the Parque
del Este for example part of it is
designed as a woodland there was a
woodland when they began so that was the
kind of shading of the original those
coffee plantation so they use shade to
you know you grow the coffee plants
below the canopy for shade so that has
been more robust and would be you know
open to that kind of mad forest
management that we see in Central Park
and out where certain areas are treated
as actual woodlands and as manicured
well it's kind of a scale issue that
there's less he doesn't really have the
same interest like his interesting
nature is in this idea of Association
and the relations of the plants to each
other to the soil to the desk in
whatever bigot would need to be for
those communities to work it could be
that big but he's not in he doesn't have
that same idea of reproducing an F
natural environment in the same way but
he works with species in a way that is
engaging their what they would need in
terms of their environment
he's very urban soon I think number the
public landscapes they really are mostly
hardscape and so you find that in fact
neither paving projects and the
exception of flamingo to a degree and
even that has a lot of program to
pavement right so I think that this one
you can see it like if there's a hole
not a whole lot of plant life there even
the very first for roof garden the
colorful gouache it's actually all green
when you look at it and it's mostly you
know pavement between green raised beds
so he is there is a question I think
there's a really interesting and that
they talking about the evidence of
Brasilia so one thing is this Grady play
was the longtime at
chief of landscape architecture magazine
in its heyday comments on this fact that
Burleigh Marx is not present in the
group that's beginning like design in
Brasilia and he was like I wonder if you
would be and it's a pretty excellent
critic he said that wonder if he could
actually expand the scale of his work to
that of the city and I think it's a
really interesting question that could
this be extended because what would he
do then if you actually had to design
forest you know more if you actually had
to do something that was beyond the
scale of contained Plaza or garden it
does huge things of the pavement that's
one honestly Thanks there's still LJ
yeah yeah exactly with the moments
allotted for can you speak a little bit
about the disparity between his plan was
conceived in plan that is in the aerial
view down versus the experience of being
in because yeah you compare that in many
neoclassical plans that are
conceptualized in plan and then they may
be evidence in that way because of
prospect or not but in this case the
experience on the ground is radically
different than the the way that you can
take something that appears before one
and gain a kind of form attitude with it
I think many of his public parks are
actually incredibly flat which is
interesting the landfill is obviously as
flat as you can get it's it it's
completely filled Flamengo is all
thankful this is clearly it's of all
over the kind of you know hardscape
plaza type projects are already kind of
flat by their nature he works with this
kind of level thing he's done
very first reprojected at 4:00 Costa
which is the raised bed so he works in
this kind of pedestrian scale
choreography of movement through the
garden and often incorporates these
bridges and flyovers you see a lot in it
we're at poeira but also in Flamengo so
there are moments where you are actually
intentionally elevated in order to see
the plan so I think it's a kind of it is
telling that the their plan driven like
he does not draw he'll draw views and
perspectives but there's rarely anything
other than kind of construction details
section it's like that's not his agenda
say so they are conceived as planar with
the exception I would say the teacher
which is on a slope site and so this is
like when he has given this
configuration where in fact it's either
a basin like a rock I'm not sure which I
didn't show which is the basin lake
project in Minas Gerais or this kind of
you know the thing the plantation in the
banana plantation he takes over it
started there it is incredibly spacial
and a lot of it has to do with the kind
of you know the hodgepodge of there many
many plants that he's not doing the kind
of formal agenda of I want this to look
like a modernist painting from a risk I
but rather like how can I get the
associations to work in this complex
situation with a street running through
so that's it's very telling that you
know there's a kind of flattening but a
spatial understanding of the scale of
the body - how plant life plays out in
five you know canopy situation I think
is one of his really amazing
accomplishments that certainly has been
taken out on by some people coming out
of pen so on like that is that he
doesn't make that he's always dealing
with circulation or with movement and
program of people and other things but
that he doesn't make a single width
path you know but that it's always and
that's the painter
the aspect I guess is that he can make
ways you move but that they're always
changing you know in relation to their
adjacencies but also in relation to
their own dimension not two minutes
apiece mark what it must have been
pretty fun to draw can you draw all the
plans you really good at art dark dark
okay yeah yeah I mean everything is pure
these I mean they get more geometric
it's ya know time passes but there's a
moment of amoeba it's true it's just
like crazy yeah that's crazy
there are no SP mines in work pure art
slides
it's great for lunch thank you
[Applause]
