so in dialogue with Sam I thought I was
going to do something that addressed his
fear of interest in the full-scale
mock-ups but as I started to read the
questions more closely I realized that
there's a probably a larger discussion
that could happen here between what we
do as students and what we do as
professionals and to bring them around
to spheres of discussion
the first being around the act of
drawing and the problems of
representation which will be the first
half of this introduction and then the
second one is three case studies which
are you know buildings with bona fide
complexities on which I'll actually only
concentrate on the mock-ups as a way of
linking what I hope will be some of
Sam's preoccupations with a kind of
commercial break in the middle to talk
about the draw the analysis drawings
it'll take a little bit of time for me
to read the statement about that but
hopefully Sam you'll let me get away
with that extra two minutes
when we were students and as we were
trying to launch our practices we had no
clients we had no agency and the model
became a kind of surrogate form through
which we could make a reality out there
convincing and so with the construction
of models that are at half-inch scale
that produce models the size of this
table we were able to induce the odour
of reality without ever having to build
a building and if you look at corrugated
cardboard and its structural behavior
you understand that it works very much
like corrugated metal so there's no
difference and in doing the Western
house we realized that the corrugation
was already a demonstration of the
theorem of a ruled surface in that the
top of that corrugation in the bottom
are the same length and therefore it was
structurally rigid on one axis and
malleable on the other enabling this
thin skin to become spatial at the
moment of conjunction of the stair where
the garden connects with the living room
what I liked about this discovery was
not so much just that the undulation of
the skin but the idea that drawing in
architecture is not pictorial in the
first instance it is already
constructive you construct a drawing and
the the drawing is as a demonstration
and evidence of its build ability
at around a similar time we were working
on a project in Venezuela and I wanted
to understand better what is it that
Venezuela brings to the equation that is
not part of our own personal agency but
rather has something to do with that
comes from within the culture something
salient within its its construction
logics and we went to what would there
be their home depot and discovered
terracotta tiles of blocks and bricks
and realized that the entire city is
made up of these things except they are
covered up by stucco and stone we asked
ourselves a simple question what would
it mean to build out of that medium and
in doing so we came across the idea that
bricks and blocks are not so much gauged
by the dimension of their units their
units but rather they're gauged by the
tolerances that you bring to the
ordering of their bonding systems and so
what you're looking at here is what we
call the variable bond because we're
actually sliding between what you would
normally called a normative bond and a
Flemish bond to create variable openings
that bring the advent of light and air
into a structurally active surface again
a model and here we're making a bridge
between the act of drawing and the act
of construction and this is all
chronological in a way we are still in
my mind students trying to come to grips
with a discipline and a profession that
alludes and evades us but in being asked
to do an installation a full-scale
fabrication a mock-up for the Museum of
Modern Art one of for installation some
20 years ago
actually exactly 20 years ago we were
interested without drawings without
models without the the paraphernalia
that architectural exhibitions come in
we were interested in doing something
that explicitly bridges the gap between
the practices with the pictorial
practices of painting and the spatial
practices of architecture in doing so we
wanted to paint a flat canvas that is
made up of some 4050 panels all
identical in dimension perfectly right
perfectly plumb perfectly level but that
would somehow insinuate some variation
as you look at it frontally now of
course all of this is a an optical ruse
that is unleashed by the prospect of
perspectival games in which the optics
is actually in the service of a
different way of building altogether and
in those early digital days where
everybody was interested in
visualization we were more interested in
how digital fabrication came to change
the way that you would do plans and
sections and those kinds of working
drawings that we have to do and in fact
these flattened drawings are the vehicle
by which we did the construction
drawings and the stitched seam that you
see on the right is an offset score that
allows for the continuity of material as
you rotate around to gain a tolerance of
less than a quarter of an inch over 50
feet to create something that is quite
complex both spatially and formally in
coming to Cooper Union in part due to
the analysis exhibit that was here the
year before I arrived and also a great
part looking and witnessing
the faculty in the trenches of the
analysis studio I was completely
intoxicated by the prospect of drawing
again and the conceptual act of
architecture and how drawing an analysis
outside of the advent of materiality on
which I had been so focused would come
to rekindle our imaginations this
drawing was done after I returned from
Rome last year around this time and if
you don't mind I'm going to read here
because it's just simpler and it's a way
for you to get into the mind frame that
I was interested in st. Peter's inverted
crucifix crucification down to earth
looking up to the heavens the altar of
the Tempietto located on axis with the
entry into the courtyard of san pietro
in monterey Oh appears to be composed of
a monolithic of monolithic pieces of
marble it is distinct from the
conventional altar conceived as a
free-standing piece of furniture
encrypted into the logic of the
buildings architecture the architect the
altar is set against the outer wall
further thickening the mass of the
load-bearing structure consistent with
Robin Evans's article perturbed circles
in the protective cast the position of
the altar contributes to the effect of
multiple centers achieved in this
building and it's D centering underlines
the importance of this choice indeed the
altar is not only not monolithic but by
the inverse it is composed of a series
of thin marble slabs behind which a
cavity allows for a clerestory window
into the crypt the altar serves as the
windows frame and thus the two are
absolutely codependence if it's not
clear what I'm referring to it is
it is this moment right here so the
drawing starts right at this critical
moment and then expands up and down from
from that moment on so bear with me one
second as partial as it may seem the
sectional detail of this altar reveals
something about this building that not
only subverts the conventions of its
time but also requires a form of
representation beyond the normative
techniques of drawing due to its curious
spatial reciprocity the figure-ground
relationship between the space of the
clerestory underneath and the form of
the altar above is so tight that the
building is exempted from the poche
character characteristic of the
structures of this period if the mass of
the traditional wall is meant to provide
structural support for a building it's
also the means by which an Suri's spaces
such as niches and other figural voids
can be carved out that Tempietto does
away with this mass altogether it is
exempt from it ingeniously conjoining
the two functions by using one as the
alibi for the other the altar gives
light and the clerestory offers mass
this telltale detail of the Tempietto
also exposes the difficulty of drawing
complex circumstances that require
simultaneously looking up and down if
only to show two facets of something in
extra inextricably bound together for
this reason the small structure this
small structure offers the ideal
opportunity with which to advance a form
of representation whose purpose is not
to illustrate what is already known but
to expose the inner workings of
something that can only be unearthed
forensic ly the drawing is the result of
the flip-flop technique coined by Daniel
caster in his book drawing Barajas
exchange where he demonstrates how this
drawing type produces a beguiling form
of visual ambiguity that enables the eye
to invert the percept
the foreground and background not
dissimilar to Alice's skis abstract
cabinet casters isometric constructed
from a trifold a hundred and twenty
three twenty degree angle of projection
is distinct in its balance biased
towards the XY and z axes all at once so
the architectural application of this
technique resides in the latent
alignment between the conventional
bird's eye view looking down and the
worm's eye view looking up the latter
often attributed to choise e if the
bird's eye view exposes the world of the
roof the worm's eye reveals the inner
workings of the dome effectively two
different symbolic realms Bramante
conceived of both the Tempietto and st.
peter's basillica a few years apart
making their conceptual connection
somehow inevitable the Tempietto a
martyrium dedicated to st. peter's is a
folly of sorts and wants a model a
mock-up and a miniature building in its
own right with the gravitas of spatial
formal and linguistic tropes that
advance the discourse of its time in its
crypt underneath you can see a pit on
center with with the oculus is purported
to be the receptacle within which st.
Peter's cross would have been planted
upside down looking up at the dome as it
were in his last living moments in light
of the eventual dual shell construction
technique adopted at st. Peter's dome
one can understand the absolute
necessity of looking up and down
simultaneously because the domes are not
symbolically divided but structurally
semi-autonomous by extension even though
the Tempietto Ted the Tempietto is a
single shell structure the flip-flop
technique in this drawing demonstrates
the instrumentality of looking inside
and out side simultaneously thank you
for your patience on that now the
analysis drawing is an extension of this
the idea that
a drawing may serve many purposes going
from plan to axonometric showing the
importance in this case of the
frontality
of a large front to the Main Street the
idea that a building may be subdivided
into parts in the domestic side in
accordance with the neighborhood behind
and how the scale of that building
begins to serve its hydrological
purposes and how the massing of that may
get redistributed in accordance with
then this necessary sunlight that it
needs to gain in a deep map building it
also brings together the possibility
about how the internal grain of a
building in this case a library has
shelving that goes perpendicular to the
actual grain of the structure of that
building which overlap in a kind of
plaid ice-cream sandwich as it were
bringing you together in a cross axial
experience that is at once dedicated to
the interior of the building but also
the exterior of the building where
you're saving key pieces of the natural
heritage of the site at the end of the
day the anomalies of this building have
to do with the restoration of a tree an
existing oak tree that is on that side
and so this is as much about the
toggling back and forth between one
medium and the other now as we go into
the buildings and I'll go very fast here
I want to simply make a connection
between the idea of construction as a
research project project in itself and
once invested in the representation of
how buildings read but also the
actuality of how they're built and in
this case none of these are done in the
advanced stages of a design but rather
as seminal parts of details that become
in a way instrumental in developing
these projects in this case how the
endgrain plywood construction of the
millwork of this building are speaking
in 10
with the brick piers that run
north-south that essentially not only
enveloped the the structure but are the
insides of that structure and how the
the endgrain supports not only
structural but programmatic elements
including the railings and the guards
that demonstrate that the the endgrain
on one axis to bring light to the
northern elevation but also faces where
you want the solidity of the private
rooms that are somehow concealed on the
east and the west similarly at a
completely different scale the east and
west elevations of the MIT project as
they come to serve a different scale or
arguments about the stacking of
triple-deckers to mediate between the
scale of something that is read at the
dimension of the skyline of Boston and
Cambridge all the while while creating
the subtle folds and bends that protect
it from the afternoon Sun using the
coloration of anodized aluminum to
attenuate and extend the the visual
perception of this tower to make it look
taller going from dark bronze to to
light as it extends up the building
using the mock-ups as a way of gauging
not only the color but the fineness and
the precision of the details such that
one sees it at the scale of the of the
skyline at the scale of the block and at
the scale of human occupation up close
and this is an image of it just three or
four days ago in the afternoon Sun and
finally a story that many of you have
already heard but our engagement with
the University of Toronto in the
renovation annex
of Knox College for the Daniels School
of Architecture to look at a very
compact building within which the old
building takes stock of all of the
classrooms and the offices but the large
studio spaces occur to the north giving
it a new facade to northern Spadina
while using the landscape for additions
and engagements with the urban sphere
this is very much a landscape project
and the roof participates in this
landscape and maybe the most complex of
its construction in the sense that the
undulations of the landscape of the roof
are a what's what make it span B bring
natural daylighting into the space C
create radiant cooling above and for
enable the hydrology of the site to go
down the sides of the building only to
understand that this was purportedly to
be unbuildable by the contractors even
though we knew it was buildable it was
through much of our agenda our and our
productivity that we change systems
actually we went from a concrete to a
steel system to demonstrate how it's
buildable but also quite affordable with
the idea of the radiant panels going up
overhead rather than under bringing it
down $800,000 to make it affordable and
essentially demonstrate that there are
flexibilities within systems albeit
going from concrete to steel involves a
thicker slab with the radiant panels and
the idea that you know at that moment in
a project one is effectively in warfare
and that the mock-up is not only an
academic tool but rather a tool of
warfare to be able to bring such things
to life Sam
great so thank you very much for
including me in this experience and yes
we have to change this I also mentioned
that professor Lorena Del Rio was
invited to be with us and hopes to join
us she had something come up but she
could walk in at any time so she'll have
a part of it too
let's take a second to start
so what I'm going to present is somewhat
more narrow than that deer was talking
about but still to talk about mock-ups
basically both as we've used them here
in the building technology syllabus but
also in design ending construction using
mock-up as a method for helping to gauge
and validate the choices of one's making
in both design and construction and to
anticipate to some extent some of the
questions that were presented to us in
terms of how to manage client
expectations I would say this is sub
theme in this so so first in the
architectural curriculum there a number
of projects that have been built in the
last several years the several of you
will remember fondly and what we've
discovered is that students who learn a
variety of different things by doing
these exercises in this particular case
which I believe was not quite full scale
right
right three-quarter scale so the
students were able to put together
something that had several different
assemblies and it illustrated with the
cantilever and the marriage of steel and
concrete in different ways and the
influence of paint and a design this is
going a little bit further back
this was also a slightly reduced scale
the module of the Tokyo housing project
so these are cases where it was almost
full-scale and the idea was to get a
real appreciation for how the how those
materials go together have different
materials touch each other and how to
make those connections or allow for
movement then also quite a few prizes
have been done with a smaller scale and
that makes a lot of sense with you're
trying to really understand what's the
what's the overall assembly what how
does this structure actually work so
this is a case last year where our this
fall actually where by doing it at a
much smaller scale the students we're
still able to analyze and appreciate
this joints of how the different pieces
go together but how an entire trust
would work and how its suspended in an
interesting counterbalance way from the
verticals then going a little bit
further back this is another one of the
really exciting ones I'm glad to see
these students here so and this is a
building
library in Mexico City which is all
about hanging the entire it's an
inversion of the
typical stacks of a library which was
supported from below and hold up the
roof in this case the roof has a truss
system that holds up all the stacks and
the students were able to put together
this to really illustrate that and to
also look at the questions of how to
hang it from the columns introduce a
issue of friction then even at a much
smaller scale so this is a candela
building from the new mexico analysis
semester where they didn't actually end
up building B the concrete shell that
goes on top of this but just by building
the formwork it's an opportunity to
really examine and see of the rural
surface approach could work and create
magnificent to delightful shapes just
using straight lines so they built the
formwork and support structure and then
part of this has always been to also
document the process and keep track of
all the parts that go into both drawing
and anticipating what's built and
documenting the actual process and then
another value is as an example here
again from last fall having a mock-up
which when positioned correctly was in
the lobby is able to illustrate the
spatial and light effect of of that
design so so I included these basically
examples of a mock-up in the design
curriculum as opportunities for students
to appreciate how things go together to
get their hands dirty in terms of
actually understanding a little bit more
about concrete and other materials steel
this is a also an interesting case where
they substituted the actual material
whose the plaster instead of terracotta
but they were still able to learn a lot
about how I went together and then
finally teamwork one of the key things
about these projects has students always
working teams and that's I think
important that I understand how to rely
on each other how to work
to make and keep promises and that's
certainly something that happens in the
construction world and in design and
Studios that people are working as teams
so now we're going to switch over and
give some examples of Maca this first
one is a mock-up in a construction
process so this is a fairly standard
version of a mock-up so here's a couple
pictures of Mason putting together a
brick mock-up for some people at Cloney
where's Berg or fanatically into
brickwork and most fashioned ways of
doing things so feel closely here's the
tub with his mortar here he has his one
tool they supplying the mortar to the
brick it seems a little narrow string up
there that's the only guide he has as to
where to put it and the picture on the
right he's putting in place and then and
the next two pictures he's tamping it
together just right and he's using the
trowel to scrape away the excess and
he'll stand there and do that a long
time to build a mock-up that ends up
looking something like this and this was
an interesting experience for me because
the people at cloning rooms burger like
it's they're fanatic about bricks and in
particular the bricks in the arch of
what I call the grub bricks you can back
in the day they would actually take
bricks and rub them together manually to
get them to be exactly the right size
and shape so they go together and have
joints that were like a sixteenth of an
inch to three thirty-seconds and so they
use machines now installs to cut those
but it's still the same idea so that's
an example of using a mock-up to
demonstrate that the contractors who
were building a part of your building
understand what it is they're supposed
to do and can do it really well and so
it's very common in a construction
project to have this be one of the
requirements and it's an opportunity for
the architect in the order to say no
you've got it wrong this is not
acceptable you have to do it again and
it's a key part of the process
so then the last thing I'm going to talk
about is projects that's nearing
completion up in Worcester Mass for a
place called the American antiquarian
society this building on the right was
first built in 1912 so the lower hundred
years ago and then was expanded to the
left it's a brick Georgian building and
it's an interesting place it has a huge
collection of everything that was
printed in North America basically up
until 1876 when Library of Congress was
enacted a they still collect everything
before that but they let a growth
congress collect anything below evidence
so the original building is the
cruciform element on the right with a
long stacked and that was 1912 and the
two other stacks were built mid-century
last base was built in 1919 in the top
part in 1970 and then this is the piece
that we designed here as an expansion to
the south and then also we're renovating
the entire mechanical system so in the
basement level this is all new
mechanical equipment to serve the stacks
and the new building then the main level
is a public engagement space to sort of
bring people from the community in to
participate in what up until now has
been a blank box and the top floor is a
conservation studio so they have a place
to take care of all this amazing
collection then the section basically
illustrates on the right you can see how
dense the stacks are and on the left
every other floor as an occupy level
floor with a skylight at the top and
students a building the tackle
appreciate the footings and the drainage
Thanks so one one way of looking at
mock-up is using other examples that
other architects used as an example of
what could be possible and in this
particular case for the addition there
was a long period where we debated with
the client as to what would not just the
shape of the of the facade but what
would be on it so first we talked about
the president of
as having the names of people who are
collected within in the books both in
Paris and in Egypt and this is actually
a winery not a library but we basically
presented a bunch of examples of using
words as part of a facade and proposed
using copper ISM material and having the
names of the luminaries of the
collection and at first they thought oh
this is a great idea we love it but then
there was a big controversy about the
fact that President Wilson turned out to
be a horrible racist and anti-semite and
what if some one of the names we put
here is one somebody like that so they
didn't want to do that anymore
so but they were still into the idea of
the copper and the idea of copper being
a malleable material this is a picture
of their founder Isaiah Thomas who was a
printer and was a major printer during
the Revolution and in fact he learned to
read as a little boy just by working in
a print shop so and they still have his
original press so we decided it would be
interesting to look at having the facade
evoking that tradition of his having
typed like this and putting it into the
facade so if you look a little more
closely we had a sea of letters that
were raised in Reverse and then the name
of the society embossed as it as if it
had been imprinted so taking the idea of
the print and printing and for that we
made some mock-ups of both the negative
letters popping out and the recessed
letters popping in and examples both of
unfinished copper and then carpet that's
been treated with acid so that it
becomes patinated in advance and then
holding it up so people could see the
scale from
would look like and they thought that
was too busy so we gave up on the idea
of the font but then said we still
wanted an idea that had something to do
with traditional printing so we found
out that in the world of of printing
people always use this particular Latin
quote as the example to compare fonts so
we thought that's great well they'll
pick the font that they want and then
we'll use that as part of the facade as
well
okay so I can't get any more
so they said come on come on come on
we're this institution that everybody
thinks of as this black box and we're
esoteric and we're weird the last thing
we want to do is to have a Latin quote
on our facade and the problem is I can't
get it to move forward normal to me and
go oh I know you have to get other is it
the springs stammering yes yes I know
you have to get out of your power point
altogether where is that I want to get
out of power point you got to get a
close power point immediately sorry no
you have to find the where's the iconic
under you've got to get out of there you
can't see if you bring that out yeah
there now go go to PowerPoint and force
quit there is no option
option yeah
for squares just worry about that
yeah
okay sorry about that
that's okay
okay I think we were here there so yeah
they said this is way too esoteric we
can't deal with that so finally we just
went to their name and perforations
and they were happy with that so we did
mock up some perforations this was an
interesting experience he said what
about birds and wasps and bees and we so
I talked to her own ethology into a
insect expert and discovered that bees
would not build anything in such a
narrow interstitial space and wasps are
highly territorial so they'll be one
last living in this facade he won't let
anybody else and then for the holes we
discovered that if 7/8 of an inch we'll
have lots of problems 3/4 of an inch
will be just fine so apparently swallows
and all kinds of birds could get in if
it was 7/8 but not 3/4 so then we had
them build actual mock-ups and you can
see this is even better than what we've
done before and that's what it looks
like in the back then there's a mock-up
in the shop to double-check everything
make sure the crane is correct so again
this is a classic example of having them
build at first
double-check make sure it's all ok and
Pat making it and that's patent a ting
the perforated pieces
and then this is just last week
so one interesting thing that was we
knew that there would be some variation
and you can see there that there's
there's a fair amount of variation in
the facade from the patination process
but the guy is going to come back in a
couple weeks and do field adjustment to
make it a little more even and then over
time they've become completely unified
so we want to end with a little movie
here so so this is the guy's installing
it these basically are people who do a
lot of rock climbing
they live up in Vermont and they're
really into this kind of thing so if you
look here you see that they're using two
by fours here is a very effective way of
being able to hold things in place and
be able to adjust it then those little
tags are the things that keep the
reveals exactly the way they're supposed
to be and you can see that as they go
through here their first double checking
to make sure that everything is right
and making little tweaks and adjustments
adding things moving things around
making little tiny changes I have to
pull one out put it back in still double
check tweaking tweaking make sure all
those reveals are just right
we also originally designed the building
to go from the bottom up and they
convinced this is good to do it from the
top down so then at this point now
they're attaching and you can see
they're working their way towards us
with the drills screwing everything in
getting it all fixed
take a coffee break come back finish up
start bringing you out the next layer to
go underneath that's a coffee break
so with that I guess we're ready for
your questions
[Applause]
one thing I noticed through both
presentations midair you mentioned that
a drawing is constructed that that shows
us it's a demonstration of its
availability and it's kind of a
connection from the drawing to the
material and Sam Anderson you and
demonstrated that through mock-ups and
that are not necessarily full scale but
something that some cases they're full
scale kind of this making a promise
towards build ability and I'm wondering
if build ability has a connection where
how do you measure personally the
success of a project and this link
between making a promise through drawing
constructing constructing building I'm
curious about that leak
well yeah the drawing the drawing is a
promise and I agree totally the material
but the the notion that the drawing is
evidence of how something can be made
and it's a lot of times clients don't
read drawings very well I find even
working with people in museums all the
times they won't understand us so we
usually try to show not just elevations
in plans but having a model or a visual
representation three dimensionally can
be very helpful to make sure that they
do understand what is it they're they're
getting
I think that the drawing and the
building in the mock-up actually do
different things so in the context of
the Weston house when I showed that
animation of the of the originating
surface that is the result of a
coordinate material I meant it's I was
referring to its build ability in a very
literal way it's actually something that
the material will allow and it's innate
to it but the effect that it produces is
altogether something else and that is
what the role of the model was because
that has to do with a kind of you know a
you know let's say the play of light or
the you know the the kind of phenomena
that it produces and I think if I were
to go one more step from you know that
cardboard model to copper if it had been
copper and you know the question of
whether it would have been natural
copper or oxidized copper or all of that
I think that's yet a third step which is
is another part of a construction
process so all the while that I'm
talking about the innate connection
between drawing is a constructive act
and and building there are other kinds
of instrumentalities that come along the
way and each one of them is a design
moment or a moment that where decisions
diverge actually and we've actually had
the argument about oxidizing
or not oxidizing it because also if I'm
not wrong if you let copper alone right
now
it won't go green because there's not a
mr. green
exactly that's so and then and then how
far you are oxidized it it you know go
dark or purple is a different part of it
so I think these are also like at every
step you're you're forced into other
kinds of instrumentalities and I think
the the drawing to form one is just one
of those moments but I guess my right
with representation has to do with the
the knee-jerk polarity that brings
everybody to make a picture of something
as if the picture is the proof of
something and and I like to think that
there's other things that architecture
produces and somehow it's it's those
other disciplines that I'd like to
invoke so I have a question to connect
again your part in academia with your
office practices and it's this idea of I
feel that in academia in school there's
a lot of inventiveness and inquiry and I
wonder how these ideas also impregnate
your practices
lots of these said that we can't sure
yeah I mean I it's interesting some
somewhere architects manage to start
their practices in a way where they're
being inventive from the beginning and
other architects maybe don't pull that
off quite as much and once that happens
it's harder to make that happen again so
so it's it's valuable advice as you're
starting a practice that you you know to
to try to be as inventive and creative
as you possibly can when you're starting
and and I found that you know some
fights are much more willing and open to
engage in that kind of dialogue than
others and I tried to steer more and
more in that direction and another way
that I've done it I would say is hiring
creative people and trying one of the
ways that I see a relationship between
my breakfast and Cooper is like who was
you know filled with very creative
students getting advice and suggestions
from people so I took they sent that I
can't I try to run my practice that way
as well so that the people in my firm
are all and the position to be creative
I'm counting the projects I I presented
I presented six or seven projects and
and I'm not sure about the question of
him inventiveness you're the one who
you're the critic I can't you can't sit
on the stage and say I'm the inventor
you have to say this is inventive work I
don't know but I can tell you that the
commitment is to a project and the
project is at once methodological as
well as drawing out certain
sensibilities that I either have to do
with certain operations or or
radicalizing certain media but I hadn't
designed that this talk with that in
mind but I just realized that out of the
six seven projects every single one of
them has something to do with either a
folded or undulating surface that does
something in the service of something
else the undulation of the corrugated
copper is in the service of a staircase
that is allowed to enter from the garden
to such-and-such the folding of the wall
at MIT has to do with the Sun from 1:00
to 3:00 p.m.
the undulation of the roof and in
Daniels has to do with the span and and
you know the other alibis that I entered
into there the folding of the roof of
the Adams library has to do with the
kind of singular surge of water the
hydrology towards the back all of them
get couched into you know different
contingencies but the project's you
can't hide the fact that there's a
project that underlies them and that
project is a kind of red thread that
goes well in this case from 20 years ago
till today
and for me I guess if there is a a focus
on the question of inventiveness it's
also a question about how you define
your research now or in the next five
years
and what's the lifespan of that research
and does it have enough legs to to to be
imagined and cultivated through
different scales different media and
different vitality so I I guess that
what you're saying is that in every time
you get a new project with a different
client there's always like a your
personal agenda and research interests
try and you know speak in there behind
all of it trying to push I think that's
true for any architect actually I just
think that possibly it's more vocal in
in some people's work than others in the
sense that it's either much more clearly
articulated and in others it's more of a
kind of stealth background yeah I'm
sorry well another way of answering the
question is like an invention can be
about using material a brand new way or
with an Egyptian shape or how things go
together but invention can also be just
inventing a bunch of spaces that are new
for people so that they can do what they
need to do happily in well so in that
respect that's something that we would
always try to do plate like when a
client comes to you and says this is my
issue this is my problem this is when
you make sure that you're inventing the
place for them to succeed there's
another dimension to your question which
interests me that for the most part I
think that architects transform they
don't invent I think they're elements of
the candela show that are very inventive
because they've never been done before
but 99% of what I showed you is about
transformation I think there's maybe
only one inventive moment in there and
that has to do with the variable bond
because that had not been articulated as
such ever before as a seamless tectonic
but the rest of it is always uses
convention in some way or another as a
crutch to make it go the extra leap so I
mean if you're interested also in the
the advent of invention it's a very
difficult thing to do whereas
architecture no matter how you are
working invariably invokes and is in
conversation with you know a world of
current conventions out there a history
with with certain consistencies and
patterns or certain cannons against
which it is revolting do you find that
your expectations on how you approach a
project in studio versus
it in practice changes your own
expectations I'm not saying the
project's expectations or the clients
expectations
well I mean I tried to approach students
in the studio open-minded leaves like
what are you doing what's what are you
trying to do here and then to respond to
say whether I think I see that they're
arguing what they're talking about or
not so that and that's not say my
expectation is that they should be clear
thinking and precisely the way they talk
about what they're doing but it's not
like I want them to do anything
necessarily
I would I would claim that the world
that I built in the office and the world
that I try to build in in school are
very similar to a fault and maybe this
is the reason why I tend to fail in both
arenas I don't get what I want in school
and I certainly don't get the kind of
presence in practice that I would prefer
but nonetheless I also think that
whatever you decide to do this is one
theory anyway so take it or leave it
one theory is that you you have to do
what you have to do and if it transports
you to what the kinds of things that
opportunities that come your way all the
better and if they don't it just
you know that's what you that's what
you're interested in doing it so do it
and so to some degree I'd rather not
build more or not grow a large office
but if it means that it is able to
expand on a certain territory that is of
some kind of conceptual interest just to
that to that it to the extent that that
is valuable I would also love to grow a
school where
the students research becomes a a more
present and visible aspect of their
growth during their five years and I
recognize when I say this that a lot of
what we do are in undergraduate programs
are so foundational that to call it
researches is already huge leap but to
the extent that you can build in your
own trajectory a narrative that builds
from last semesters project into some
other thing I do see a huge value in
that to the extent also that we
artificially try to do that in the
construction of pedagogy's but sometimes
we try to build on the last semester
sometimes we try to cut the umbilical
cord and do something completely
differently but there is something to be
achieved that can only be described in
temporal terms
can I beg you to be inconsistent
[Laughter]
[Music]
education I think that their receivers
and more recently
the reason he said their goals are
different why there will be underlying
the person metros ferment architectural
principles point of view the question I
think that why are you here in school
that go with these if you had what you
go one these for you to learn a ton of
things
[Music]
had not had the experience that you
don't have the knowledge of and if you
have to require that what here at the
same time reducing some now what similar
is reducing so but there's also a very
rigid or thing
which means that maybe the previous
semester may not be of any
to you at that moment or do you need to
doing the next magazine for people if
you crazy Oh Jennifer to them
so they're it's not in the American
suspenders
equation from one year to the next on
semester exits ethnicity but overall if
you know what you got strategy some
pretty signals have to do with education
without prior knowledge through research
for making so many different ways so
testing the drawing of the model making
of the mock-up and many other things and
the reading and the writing and the
sketch in the computer and then
hard-line its interest in transition we
made sort of the in practice but
practice of a lot of other constraints
and other things about the inventiveness
that the invention is overrated it's a
fashion it's a mode of everybody's
fighting been inventing
and very few things have been invented
in the history of humanity they happened
every 500 years you know there's an
invention or something like that
in architecture certainly they go by 500
years so the question is that it's not
about us
Jaka Oregon very clearly shown me
comparing their genome or Rimini Rimini
seem that one that was you know the big
gestures have been using at somewhere I
mean he was tortured and I'm very
excited tortured so slaughter gesture of
it in the end the one that made the big
changes architectures being a permanent
Indian so I think that there are
different ways of contributing without
dream as a conventional original the
question is what are things you do and
when you're in practice you have your
principles your
but you have to fight for those new
words
after it nothing Moria has done that a
long time ago with great success so what
were they
Christian right there plenty of examples
of that history but you have to do those
local strains have tried to make a
change
you know I've tracked it to a form that
by for many would make to be concrete in
India trade with you know which doesn't
that stuff and then she brought him then
acoustic and then and then it all those
times is it the same is it
I have a response Taiwanese you know
what I'm saying about issues when you're
an architect and your aperture teammate
when a probing kind of that you know
Jesus sends you and I think it's great
that you managed to do it but then it
becomes a correlation if we didn't form
in relation to my serial DJ's you were
talking about those kinds of things here
so what I want to just to wrap it up in
a second is that I think that they're
both words connect architects have the
old meet back here but I don't think
education should be imitating an office
as you had the rest of your life for
that way when you're escorting
opportunity to really re-inventing but
put forth for your yet energy and
creativity which are form that we take
without the kind of constraints that
there we have situation of and so I
think your point is well-taken but it
also merits some clarification first of
all it also depends on what hat we are
wearing as we sit up here
note the hat that I wear as an architect
which is what I'm trying to present here
is different than what I would say is a
deep in that sense I agree a hundred
percent with Dianna in the sense that I
think that the world of practice is so
limited and actually so pathetic often
that it's not even worth pondering
because what we can do in school has so
much more intellectual latitude in its
capacity to transform practice in the
future rather than submit yourself to it
so I do think that there is a necessary
gap that we need to create in order that
we have the space to become rather than
the space to accommodate for the
practice that is out there today so we
always like to say in these admissions
events we do not merely give the
students skills because that would be a
very myopic vision about what education
can do but rather to prepare them for
all of the uncertainties out there in
the world
such that it's their mind their
intellect and their ability to improvise
under the diarist of circumstances to be
able to insert design as an instrumental
function in society the part that I said
that about what I do to a fault is the
fact that precisely because I treat my
office so much as if it's a school
studio scenario I actually cannot share
that with the clients one because I
generally don't like clients they're not
productive very rarely are they a
productive participant in the process
and that is not a blanket statement
it just is you have to know when are
they productive and to what extent gee I
don't see the idea that we design and
then build as a productive dichotomy in
our case we build therefore we design
and therefore none of the experiments
that you're seeing are the result of
design
think rather they are there's a kind of
interactive relationship between
conceptualizing building phenomena and
representational phenomena in that
moment in that seed that you're planting
out there so let's say the professional
world does not tolerate that because
they have a very well structured notion
of what happens in schematic design
design development you know CDCA and so
forth and so on and then also given the
limits of my experience in professional
offices I have been saved from
professionalization and so I see
professionalization is a four-letter
word because it produces patterns of
behavior and ambition which are woefully
thin in terms of what I would want you
to have and so to some degree while I
think of everything in practice and in
school as necessitating productive
constraints it is also important for you
to know how you define those constraints
to know what hurdles you're you're
crossing so so in terms of the I forget
the exact word you use but the
relationship with the client the ones I
hate so I I mean I endeavor to have
clients that I can have happy good
relationships with so then that leaves
that most residential pressure exit just
because it may need to say why yeah so
when you have people who want to design
a home for them and it's an individual
home as opposed to housing you
inevitably get thrust into the position
of
sort of the therapist because they'll
have disagreements and misunderstandings
between each other that you have to
reconcile so so I avoid those at almost
all cost and and I've been fortunate to
have mostly clients who are
institutional people people in museums
or libraries so when we're having
meetings talking about things we're
talking about their work and it's just
much easier for the people to make
choices about their work life is to make
about their personal life that's a lot
of times though again the residential
circumstance people are talking about
who they are and how they representing
themselves to their home and if it's an
individual house or home they tend to be
high income and so they're very entitled
so it justice becomes problematic in any
case for me have an initiative client is
a wonderful thing and I throw myself
into learning who they are what it is
they do why it's important to them how
it reinforces say the mission of the
museum with a library so that I feel
that what I'm doing is serving a greater
purpose and that if they're if they're
good clients they will also be very
stimulating and tend to challenge me in
ways that will inevitably make the
project better it's it's like it in
school can I ask you to refrain what
you're saying because it's too polite
but it also it brushes everything under
the carpet sometimes I'm busy and so
could you draw out the complexities that
they bring and how they make it more
interesting because I could do the same
to say that oh I have great clients and
all of that but I don't want to paint
that pretty picture that I want to I'd
rather this form become about how you
unveil things that are not immediately
visible to the eye
sorry that's okay well something I've
noticed a lot lately instant in an early
phase of design when you're you come up
with an idea and you're presenting it
and you're with a bunch of people who
even if they're in an organization
that's not their home they still have
different things going on different
ideas and so they'll get into arguments
and disagreements it just be confused
and what I find myself having to tell my
staff just let them be like this let's
let them we have to enjoy the process of
their struggle to to figure out how do
they articulate what they need to want
if they haven't figured it out so you
have to give a certain amount of time
and energy and you have to coast you
have to without saying look I've done
this five times before all the times
before this is the way you should do you
have to give them suggestions so that
they can see those and come to them that
closer it is because I'm looking at my
screen and I'm saying why is it that I
hate these clients so much so let's take
a case study mit is not a client it's 70
people represented by you know 13
different into interest groups working
for mi t--'s office of the president has
one interest for the School of
Architecture is a different one for
Mateen co that are realistic real estate
branch is a different one the forces of
the city of
which are another one and then within
the building there's about ten other
constituencies that you have to serve in
their programmatic needs in their your
attic needs and so forth so a lot of
while the building is relatively benign
in my in my estimation and and very
contained in its expression at the end
it's it's a manifestation of one's
ability to bring consensus to a very
complex situation which would otherwise
not be possible and often and this is
the difficult part because we don't live
in the world of the 1940s and 50s we
cannot actually bring conceptual clarity
to a project because involving
collaborations across communities
involves forces that a contaminate the
design process B require actual
inclusion if you really want that and
you have to accept what they're bringing
to the equation and what you need to do
is actually incorporate all of those
ideas but within an architectural
strategy that yet you may be the common
denominator between their warring
parties to the extent that one
identifies in a client like this
hundreds of holes
hundreds of inconsistencies and even
ethical doubts of your own that I don't
want to represent this client and yet
here I am I've made a deal with the
devil
doing it right now one by that time by
the time you know who they are you're
deep in the well and you're having to
make in my mind some pretty difficult
decisions about what constitutes
integrity in the context of the delivery
of something that is at once in any way
a contribution to the discipline and
second something that contributes to the
well-being of a client in ways that they
will never imagine because they don't
obviously you don't talk about beauty to
a client
that's just not part of the discussion
you can't talk about pleasure
because that's not that's not what
they're asking for in a way you know
everything that you do is kind of a
anything that you do that's good is a
surplus to the kinds of discussions you
would be having with that well I mean
there might be a scalar difference there
okay I mean it's like if you for a big
project for a big university in a big
building yeah there are all these
different entities that way in that have
a finger in yes so that's important in a
much smaller scale project they're
hardly there still more than one or two
but it's it's easier to talk about
beauty no sir yeah okay that's fair idea
conversations all the time
and making a building is what makes
being a being in practice and being a
teacher at a school quite similar you
know it's to say that it's not just one
conversation all the time like one
conversation and yet it is your voice
all the time so one's own agenda I think
needs to be clear and that thread of
penny survived the onslaught and
practice of multiple pressures constant
dissonance
you know claims and advisers and legal
entities and zoning
being in school I think is about kind of
practicing for practices practicing
understanding those multiple pressures
and how your own agenda had established
a thread through them you know I think
so much of hopefully what I hope we do
here for you is to not prepare you you
know not to prepare you for practice
their skills so much as preparing you by
helping you to practice that process
about going through a design project of
recognizing its multiple
it's multiple questions it's multiple
problematics as multiple pressures and
agencies
and you do that ten times it's not a lot
of times but you do do it ten times
and so it's too
build stamina intellectual stamina
creative and understanding of your own
desires and obsessions
you know and I think that's a similar
thing to what we do in practices one
recognizes
desires through multiple range of
projects
[Music]
bring us questions
some of which are articulated with the
client and some
so let me ask you a question that I
think you invoke
or anybody else but somehow those
strategic choices that you're making
constantly have belong the way in my
mind must have something to do with
architecture as a
I'll give you that you take it off
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
experience
is to
there's debris
[Music]
[Music]
assignment requirements
there's something
three
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
and you know
[Music]
I mean it
[Music]
and recently I know that we should
stewards
and I was reminded by the top of a
sentence that grossly used in describe
the work all out of course
and characterizes most war in control
another theme of moral intuition for
centralized an entire year at that time
and it has to do with the novelty comes
out from an intellectual intellectual
encouragement able to befriend and that
also has to do with the fact that it is
architecture among the most influential
tribesmen exact or changing
Morgan it even if they're being ignorant
the point of the building
Bernard order for me does that novice be
able to change so I think that you have
to present
you are no different kind of thing
this one has but it was a very important
thing two more is fundamental but
he could have missed all of positions
forever they're recognized inauguration
as something that engages in social time
he joined the natural Department in fact
Department telephone
unless you're way too bright individual
sport for me to call the airport
platform all the different agencies that
are
and get the first to be that of
practices
our inputs and then the question of
 and who do it
other culture
the nature's fury
are you the person
everybody
not image
semester any teacher
whatever he has probe there
maybe
other
if anything it's all right but it was so
far
how many think I would like to bring to
that discussion if after you've sold all
its problems happy satisfied all of the
clients request after the response was
not a piece of art because that
architecture is something else as a
service as something that transcends the
terms of the request better away and if
you can best in any form of research or
[Music]
[Music]
there's enough
here
come on
now
[Music]
aside
or your computer and your work in there
first
music right here
one thing that hurt your thoughts
Oh
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
in hotel or
in telling the school neither government
nor story by advocates treated by other
other industries and profession together
a practice of other speakers
never
there's something about
conventional relationship education
practice
the dollar cents
it's
and it's right
