and I'm very very moved I'm going to
send this to my mother my mother loves
not there very much I'm Emma's jealous
so maybe when she reads this coming from
mother she'll take me more seriously
mother thank you very much I'm very
moved and I'm also very honored to speak
from this podium from Cooper
it's Cooper that has been speaking to us
about architecture for very long
reminding us of its importance through
tenacity through looking closely and
carefully at its politics at its role in
society so it's very humbling for me to
speak to Cooper I'll do my best as nada
mentioned the title of the talk is cyano
metrics I was also told to dim the
lights so that they say lecture there we
go
[Music]
are you hearing me well by the way
during his travels in latin america
alexander van hopper would carry with
him this device called si an ammeter
it's made out of 53 swaths of blue and
every time he would arrive to a location
he was fascinated with mountains and
dissections in particular he would pull
this out and measure the exact swath of
blue of the sky at that point these
documents ultimately came together in
the canonical book cosmos which was in a
way the establishment of geography as a
field but also a document that attested
to the ability of every location to be
measured in relationship to universal
principles it cosmopolitanism of sorts
that geography as a field has forgotten
but the idea that when you go to a place
you measure its flora and fauna and your
document you draw carefully every single
feature and usually he would put
architecture in those pieces that are
grounded and then to attach to the
specificity of the place he would turn
to the sky and would register what the
polar blue was eventually he and fellow
geographers were completely abandoned
this tool because they were discovered
that the blueness was not so much
affected by the density of the air or
the specific humidity of the place but
by other impurities in the air which in
the way falsified the documentation but
there is something very beautiful about
the idea that the sky as universal and
sheltering as it is of the whole world
has a certain specificity connected to
place and the idea that we would turn to
the sky to measure specificity of the
ground is something that has always
appealed to me as you know that
architecture could play as a way of
bringing architecture out of its mission
to be grounded or out of its placement
by other fields as the measure of
locality to also be reaching out to
universality in some way and the idea
that it would be a shade of blue at once
detached from the sky at once within it
sometimes when the Sun would set the
blue will stand out but when it doesn't
the blue will disappear in the sky that
quality that duality that architecture
could play still preoccupies me as
mother says it verges sometimes on
obsession
I would like to lay out the terms of
this cyano metrics of how we can measure
architecture in relation to the sky or
how can we situate architecture within a
larger global setting in which it is a
present at once connected to the
locality but also detached from it
making those bridges between a place and
the rest of the world the main
protagonist of today's story is the city
of p+ located north of beirut a
population of about 40,000 100,000 put
its suburbs not a very big city but a
city that has grown very chaotic ly
since the war and yet because of its
World Heritage status its downtown and
the historic site have been preserved
and as a result of that has managed to
maintain both economically and in some
respect it's in urbanistic ly higher
quality than other cities in the region
becoming more kind of model for other
cities to follow
in the foreground here you see the
archeological sites that have been
excavated since the 1920s
and remains of the Ottoman axis in the
city I don't know if I have a pointer no
pointer I won't need the pointer I'll
use my finger and this is the
archeological site with a very iconic
old house that is used as storage for
the archaeological finds
[Music]
and this is the view of the city from
its suburbs kind of sporadic
construction rather chaotic interspersed
with agricultural fields here and there
[Music]
the city thrives lot on his on tourism
both historic tourism and religious
tourism and in this view you see the old
harbor with restaurants around an
attempt kind of shy attempt at
attracting international tourists I love
the name of this place which combines
different languages from French English
and Spanish to describe a location and
then the religious tourism that has been
on the map recently especially in the
region this is a crusader Church that
has been transformed at some point to a
mosque in them back to a church with the
iconic veiled women visiting so showing
the kind of plurality of the culture and
here Roman columns with a umayyad mosque
in the foreground bieber's has tried to
build on this historic tourism and
religious tourism to attract youth and
other to listen there's a very famous
festival in the city every summer which
has been attacking international figures
I don't know my gorillas very well but
for those of you who know the gorillas
it was at the biggest concert that the
gorillas took off their masks for the
first time so bid was made history yet
again at that once the city has been
mayor of the mayor accumulating
international funding and support and
actually thanks to the fact that these
mayor's do not oppose each other's
agendas but build from them it has map
it has managed to create a certain
thickness in its urbanism and value that
people notice when they visit but people
are not visiting and they are waiting
still for the tourists to come given the
situation in the region and there's a
sense of wait-and-see a kind of
heaviness in the air that gets lightened
up by the occasional summer activity
that happens along the coast
[Music]
the other protagonists are the City
Municipal Board and here the a picture
taken in 2012 of the mayor with his team
who had been my clients since 2011 very
dynamic group again a group that
provides continuity more than disruption
from one election to the other and here
standing in front of the world Christmas
tree they over decorate every Christmas
I'll come back to that and try to win
awards in terms of the best Christmas
tree decoration ever this year they just
put up their Christmas tree it's as
horrible as the other ones in 2011 we
won a competition for the byblos Town
Hall the competition was anonymous
it was also open anybody could represent
and peculiarly it was in black and white
our competition entry was the site was
on the highway and we thought that was
ridiculous but we went in ahead and
presented them three volumes three
abstract boxes that look like they could
be from the castle on the sea or not an
office buildings with gaps between them
spanning over a park that would continue
underneath the building an existing park
that we managed to carry through
underneath the building the reason the
competition was in black and white we
were told was because some of the
members of the jury were professors and
the public universities and the public
universities there is still a sense that
printing and color is more expensive
than black and white so if you make the
presentations in color that means we're
excluding a group it's kind of equity
logic in black and white but what I will
present tonight will be how
from the kind of black-and-white
presentation to a colored material
presentation and how we actually built
it but how we are which the actually
over the years working with the city
went from building the Town Hall to
helping them in defining the waterfront
of the city and also the master plan for
the whole region which are currently in
the works in doing that I'll try to
elaborate more on the project of silo
metrics and elaborate on it from
different measurements different scales
different attributes from the idea of
the relationship between architecture
and geography how grounded is it and how
detached how much part of the writing of
the surface of the earth versus part of
its description and how do we calibrate
that relationship through architecture
how architecture itself becomes the
cyano meter by which we measure it
geography I'll also talk about how
architecture in its commitment to being
an object can still maintain that
distance iation this displacement from
the place it's in in order to at once
keep you there and take you somewhere
else and again how do we calibrate that
our architecture in its containment of
the activities in it provides a certain
intensity of enclosure but an openness
for life to happen within as if it is
providing another sheltering sky at the
smaller scale how much does it relate to
life and how much does it leave life
alone and whether that life can be free
and how much do those surfaces of
architecture the surfaces which includes
but also which communicates within the
materiality and then there some
symbolism are able to maintain that
communication level both at the local
and that the universes scale so let me
start with a geographic aspect and I
keep the - there because etymologically
geography is about the writing of the
surface of the earth and that could be a
passive from a description or an active
form a fiction an active creation of
that surface the site as I mentioned
earlier is on the highway actually in
the interchange of the highway and the
idea was that the city wanted to move
from being can you see the cursor I have
a matter the site for the new spot used
to be here then we've temporarily to a
site here and now it's on the
interchange now the idea in this book
was because many of the citizens of the
city that had been displaced by the
archaeology but also by the tourism that
happened here and living elsewhere could
find in the spot the kind of central
spot it was an act is a Baalak act of
resenting
even though practically it wasn't really
a good reason Turing because you were in
the middle of the highway
which as you know becomes a very
Islamist no-man's land rather than
everybody's learned the idea that a
building could actually play a role in
resetting or restructuring the
relationship of larger territories has
been a project in our office for a few
years actually our first project 1998
the housing for the fishermen of Tyre
was exactly about that the historic city
would have to decide where the fishermen
were living in an honorific and the area
and with the passage of years they could
not live there anymore so they had to
move out built in an agricultural
terrain and their own one which would be
broken down by new laws into smaller
parcel Asians and their site was the
last remaining bastion of the
agricultural scale and so our idea for
that site was that we would preserve the
scale of the agriculture and turn it
into the communal scale for the
fishermen displaced from the sea and try
to recover in the scale of that sense of
community so you can see the difference
in grain between the building of the
housing and the neighboring buildings
around which are now either tobacco
fields for banana fields but neither is
slowly eroding and being replaced by
buildings like this one in that sense we
tried to give a very urban exterior by
the kind of safe haven on the inside
with the remnants of the scale and
character of the agricultural train
before a registry that same idea of
architecture as a register we applied to
the project of the balloon in downtown
Beirut where after the erasure of the
ruins in order to create larger
processes for 12 buildings there was a
period of temporary uses of those
processes and we tried to maintain that
emptiness by clearing the surface for
that helium balloon operations but also
using it as a train for public activity
and in doing that we also showed through
the adjustment of the terrain to
accommodate for the balloon how that
gland is made out of many layers by
peeling off the ground and tucking
underneath that the activities and the
entrance to the balloon
but in doing that also we proposed that
the ground could be no matter how
shortly be given back to the city as a
public domain and for a very brief
period it succeeded at that
this idea of writing the surface emerges
also in this project never build for a
house by the coast in the Aegean where
in order to preserve the trees we move
the passage between them and that
passage became the house and in doing
that it inscribed the particular way of
living but also a particular passage
between the trees to protect them and
that became the architecture but it
means when you look at it from the sky I
have no idea but it does that read as
writing and then these projects
currently under construction the series
of apartment buildings that have been
carved into the hillside which is very
difficult to do because usually you
either carve the whole hill or you
Terrace it and we managed to carve them
in and reconstitute the hillside as a
way that the buildings become in
themselves the register through the
series of punctures around them of how
they calibrate the slope and how they
measure it at the same time another form
of writing came in this installation in
a man another obsession of mine is
watermelons and in this case we design
the landscape out of watermelons working
with the local watermelon suppliers who
stack up their water balance experiments
but here we made it the landscapes of
Seven Hills like a man built on seven
hills miniaturized in an oval space in
order for it to be both a leisure space
demonstration of how everyday goods like
watermelons become art but also a
miniaturization of geography through
that scheme
[Music]
but perhaps the place where that
connection to geography becomes
strongest is in the cities of houses
which were built on the coastline north
of people's for a family of siblings
that live there all together over the
summer and using the houses as a way
both to recover the landscape and
reconnected with connecting these two
very different terrains and very
different topographies that have changed
over the years and using the way we
manipulated the land parametrically in
order to work on specific variables
visibility so that no house can see can
no house can be seen from the scenery
but also that they would be blocking the
views from the side and recovering
continuity of the landscape so that the
houses can be very hardly visible from
the from the street level except for the
little turrets and much more open from
the sea level and there the architecture
retains holds on to its geometry its
specificity is topological I was an
archetypal rigger in the sense of
world's retaining walls and turrets and
courtyards but at the same time in order
for these houses to exist the geography
is reconstituted continuously as if it
has always been there and these are the
houses encrusted in the land another
aspect of this project that we tried to
do is in reading Vidal about the
Mediterranean he describes it
beautifully as being the meeting place
between the olive tree and the palm tree
and so we treated this site as exactly
that bringing the olives from across the
street and the palms from the sea and
covering the ground with a kind of
indigenous shrubbery that blossoms late
in the summer but using those paths also
the historic paths that existed on the
site to stitch between the two and here
you see the kind of way the landscape
was formed almost as a sheep grazing
between the trees some of the historic
eucalyptus trees than the olive trees
and here the
making the punch board l would have been
happy
but back to the person we were faced
with a sight that I would say had no
geography had no sight in it an island
in the middle of nowhere that
technically the depository of gift after
gift of sculptures and god-forsaken
objects to the city because they would
seemingly be hosted there in the part
but nobody would ever visit them and
here the danger was that the
municipality will end up being yet
another one of those hideous sculptures
and you can see the access to the site
was so difficult and yet its visibility
very strong you would never know how to
get there even though you see it from
everywhere and so we started working
with the city and realized that that
chaos is actually spread all over the
city the city has grown immensely and
actually never had the master plan done
were executed since 1958 when Michelle
akasha proposed the actual highway but
based on land uses that word strictly
archaeology hardly tourism them and
agriculture this was built in 1958
compare it to the images I showed you
now and this was the waterfront which is
almost archeological not touristic and
so we resorted to the idea in this case
of operating not by trying to provide
clarity at every level but trying to
identify within this chaos a series of
figures in a kind of over determined
field and using the key request of the
city for clarity of anthros and
transportation the waterfront port walk
key public spaces and entrances to the
city and the town hall itself to
inscribe in a kind of chaotic landscape
a series of identifiable figures that
you will be able to pull out of the
larger chaotic terrain in order to
relieve the pressure on the interchange
we created two entrances that exists but
highlighted them further we also created
a loop under the highway that would come
in the new cities with the series of
sites that would become public parking
and significant public buildings on top
of them or commercial sites along so
that that site would also be used for
public transport if free shuttle bus was
tried and I think it's going to be quite
successful
these are shuttle buses donated by some
sister city in Europe which are only
used in the summer and part under the
tunnel over there so we're trying to
revive them to become a shuttle system
that averts traffic the figure of the
highway itself has a divider has been
typed prevalent in the city and here
we're working with them to turn it into
an actual digital they figure that you
see from the highway with facades
including the city hall that define it
but perhaps the pioneering effort of the
city and the sport are very commendable
for it is to recover the publicness of
the waterfront which had been privatized
over the years by one developer after
the other by one tourist attraction
after the other and to connect it
together
is many abandoned pieces like that into
a continuous world walk and here our
strategy was not so much to take it and
create the continuous figure out of it
but to try to approximate through the
geometry of every piece the features
that the natural terrain gives us so you
can see a sequence of interventions that
are different one from the other based
on the topography and it raised
dramatically there and the features do
but each of them is somehow tamed with a
particular geometry that floats over the
existing terrain and ordered for you to
see the contrast and that floating is
strategic both because we don't want to
be heavy-handed and because we have no
money so we have to do it lightly but
the idea that the natural environment
offers a certain clues of how to work
and that we are it's not determined in
how we do things but it gives us certain
possibilities comes out of
and then later on by culture geographers
like Paul Vidal de la plage and the idea
of possible ISM of the fact that
architecture does not need to be
determined by its setting or grounded in
a setting but offered the setting office
possibilities for architecture to
exercise to lay out to play out of and
maximizing the benefit but also moving
you somewhere else is something that
I've been fascinated with and decided
the boardwalk offices that it's just a
quick series of sections showing you the
vast differences between one location
and the other and then how we try to
tread lightly but with very strong
figurative gestures that define every
location differently while maintaining a
detachment a kind of displacement of
sorts in the site this one is probably
we are trying to make that broad work
float but also disappear so that when
people walk they will look transparent
like that and then this is another one
of those platforms that is at once there
and floating which brings me back to the
section of the City Hall and it is
exactly that it's operating as being at
once a carving into the ground so that
it can stabilize the relationship
between the highway and the inner city
while maintaining the continuity of the
park and protecting it from noise and
everything this is a noise barrier up
here that protects from that but all of
this device --tz--
carving grafting into the ground is in
order to lift up the building and allow
it to float above those contingencies of
site noise and place and if there's any
job in the site it is exactly that the
geography of the highway and its
connectedness to be run an axis that
connects to the city and then the sea
whereas the object itself is propped up
by all of the particularities of that
section and here you see it in
relationship to the much larger review
of the city and the mess around it and
how again it's propped up these are
three little pigs that
about the mess that is around them
anyway they operate as what Michel
circles quasi objects let me describe a
little bit more what that might leave
the project as I described it is very
simply we followed the program a
building for administration a building
for the governorship and the third
building for multi-purpose hold which is
now becoming an exhibition space for the
alphadon and we tried to maintain but
also activate the ground by carrying the
park through the building with some
bleachers cafes space and then a public
space in the back with all the public
services happening on the ground that's
where you pay your tickets that's where
you pay you make the transactions and
you can come in and leave without going
up there is a sense of these objects as
being at once a figure and the see
reality that was being additive and
subtractive and this has been another
preoccupation of mine how do we make a
figure repeat but still maintain an
attitude of a negative of a subtractive
form rather than an additive form or
suspended in between discipline series
of experiments particularly working with
perspective of how the repetition of a
form through perspective can still be
captured by figuration that comes in
from outside in this case the coastline
and the cities of parasols floating and
by removing the ground and by removing
the sticks that hold the parcels this
geometry is recovered is made much more
visible but there's another aspect to
the three blocks obviously there's the
institutional there is no municipality
built in the modern era that does not
present itself as institutional and
repetition in institutional form is
something that we associate with
Brasilia we associate with a war we
associate with many new cities and how
they demonstrate what the role of
administration is visibly the
sector the other aspect of it is however
the notion of the quasi object and the
notion of the quasi object comes from
Michel said which I said the French
philosopher has described the fact that
we are still thinking of subjects and
objects as being a detriment to our
ability to understand how the world is
interconnected how there is much more
fluidity and how the boundaries between
things should not stop at that classical
distinction he proposes instead it was I
object and in in that he uses the figure
of the soccer ball has been the
description of what that was an object
is he argues that the ball is imbued
dumb stupid thing but actually it's not
the ball that counts it's how the ball
orchestrates the spaces around it
particularly players and he
distinguishes a bad player from a good
player by the amount of time the good
player spends bringing the ball to
himself ISM no understanding the way the
ball works rather than the bad player
who wants the ball to come to him rather
than the other way around
and in a sense inverts the revolution
saying it should be Ptolemaic rather
than Kopernik
the ball itself has qualities to stink
intensive qualities of texture shape it
bends it breaks etc but it's really
activation is the way that it activates
the players the field this dates me and
chose my biases but this was feeble
wearing the colours of Real Madrid and
taking the bony activating it into the
space of a stadium a very large audience
and how to use regulations our own
around this ball and take it into the
space of a pub in byblos watching the
Women's but the soccer finals or an
indoors game in this cities high school
or on the beach in some ways most of the
projects in the office are like that
there are simple figures maintaining
their objectives
dented distorted punched in orders so
much not so much to register what is
happening inside them but how they are
interacting with their exterior and as
always this register of how much push in
how much pull happens in every object
that we try to calibrate in order to
show that architecture could at once be
of the place and its own this game what
because our object is recently on our
mind in the project that we are
designing is the first time I show it
and I've always been warned not to show
a project too early but hey I want to
show it to you because I want to hear
your opinion about it this is a reserve
in the mountains of Lebanon that covers
about 5% of the country this kind of a
way to rebuild the cedars forests the
historic symbolic see this forest of
Lebanon but there also other things like
Pines alone and the attempt here is to
not just reserve the nature but the
culture as well and this was a donation
from the USAID landed from nowhere it's
not a quasi object is more like a super
object which is a place where you would
store the ambulances and snow plowing
trucks for emergencies in the summer in
the winter but for the rest of the year
it's such like an ice were there and the
reserve asked me if I can help them turn
it into a biodiversity platform where
people can come and visit and as one of
the gateways to these recovered forests
where they will be bringing back the
Nubian ibex boots which used to be in
the area but left it and now they are
trying to bring them back and bringing
them back for different reasons one is
to recover the flora fauna another is to
activate culturally agriculture but also
as a way to help save the area from
fires the region suffers from fires late
in the summer September October
particularly because the brush
underneath burns and in trying to
recover the landscape that also trying
to take not just the brush out but also
the remains of terrace was that that
have encumbered somehow the flow of the
fauna in the area and the I backs as a
figure comes back in this is another
quasi object to eat the thistle to eat
all of the stuff and help clear the
ground of the forest and they are trying
to help us so by weeding it out every
year and removing variables of the old
talismans your tears will look like this
some of them abandon but there are very
beautiful moments where you actually see
the Skype through the rocks and their
materiality somehow disappears and that
this the shrubbery looks like this this
is a very prevalent type which is very
beautiful in the spring but becomes
thorny shrubs I think called the in
English in advocates could Rahzel in
English it's called spiny broom I think
it's called the spiny broom what we
proposed was a very simple thing our
budget is minimal is the trail that will
take you into this forest where you will
meet the ibex will start in the building
the trail will wrap around the building
take you to the roof and then drop back
down and become the trail that takes you
out in a three-dimensional way we didn't
touch the interior of the building we
just wrapped it we put a big wrapper
around it around and that ramp becomes a
hat and on the top you will have a cafe
but you will also have some display
ahead of the head of the visit and the
ramp curves itself into the figure of
the house the interior is still to be
worked out but it's supposed to be dry
acidic high-techy looking and the
exterior will look like this the
exterior is essentially the terrace of
the terrace walls we gathered within a
steel frame structure but also
transparent and the upper part will be
the Thistle that will be dried and put
together on a seasonal basis to pull
things out from the
and you will see the path there so the
building is really like the goat
cleaning out the terrace walls and
clearing out the shrubbery for the put
forest to recover that's the top that's
the bottom and that's the building scene
from the point of view of the goats and
that's the building at night almost
burning with the light from inside that
glowing through it so back to the plaza
I think the building right now as it
stands is still suffering from a degree
of isolation but step up this tablet is
beginning to become a quasi object the
roman axis has been extended by a
pedestrian bridge is sought in some of
the photographs and recently we were
asked to design another piece to it
again the repetitive but also the figure
and that piece is a staircase that will
take you over the interchange passage in
order to connect to the neighborhood
across and we designed it to be a fourth
block but the block that terminates the
interchange angle has a triangular piece
so that it's almost like a clock tower
in the convention the relationship to a
town home but here seen from different
angles it plays a very different role
that scene from the cafe it's under
construction and that's seen from the
sky
let me get into the program of the
building if we consider with the way the
building program was given to us it's
actually quite simple we were asked to
delineate spaces for three different
functions one is the offices of police
engineering staff the middle one was the
administration of the mayor and others
and the third one was a salary of a lot
there's a term used constantly in the
region but it actually means space open
for anything right now an exhibition is
being mounted for the history of the
analphabet initially the mayor wanted
his office here and wanted me to open a
window here and when I said - no you
can't open a window in a block he is
very upset
miraculously it turned out that this
block when you stand here through this
window you can actually see the bay of
the city and the world Crusader castle
so we convinced him to move there
without having to open the window there
that window is still a stigma but I'll
come back to it later on
the plans are three envelopes we pushed
everything on the edges structure
structure and service and left the field
open
these are reminded me of the pains we
have faced in order to make it a truss
but they wouldn't let us so we made them
into nine columns and since then every
time I see around Pilate I think of it
as being a structure that could have
been bigger but this is a kind of
placeholder for ideas that have been
value engineer
and this is the ground plane where you
see the continuity of the park carrying
through and out
this notion of intensity of edges and
openness came about in a difficult way
because we started the office in 98 in
about 2000 we worked with the Rena Mott
Foundation in the north to build a
center which is for agriculture but
included administration it included a
school for hospitality a technical
school it very far is the administration
part and the daycare center on the upper
level it was impossible to program it
well and to put everything together so
we resorted by after trial and error to
create the series of very large open
spaces that could be separating but also
shared by the different functions in
order to save on space this created the
building that is made out of the
thousand courtyards in a way and even
though the building is still not
finished what remains very clearly very
strongly in them is the role that these
courtyards play in the livelihood of the
building with the rest as a placeholder
and the way that the building's
horizontality is registered the
relationship to the section and to Mount
Lebanon and to the sky
this also came about when we started
working on the balloon and if you think
of this logic of the intense edge and
open space as being something like when
you start drawing this prayer in your
sketchbook you never get it right right
you draw again you draw again and it's
the approximation of all those different
lines that create the figure of a square
but you can never really dramatically
say this is it and it also creates a
density around that can provide the
support for a space that is open and
free and could be occupied by different
activities informed by the edges the
balloon was exactly that and the
clearance there was dictated by the
operations of the balloon and by the
slope so we tucked everything in the
ground
very thin edge it was a temporary
structure and therefore we had to house
everything in that very thin space all
around the houses of AM sheet are the
same the series of four houses plugged
into the landscape each with different
ways of holding back but all of them
designed with a very big free span for
about fifteen meters with both stanchion
beams in order to create the space
around them free they are in a way a
retaining wall that is extended to
become the tower
[Music]
these are free stands and the towers
themselves are also an l-shape that
keeps the the kind of provide thermal
mass against the Southern and Eastern
Sun and that opens up the view to the
western and northern sea views and the
thickness of the world is at once a
thickness that is structurally
mechanical and serviced so everything
happens in that thickness that holds
back to earth and creates that freedom
for the space to happen
you can see the sir here you can see the
service passage from which we draw in
order to cool the space the temperature
here is about two degrees less than
outside and we worked with trans solar
to pull water from the sea which is
cooler to chill the chillers and then to
pass the cold water in the thicknesses
of the words in a system called gravity
words so it's not the air movement
system but the refrigeration system
passively that codes the spaces again in
the thickness behind the closets and
behind the bushes there's a series of
plans showing one of the iterations of
the four houses each one is slightly
different but that thickness is also
taken in section you can see it the
ground itself is lifted up also for
ventilation when you walk on the ground
outside that's not a quite cool and the
stick is the step our acts as a chimney
with outlets for the hot air connected
to it and that's the section of the
courtyard which itself plays a game in
the circulation of the air but provides
a reprieve from that openness on
horizontality outside thus the name core
towers courtyard and town that's the
view from the upper-left level you're
walking here through the thickness of
the walls that's the staircase the
passage and there's always an attempt at
carving to reveal that thickness again
and again whether in the railing in the
lighting or in the way that the windows
are placed in the towers just to give
you an example this is the entrance from
the upper level to the turret and this
little window sticking out here is the
sink in the bathroom the bathrooms are
very compact it wasn't very comfortable
to put the things in so we pushed them
out and then pushing them out you
started getting light and view this air
this way so that people can't look in
and the mirror in front of you that
would reflect the view behind you the
garden behind you and that's the way it
operates
and this is the courtyard looking at the
living woman here you see hidden and the
thickness of the bookshelves is the
cooling system every house has its lemon
tree and that even the seating in the
spaces are carved the kitchen sink is
carved each with a different color stone
and the seating of the garden is also
hearts again Dinesh as a motif in the
revealing the thicknesses and the tower
itself operates in the same way the
wooden louver is opened up and then the
glass will open up and they open up
again so that every bedroom becomes a
balcony again turning the whole space
into just a thick wall and the platform
from which you see the world same
happens at the pod level you see the
different shutters operating to open up
to get you into the service areas or the
bar area this is the bar area
[Music]
it was a very big fight about whether
the grain of the blue stone should be
vertical or horizontal I insisted on
vertical because I didn't want to
imitate the see you cannot imitate the
see
and these are other views of the complex
the main house which also operates as a
kind of open framing looking back in did
the same with this mosque and the mosque
is an easy space to do that with kind of
thick exterior and then the hallway
whole open space that emulates a kind of
scooping of ice-cream into a form that's
the exterior of it with cuts and in that
moment we were there was a whole crisis
of the mosque in Switzerland where they
decided to forbid minarets and so the
joke here was that we would call the
minaret out of the valiant of them
that's without going higher but it's
still a minute because of the way it is
cut and that's the interior I would say
that this gesture of the intense edge
can be taken to another scale and we
tried it here in the school project in
the outskirts of Damascus which was
stopped because of the war where we try
to apply that scalar nested miss of the
courtyard logic in a very harsh
environment so that to protect the
students at every scale but also to
create the kind of haven for the
landscape to grow in and this is short
animation that illustrates this
happening at different scales and then
adjusting as it turns around to fit the
sloping site I would say peoples
operates like that but perhaps more than
in plan there is that spatial void that
it creates in Section which allows for
the freedom of activity to happen
underneath and this idea of how much
architecture prescribes the activities
that happen in it versus how much space
or how much air it leaves so that it
displaces it becomes background to what
life can bring unexpectedly were
expectedly
has been something that I've been
thinking about for a while and when I
met a couple of years ago in Sao Paulo
mr. Rocha and there was describing that
quality to him he said the following he
said architecture is the art of
delineating the space for life's
unpredictability I would like to think
of that as being the unpredictability as
being silent silo metric scale as well
lastly I come to the notion of the
surface and here I would like to spend
it in discussing two attributes of the
surface its intrinsic qualities but also
its connection to communication it's
external qualities when we want the
competition it was in black and white
and we had proposals in a kind of very
quick Photoshop way three blocks with
huge pieces of sandstone London because
we knew that sandstone was the official
stone of the city but but the one we
have to build this and you you can't
find pieces of stone stone that big so
we were stuck you have to build this we
were told and we said you know we can't
do that they said figure it out so we
thought of the process of giving a
certain materiality through color and
there's a sense of coloring that can be
very arbitrary as the coloring books
where you have a thing like a palette
where you can color it with any
combination of colors and it is
believable the color somehow comes in
from outside and it doesn't matter we
tried this problem or this approach in
the work we did for the fishermen of
Tyre I
thinking of architecture has only white
and Judith Raman we forgive me for using
color she taught me about white but she
also taught me about color but other
teachers would not there's a sense that
color is external to Architecture is
polluting of architecture and in this
case the housing of the fisherman was
meant to be white granulated white with
stamping on it alone but we ran out of
money and one day I get a call from the
contractor and said there's only money
for a coat of paint I panicked I sweated
went back and said what color is that
all colors cost the same any corner so
through a bit of therapy I got over my
criminal phobia and the reason I had to
use colors because the finishes were not
very good they were meant for the
thicker coat and yet when you paint them
white like that they become really huge
revealing and exaggerating the the
mistakes so we started playing around
with color and we used it as a way to
distract from the rigidity of the
volumes to turn corners to contrast with
the light rather than play with it play
against it especially when the Sun is
hitting and we used cold colors on the
outside and warm colors on the inside we
also went back to get there to Joseph's
fibers but we dwell quite a bit on the
core busy and discovered in the premiere
she cheated on a series of rules about
colors particularly the color blue and
in one of the passages from that book he
talks about blue as being a prevalent
color
he talks that for him and over 20 years
Colin occupied half his day as a painter
where blue prevailed blue and green and
echo and he goes on to describe the
color blue and indeed is not a mentioned
I've worked a lot
travelogues and his travelogues brewery
curse as a motif as a team as a movement
and let's face it blue is the color of
modernity and it persists as the color
of the modern era but i feel like it's
time to recover it as a special quality
not just as a color this is a blue sheet
from the whole book of the poem of the
right angle
it's not the screen being blank but
think about it whenever you open your
screen by default it's almost this blue
and what he liked about the blue is that
it offered the possibility of
displacement meaning every time your
painters of his blue it recedes and it
allows other things to move forward but
yet if you isolate it as an
architectural feature against natural
elements is highly artificial it's
hardly many things that are blue in
nature and therefore it becomes this
kind of tension of it being at once a
natural background but also a very
artificial object floating forward we
used it in entire in again for bet lack
of better words in a symphonic way so
that's not corresponding to the volumes
or the corners but slipping creating
half groupings so that it doesn't
express the individual unit or window or
doesn't express the overall volume but
somewhere in between but it also plays
about place tulika truth from inside to
outside and tries to break down the
volumes or exaggerate them depending in
showing some transparency some overlaps
of volumes and that's the image we
started with blue comes up also in the
pavilion we did foolish engine Biennale
in 2011 Jonathan is here he had me on
this one quite a bit building it and
getting it done an impossible time but
here the idea was to recreate the
product to the curator the stratum of
Aseema how does an architectural object
reside in the street the stratum of
assimil was the moment of post-modernism
where the facade prevailed and he
we wanted the object to come back but we
made it float and we painted it blue so
that while it aligns with the rest of
the world it maintains its independence
and you can get into it by slipping from
underneath the geometry but it remains
conforming to the height and by lifting
the horizon line a bit it's sort of
displaces itself and you at the same
time another approach to coloration
comes from the way in which we call our
historic photographs it's not external
only there's some clues that you get
from the picture itself but it is not
that clear that Lincoln looked sepia and
we don't or that his clothes look at
washed and ours don't or that the
background itself was brown and not this
kind of approximation but also a very
clear intervention in order to pick make
the picture look like it is 19th century
we played that game in this project
which is a library branch library they
never built
but there's any big game of elevating
the texture of the concrete to make it
sound like so that to make the
exaggeration of the color of the sand
that they aggregate but also an
inscription on the surface of the
windows which follows their apps and so
you have this kind of juxtaposition of
something coming out of the surface and
something being inscribed in it and it's
like a Mark Rothko meeting frank stella
where that reverberation against the
surface is captured in that coloration
and we use it in the balloon project
where we literally took the sand and
pigmented the cement with it and
exaggerated the pigment with paint and
then we took the cement and painted the
wood with it this is the formwork itself
being used to create partitions inside
because we didn't have money but when it
came to building depots I experimented
with these different colorations and
presented the city with different
possibilities they said no
you have to use sense - and they were
already in the process of embellishing
the facades of the old Roman axis with
sandstone trying to use it in antiquated
manners removing the plaster from inside
the churches to reveal the sandstrom
which is not supposed to be done because
it's obviously not built to be revealed
and the bazaar itself being covered with
sand stones some houses were required to
do that and did it in a good way but
sandstone is a very brittle spoon at
ages and collects pollution and is
really inconsistent color wise so how
can we possibly use that and still
maintain control over it at that scale
and not reveal to its scale breakdown of
the scale of these big nominates along
the highway this was the headquarters of
the municipality before they moved this
is the meeting place in the old city
again sandstone revealed under the
plaster and here are some of the ruins
of old buildings which they were trying
to cut and sell to us but they kept
saying that it's the stone of the old
city but it's not true the sandstone is
the infant behind the limestone or
granite that would be applied on the
outside to protect it it's only revealed
like that when you steal the other stone
and it's revealed like that I kept
saying no until one morning for trucks
of sandstone were dropped on the site
and I was told deal with it and here
they are in all of their inconsistencies
presented to you in this display I was
at that time buying stone for another
project in Verona and I met this very
piece of space
beautiful big travertine stone big sheet
eight feet by four feet something God
and I thought I wish that sandstone
could be like that went back to the site
and discovered as we were trying to
figure out what to do that when you look
at the sandstone sideways and it's
stillness if the color becomes more
constant because you're almost cutting
through a grain that is revealing its
coloration and because the area is
smaller you get a more consistent
scholar who said what if the building
can actually be the travertine sheet we
pixellated and said okay we can define
the sandstone and four colors if we look
at them sideways we tried different
grains and colors introduced some blue
that it turned out that some of the
sandstone has to be and came up with a
pixelated panel that we carried across
the whole thing so that all three
buildings would look like they were
carved out of the same block we worked
with the Syrian refugee from Aleppo is a
very masterful stonemason we determined
the size by which we can cut them
without plaster between so we can just
glue them on the world and we started
separating them into four parts every
time we cut which separated into four
piles and then created four big piles
and with his help we determined that all
he needed was a grid drawing of the
image transferred into a grid sheet and
that as he was starting to put them up
he would be on the ground with a guy on
the top colouring at the area as they
moved up and but only one mistake they
managed to do the whole block meaning
one time that they had to remove the
pieces and put them back they managed to
do the whole building to know what no
problem
we express the thinness of it on the
bottom so that when you it from a
distance you think of it as one big
block and then ask you get closer it
starts revealing its artifact to you
this is the Master Mason who helped us
with the school process
[Music]
so we went from this to this to this to
this now you sit from the highway at the
speed it looks like three big blocks
and here you see the blocks from the
other side the last aspect of the
building has to do with its ability to
communicate to exchange ideas to
exchange languages and here again I
think there's another dimension of our
craft that is inhibiting of exploration
of that sort which has to do with the
monomania the park attacks have in mind
that the field itself has to control
every aspect of the form rather than
allow for other arts or forms of
communication to dwell within it
so the longest arm architecture was not
the dominant thought it was the host for
the other artists within it you create a
decoration program for textiles to
happen for a sculpture to happen for
inscription to happen and rather than
have to do all of that yourself
or turn all of that into architecture
when we remember competition we have
proposed a trellis tone but then that
transform which went under the building
on the side became challenged by cost by
materiality it was supposed to be booth
and by the fact that the city wanted a
certain expressive dimension to happen
particularly that they decided on the
alphabet as being a team and if you know
your alphabet you know that the first
phonetic alphabet was invented in byblos
the alphabet was invented in byblos thus
the connection with Biblos which is the
Greek word for book because they
invented the first phonetic alphabet
which till now is the basis of all other
phonetic alphabets this idea of writing
on the surface had started in the
explorations for the for tyre for the
housing for the fishermen we think about
stenciling the thickness of that
aggregate in order to distinguish the
different facades from each other but in
the end it ended up just being screens
like calligraphy on the sides and
perhaps a form of other form of writing
was the side elevations which read
like a form of hieroglyphic and I just
aim on the science in the balloon
we used the chevron pattern to create
silent arrows
we brought asphalt to the interior
because again we didn't have money and
we wrote on it as if it was a tarmac in
an airport but here it was a balloon
word indicating arrivals departures
where kids sit or if you inscribed in a
pen arrow it becomes an exit or an
entrance again we did that kind of idea
of signage in the writing of the windows
in this building we moved from aluminum
particularly because of course but also
maintenance and we thought that if we
wanted to contrast the alphabet with the
most recent form of writing the kind of
ubiquitous barcode both difficulties in
products and an architecture could be
used there and we took the words of
Biblos Jubail and played with them and
here again we wanted to decide on how
the vertical surface becomes the canopy
that covers inside and then goes up in
order to create those enclosed spaces
but again separated from the volume so
that they reveal very strongly the
thinness and the artifice of application
the color was decided upon also in an
arbitrary way high so in the magazine at
home the most recent collection of trees
from mountains clothes and other was
noticed how amazing his colors were and
when Rich decides on the color
combination you know it's a good one so
in this case there was a Prussian blue
with with a kind of sandy color that was
in the collection and I thought ok we
will borrow that and we bought that in
byblos and it actually proved to be very
good because the black and blue in
Greece was also important to help us
create those planarity but also the blue
or the
good day the Prussian blue which were
bought from him had reflect the sky very
beautifully and it almost disappeared in
certain instances and here it is in play
that the bridges were the passages and
how it becomes an inscription of
lighting on the inside with the design
with the irregular surfaces and then a
play with the surface here the interval
of the mural of the noise barrier was
something that we wanted to give to the
arts but we didn't have time so we
decided that we would propose a mural
which would be a temporary one made out
of the Phoenician alphabet that would
take it from alphabet to geometry which
is the basis of it in order to simplify
it and we'd spread it along the wall
almost like something you'd see it's
speed
reflecting the highway behind and
translating parts of it into patterns
that resembled Morse code another form
of writing and registering against the
barcode present as another language to
be contrasted together to think of the
architecture not as a dominant surface
that expresses everything but the
surface that hosts the different
languages of the world so a kind of
multiplicity rather than singularity in
spite of the coloring I still believe
that there's a certain beauty to the
village in black and white peace we
received from a local photographer where
he shows the different languages that
play the alphabet behind the Arabic
calligraphy which says the municipality
of Byblos and then the barcode against
and here contrasted against the stone
his idea of architecture becoming a
surface is at first by jacques ranciere
in his essay the surface of design where
he talks about the idea that the graphic
individual can coexist on the surface
and that the different languages of the
world work together so instead of us
thinking of a universal language as
being abstraction we can think of the
universal language as being the
superimposition of different forms of
communication whether it's the material
whether it's the graphic whether it's
the where is the linguistic coexisting
and sharing with each other
overlapping and connecting so that
locality becomes expressed by the
multiplicities that form it's rather
about singularities that isolated
just before we finished the project
nibblers went on another Christmas
decoration spring
they came up with this amazing tree at
the end of the run axis and decorated
the axis itself but through to our
desire to make the building surface of
exchange in communication they projected
Christmas animations on the surface
[Music]
what upsets me the most is that they
skip this part therefore making each
surface separate rather than continuous
and that skip here is also upsetting
fortunately they were convinced that
they can leave the building alone and
the new mayor at that point wanted to
put the window back in this facade
because he thought the offices were only
getting more than light but fortunately
with the contouring of white on the
inside
the Clair was strong enough that they
were convinced they needed more glare
and when they opened the windows and
heard the noise from the highway they
understood that turning away from the
southern facade and from the highway
noise was a good thing but there's a
certain vulnerability to Architecture
which again brings me back to its
broomis the idea that it could be
mistaken for background that could be
absorbed into the chaos and to the noise
of its moment makes us as architects
always have kind of heartache we're
going in with every project to the end
but then when we hand it over we don't
know what will happen
fortunately at the opening they they
left it alone they did not project
anything on it and they projected
sideways I could not attend and they
asked me to send the word to say
something at that time there was a whole
again debate about changing the interior
radically and I was trying to convince
them let the building live with you for
a year or two until you decide whether
you change it or not and I remembered at
that time that the Arabs in Andalusia
when they finished the building they
would write the poem as if the building
was speaking the building describing its
qualities with seductive qualities and
asking the users to pay attention to
them and to protect them so in my
despair that that's me they're desperate
I wrote the poem in Arabic called I am
based on a poem written for the alum
Brock Holt I am the garden describing
the qualities of the house saying it is
the part that runs underneath don't
block me
I am three rocks please don't touch me
I am the alphabet please don't change me
etcetera etcetera fortunately last year
the building won an award from the
Lebanese architectural league and that
has protected it a little bit a little
bit and it got published quite a bit so
they're proud of that and it's recently
featured on a local on the Lebanese
stamp so I'm hoping that that will
protect it enough and then I work with
them since to carry the project forward
to the largest scale to the master plan
where we're working with the Rockefeller
Foundation working with the UNESCO to
create to both walk the other parts
there's a certain partnership but still
vulnerable because politicians change
and ideas change that the building will
somehow survive here we took it all
under the theme of the color blue to the
Chile Biennale in Valparaiso and showed
it against the different measures of the
blue sky of byblos where the different
public places that we imagined in
addition to those in addition to the
building will be displayed but in the
end I sometimes feel that the kind of
blue that architecture needs is that of
the blue against the evil eye protecting
us from the vulnerabilities of time
maybe from the evil eye I have your
generosity I think of time I know that
you have a lot of work to do
thank you very much for your patience
and attendance
I have put in front of you many new
ideas things that I'm thinking about now
new projects and ideas that are still in
formation so I would greatly appreciate
through your questions and feedback help
to articulate them even more Thank You
Cooper
[Applause]
