so start off with very very broad
discussion of the difference between
history and history as it informs
architectural design okay
there's history of very many kinds the
social history economic history cultural
history the history of architecture
history of art history of painting
history of drawing their histories
galore in relationship to the study of
the objects and subjects of the past
then there is the question of what you
do will this extraordinary ramified past
in relationship to present design and in
quote unquote the studio I was educated
at the moment where history was
extremely present in the studio and
extremely present in courses very
serious courses on the Renaissance on
the topic on antiquity but where that
history and the history in the studio
was what I would call completely
abstract it was to do with the the
question of the facade the question of
the entry the question of spatial
organization and the ritual and so on so
you could extract or you were you were
asked to extract from your experience of
historical objects of historical
environments of historical urban and
rural environments extract those those
principles of organization right which
you could then begin to deform and
reform there was also a particular kind
of history taught by Colin Rowe which
was a history that said if you look at
something abstracted from something
abstracted diagram it reorganized it and
then at some point in your
reorganization you will be signaling the
sense of your project by a kind of
implicit abstract reference to the
another project in this policy yeah you
know in a few weeks we're gonna be
sitting in on a different lecture by
Harry Cobb and he he will tell us that
history was all but absent under
gropius's Harvard right and I wonder if
you could just situate yourself within
that timeline because he he makes a
claim that much of his discovery of
history as a phenomena is a result of a
kind of retaliation against his own
education and I was interested by his
introduction and the sort of absence of
history or absence of history in the way
that it's used as an alibi which was all
what my education was about because of
that burning postmodern moment and so
I'm very conscious of the kind of ebb
and flows of the presence of history and
how instrumentalizing I'm just wondering
where you and Harry fit in that
constellation well I'm a little younger
than Harry
so I fit okay I'm gonna show how that a
psycho goes up and down and I've tried
to avoid dates because I'm always
location might know my dear wife always
tells me stop dating yourself you don't
think you're old anyway yes the evidence
flow of course emerges at the beginning
of the 20th century when there is a
strong reaction from social sciences Max
Weber from psychology and sociology
Zemel from the academisation of
architectural history with her friend
and company there's a strong reaction to
the notion of continuously copying
styles continuously styling styling past
and imitating the styles of the past at
that moment that reaction is is a very
very difficult reaction because the
bizarre educational system which covers
Europe in most degrees in terms of both
in England and in France and in Germany
there is a sense that you cannot throw
away the past and the struggle of
modernists like Toby cames and others to
to respect history on the one hand
abstract history on the other and
internalize their history in the objects
that they make led to a kind of
oversimplification of abstraction I
think especially in the states after the
Second World War and especially in the
Bauhaus itself under under Gropius what
is interesting about the grumpiest
question is that was no there was never
until Tobias left the Bauhaus an
architecture studio in the past but
bajas did not eject yeah they taught
everything but architecture which meant
that Gropius could remain the king right
I mean he was the only architect he was
the architect everything else would
build the Cathedral of which he was the
master right but there was no history in
the box and there was no architecture in
the box
architecture came in the bathhouse with
Hannes Meyer and they're nice but very
very briefly when Gropius came to
Harvard he had a tremendously
contentious relationship with with the
with the Dean he came as the chair of
architecture the Dean of architecture
was joseph Hudnut and Hudler was a great
believer in history in fact hermit was a
sponsor of an émigré architectural
historian Emil Kaufmann and even when a
milkman died prematurely provided the
money personally for the publication of
his posthumous book on enlightenment
architecture so haben was very very
interested in architectural history was
very interested in in in getting the
secret gideon to the school of
architecture which for obvious
absolutely refused he refused he was an
absolute imposter imposter who basically
was a was a kabuki a fan with nothing
but Corbusier the German condition
traditions with nothing for for Gideon
space-time and architecture in fact as
one small photograph of reason and
nothing of Proteus
and so in the end part not had to get
Gideon invited by the Norton Simon
Committee so
Simon lectures outside the architecture
school which became space time in
architecture but but then this asks the
next question was Gropius ignorance or
was he much more devious than that was
he recasting history into a new frame
that that suited his narrative I think
he was not recasting history I think he
was total believer in the science of
functionalism that would with the tools
of industrialization emerge with a new
architecture without history a new
architecture but that did not reflect
his our education which presumably had a
well he started off as an investor and
that's what I'm saying so he himself was
rejecting the father so to speak yeah I
kind of stripped neoclassicism I just
wanted to just these are the kind of
monsters that we had to deal with in in
the school I had seen pre kid Ian
spacetime in architecture that was the
history Peter Eisenman who was a TA in
Cambridge when I arrived in Cambridge he
at the same time he was a TA PhD student
I was an undergraduate here
he gave us space time in architecture as
the history book to read right
it took Colin Rowe to tell me put that
away it's nonsense
and Russell Hitchcock gave the gave the
lectures at Cambridge on Frank Lloyd
Wright in terminally boring lectures on
Frank Lloyd Wright and then there was
that group the Nikolaus Pevsner who had
come to Britain with Victoza
Posner as the head of the architectural
review editor of the
review and a lecturer in London
University Victor for Atlanta University
before he came to Columbia and then the
very puzzled Colin Rowe who really
doesn't want to doesn't want know what
to do with either of them but who was a
student of Victoza plagiarized and took
over Victor burrs work on Palladio and
turned him into without footnotes I'm
asked to work on Palladio and literacy a
acting is a younger generation there
were these three there was Raina Bannon
who was not trained as an architectural
historian but as a as a technical
repairman for aircraft during the war
then studied on the person--i and did
his thesis Theory design in the first
Machine Age which was published in 1960
61 and was the Bible for the history of
modern architecture after patent ADEA
not have been the Novello who was was a
center that a center-right Catholic
historian who was one of the few to
start to describe the history of
modernism as a social and political
movement but who knows av who led a
revolt against Gropius when he was
exiled in the Harvard School in in 1943
and calling for more history in fact and
became the resident historian of the
Christian Christian Democratic right in
in Italy history as the history of
Technology history as the history of
society history as the history of space
so each of those histories was also very
jaded towards a project a project in
architecture in other words an unwanted
octogram abba navel of wanted social
housing the xavie wanted Frank Lloyd
Wright and understand the image of a
social democratic architect right
history why is history important we get
it from the very source from Vitruvius
Vitruvius says you can't explain your
work unless you know history so you
gotta know history or even more
important for the modern age its
quotation which is well known to all of
you to be sure we need history but we
needed a manner different from the ways
in which the spoilt idler in the garden
of knowledge uses it no matter how
elegantly remains of down on our costs
and graceless needs and de-stresses that
is we need it for life and action not
for comfortable turning away from life
in action or merely for glossing over
the egotistical life and cowardly bad
act we wish to use history only insofar
as it serves living in three respects
history belongs to the living person it
belongs to him as an active and striving
person it belongs to him as a person who
preserves an admired history it belongs
to him as a suffering person in need of
emancipation this Trinity of
relationships corresponds to a trinity
of methods for history to the extent
that one we make the distinctions
monumental method an antiquarian method
and a critical method monumental method
would be that method of using history
which serves to make history
the
the act of power the act of monumental
ization the act of of reinstating
something which was lost antiquarian
history is something but at history
completely divorced from the present and
is absorbed in the study of of the past
for the past sake right critical history
is something that does things with
history here's two people who did
justice in their work to the Parthenon
both in the Parthenon is the caboose EA
in a very difficult moment of trying to
absorb himself within the stones of the
of the Parthenon column and Aldo Rossi
trying to be as tall as the dark column
neither quite worked but both of them
took the notion of history very very
powerfully and tried to absorb it within
their work I would say that if one of
the earlier critical historians the
architects were always their own
historians but one of the first critical
historians which is arborist who
realized that architecture no longer had
any power no longer had the power that
they had in the church or the or the
castle but only the power to shelter an
increasingly democratic nation and
increasingly democratic state the
library it had the power of knowledge
his ghost was played as Academy the
residues of which were found in in
Athens and were also pictured in in
Raphael's School of Athens and you can
see that ghosting in steel the structure
of the Academy was the way in which
libraries look to the Past or where
someone like Schinkel will look to the
past by taking the pantheon for the most
highest artistic works of sculpture in
his altas museum take the Greek stoah as
the
intonation that his museum is no longer
a temple but also open to the people in
the in the Agora and the very wittily
taking the plan of the palace the king's
palace which the altered museum stands
opposite and unwrapping the whole thing
round as a linear sense of history in
action as you go from room to room
tongue the 1970s and 1980s
you have Jim sterling building in
post-war in post-war Germany the stats
gallery in Stuttgart taking the taking
literally the plan of the of the of the
Altis Museum stripping the stoah from
the front stripping the dome from the
Pantheon wrapping around with a
chronological sentence but actually
making the whole thing
a powerful urban route from the top of
the hill skateboarding around that
wonderful skateboard run through to the
sir to the other side through to serve
God in the center set so that a way of
using history which is quite literal
diagrammatically another way of using
history we'll be able to Rossi who
passed this little palace with its
unfinished facade in Venice every
morning on the way to the Institute for
architectural history seeing this column
which apparently according to Terry was
built by Phil arrete and building it
into his into his Berlin operations so
against this history was this history
the history we know the history of the
relationship tattered at the end between
Colin Rowe and and the young Peter
Eisenman this is Peter Eisenman in 1963
and you might not recognize him but from
Colin Rowe Peter Eisenman gets
diagrammatic history from Frank Poole
and from Vicky over the diagrams of
Palladio that
has been fighting with ever since he met
Colin Rowe the notion of the Palladian
plan being completely subsumed by the
movements and structure of the of the
modern plan and then his thesis 1963
we're all history is observed is
absorbed into a diagrammatic vision of
planes and the structure of of cubes and
primary forms to the point where in that
in that wonderful thesis you have the
Courvoisier I've made gusta Lou with it
very contorted entrance now analyzed by
Eisenman there's the there's the there's
the plan you know the plan you come up
you go across the bridge you go into the
into the circle sorry you go into the
circle you come into the square you can
you turn and you move to the move to the
elevators a trick according to Peter
that allows you to do that as opposed to
come off the hill and go like that and
without any kind of preparation and so
here's Peter diagramming perfectly
knives you come in the entrance yeah you
had the axes there you have the diagonal
of the cross axis that creates a problem
so you have to do a right-hand bend into
the into the cylinder and then into the
thing but then all kinds of
complications of that level pavilion
where you have to do several right-hand
bends backwards and forwards and
backwards and forwards until you finally
collapse into the cylinder and once you
get into the cylinder there's a huge
explosion of arrows around you to the
point where you are completely
discomforted and that you are smooth on
one side and Celtic on the other side
and push it impressed on the other side
until you get into this exhausted with
all these arrows and lines into this
particular space and then you come into
the square face which gives you a
centralized another centralized thing so
from this kind of contortion to this
kind of contortion to this kind of
contortion you're ready finally to enter
so that's one kind of history right and
that's the final kind of history I want
to talk about it it's man Fredo's
history which once disassociate itself
from all this programmatic operation how
you'd use history from design you want
to actually remove yourself and study
the way in which and a teachers here
rather than turning the past as a sort
of a sort of fertile ground rich in
abandoned mines to be successively
rediscovered finding in them
anticipations of modern problems we must
get used to seeing history as a
continuous contestation
of the present the way for architecture
is not to retreat into the night of pure
form he's talking about Peter relating
only to itself as an instrument to
design history is sterile it can only
offer solutions and implication is
already taken for granted a new solution
implies a jump a radical reshuffle of
the problem a risky adventure history
can only spare only prepared the basis
for this adventure and explain why it is
not feasible for today that's the image
I gave of kind of the Baroque
perspective or telescope which of course
is imminent in borromini's
stare in the barbarian palace and you
notice in the second state the gallows
appears Caffery has an extraordinary
analysis of this in the sphere in the
labyrinth but also points to the fertile
nature of this image which is completely
uninterpretable a space for for example
Eisenstein you use the cautery as as a
series of decompositions that allowed
him to have a theory of montage in film
that theory of montage in film giving
human
notion of the relationship between
movements and architecture and the whole
baroque image of telescoping
perspectives are giving of course Gordon
matta-clark the possibility of
developing baroque office in his one of
his last cuttings not using history but
understanding history and of course then
other decides to indict Manfredo
for assassinating architecture by
historic sizing you
I have to I think so see
and then I was born the majority of what
I will present is actually student work
and a reflection of the predicaments of
a of a student trying to come to grips
with that the presence of history in a
very confused time I would say contrary
to Michael's introduction I was at the
tail end of a moment in which the
presence of history in its challenge to
the orthodoxies and the positive isms of
modernism had you know fully bloomed to
the point that the history was being
used as a crutch as an alibi that if
history was there or if recognizable
forms were there then it must be right
but without a kind of critical interface
that that you're bringing to Tafari so
our first year in architecture was the
end of that and yet our education was
was was absolutely absolutely saturated
with that aura let say
then came the emergence of theory in the
new guys theory in in in our context
through the voice of people like michael
hayes judith Wallen who was a student of
column row and Rodolfo Machado some of
whom had drawn from French structuralism
and others who are trying to grapple
with post structuralism and the ways in
which it it reinvigoration ship to
language and
and criticism but much of our
fascination lay in the predicaments of
history and the ways in which buildings
and their spaces are the evidence of
conflicting cultures manifests as as
sometimes
irreconcilable artifacts that are
transported are fictitious and the
result of a form of instrumental madness
and so we were very conscious about the
artifice of history and the way it could
be deployed as much as it was a topic of
scholarship much of this talk is also
about my journeys to Rome having decided
to go to Rome at an age a little bit too
early to understand either history or
Rome itself I found myself in a context
replete with archaeology and and history
without an ability to decode it and
during my stay in Rome in 1983 I came
across a Domus which had six entries for
Follies in them and in fact deana
highest hat was one of those but this is
another one I discovered by Machado and
savetti who were one of whom was a
professor at RISD and I said how curious
look at them why would they be building
Roman architecture in this day and age
and I was somehow it was very
recognizable but I could not recognize
the figure that is somehow encrypted in
these various facets
it was only upon third and fourth look
that I began to understand that figure
but for those of you who can appreciate
the the presence of history you also
know that the orders of brick and the
treatments have a mechanical or
structural function they have an order
to them in the way that they either bear
loads or or retain earth and have a
relationship with performance so it was
a kind of moment of all that I realized
that this entire structural and
configurational edifice of their work
was actually a ploy to get to the kind
of the figure of the monster the cranium
that is depressed in this earth and
somehow evocative of some other
iconographic or symbolic gesture that
they were after in discovering the folly
so the configurative discovery came also
at a moment early in my career when
everybody asked you know well what do
you bring from your culture to to
Architecture born in London raised in
Pakistan in South Africa and very few
years in Iran subsequently in the United
States and then to Italy I had little to
show of Iranian knowledge and so in
college at your age I ventured into the
library to understand more of how brick
actually has historically operated and
so here's what I discovered as a kind of
generational shift of knowledge that was
transmitted through crafts not if not
architecture in the way that we think of
it today was never theorized it was
somehow passed through trades from the
seljuq period to
Safavieh period and then finally to the
Gaja here this is happening over 400
plus years and as you look at the
section of the wall they're all
virtually the same until you begin to
recognize that the the kind of ikana
graph the iconography that is embedded
in the Seljuk wall is actually integral
to its structure that same order of
patterning that is embedded in the
Safavid wall is structural and yet
independent of the structural wall it's
tied to it but not really and therefore
can change and finally by the time you
get to the larger period it's literally
a skin it is a surface of of decorative
our tenets a tile it's not even brick
anymore and so as you go through the
images of Islamic architecture and you
recognize that critical to its cultural
underpinnings is the is precisely the
lack of figure and iconography that it
does with calligraphy and with geometry
what in the West is done with the body
and and its symbolism that all here is
repressed within the context of the
brick as a medium through which the
architecture is allowed to speak somehow
so bringing this all to a more
contemporary setting of the 20th century
then you begin to appreciate the two
modalities in which ideas about
figuration
and the historical impulse get to take
shape in one instance on the left you
you appreciate the way in which the the
brick as a medium is negated insofar as
it's sculpted and the image of the of
the figure is extraneous to the brick
itself and on the right you appreciate
that a certain figure may emerge from
the from the pixels if you like from the
the very module of the brick itself and
so this shows you the the the history
that we brought to the idea not of the
running bonds nor of the Flemish bond
but the idea that we're not looking at
the brick anymore but rather the space
between the brick to understand that the
mortar between all of those bricks from
the seljuq period to the Safavieh period
are a vocal part of being able to expand
and contract as part of its ordering
system to denote something and therefore
the the the wall in Venezuela which has
absolutely nothing to do with Islamic
architecture has all to do with a
layering of traditions that evolved
separately sometimes and this may be is
an important moment to bring in you know
the the theoretical differences between
synchronic and diachronic history and in
one instance as you're looking at the
social the political and the economic
circumstances under which something is
given shape what architects are also
able to do is to cross laminate and
stack histories that are not actually
related to each other but that are
learning from each other in a very
particular medium
and I believe you were getting to that
focused history in a different way the
way you can isolate let's say the
history of brick and this speaks to that
in a certain sense the variable bond is
is part of that history and an equally
so the discovery albeit late on my part
and my trips to to Rome in 1983 that
well the brick is not even structural
after all of that the brick is merely a
casing for the concrete very modern if
you like in that sense the concrete has
has structural mass to it it has no
ductility as it were but it has a kind
of environmental presence as the thick
walls are able to bear energy it is for
this reason that the translation of that
brick structure into the Tong Shan
project in China is all the more
poignant because the brick is actually
form work for the ductility of the steel
that is embedded within the concrete and
becomes a formwork that is no longer
thrown away drawing from the the
economies of the brick trade in China we
knew that it could be built incredibly
cheaply but in fact because of the
seismic pressures of Beijing you could
not build in the old brick technique so
this is a hybridization of historic
techniques in combination with modern
codes and bringing it to the absurd
conditions whereby the brick is
literally the form work for the sulphate
underneath now the figuration aspect of
this takes you more towards the land of
myth or history as myth
and this is where an element of of
allegory of symbolism and of
representation comes into play one
cannot deny at the end that even those
organizations which seem to be straight
have a slab to them and so recognizing
that we also understand how a particular
medium may bring a completely different
form to that same curtain because the
form emerges from deep within the grains
of a particular material logic in this
case the corrugated copper that is the
cladding of this house is able to Unruh
laz it were to give space to the awning
of the skin and establish a figurative
relationship with the brick building
albeit fundamentally different in an
enterprise there is something to be said
about the Islamic traditions and their
commitment to part-to-whole
relationships and and that's maybe
something that if it didn't come through
my religion because I'm not a Muslim it
came through the pores of a cultural
circumstance and when I was faced with a
project again a student project in in
Boston I came to discover a strange
coincidence that much like Rome Boston
used to be the city of Seven Hills
except in Boston's case a good many of
those hills were cut down to make for
the landfill of the Back Bay and the
South End and during my stay in Rome
last year I you know
was lucky enough to get this view on one
of those hills in the Jeni Cola and an
understanding how the prospect has
brings a different kind of understanding
of the history of that city now these
are all related because from them on
building a logic during this historical
stay some 30 years ago I also went to
Florence and impressed by the
marketplace and the way in which this
monolithic table-like structure is the
mechanism for furnishings underneath
tables awnings that serve the immediacy
of quotidian life and exchange and how
that connection to the table is latent
and yet not expressed I was also
impressed by the way in which one's
interpretive faculties can bring
different readings and how the symbol of
Rome in fact is the symbol of the
she-wolf
and Romulus and Remus and how they come
into conversation and how that curious
and empathetic narrative provides for
such a strong symbol for a city and how
these things can work together as images
so this project here curiously at the
intersection of Massachusetts Avenue and
Washington Street is really
reconstructing the height of that Hill
where Boston used to be where it used to
have at its neck a hill that is really a
narrative about the table and the way in
which one table is nested with another a
pergola underneath which are a series of
infant tables that happen to be flush
with the sidewalk a kind of excavation
of that sidewalk provides for the
infrastructure of
market market space ping-pong tables but
essentially establishes that
part-to-whole relationship between the
unit of construction as a table and the
edifice at a hole as a whole
now what produces the unique and curious
skin condition that describes the
surface of that table leads back to an
embedded or encrypted logic of the
staircase and its landings which
participate in the manifestation of its
legibility I'm not trying to give you a
narrative of reason I'm simply trying to
immerse you in the cloud of associative
madness that can come to bear on
somebody as you're thinking in this
modality now just to end with to to end
with something that Michael introduced
this talk with we were also asked to
examine the poacher finales a piece of
Earth another Hill lodged between the
historic and modern city of Caltagirone
whose origins come from a lot of Jarrar
which is the castle of the of the
one-eyed monster essentially it goes
back to the myth of the battles back to
Homer and the myths of the battles in
Sicily and the Protectorate of this one
small town was allotted Girona and the
person who protected it from all of the
different people but nobody knew where
he lay and as you look at the city you
begin to appreciate the way
which at the Nexus of the old and the
new city there is a chunk of earth the
Porto finale's which can be framed as
part of the modern grid and contains and
as part of that myth goes is that part
of the retaining wall still rests there
and some people have thought that it is
the place within which he lays rest and
so there's a whole narrative about the
figure of this monster and the different
access points that you come up to in
engaging it and embedded in that crust
there is a cranium there's the arms
there's the ear there's the foot and
they give body to the nature of this
beast but I'm only interested in one
here and it goes back to the ways in
which we establish a dialogue with
history in this case an ingrained Roman
history that sees as its vocation the
presence of the axiality of the arch the
stability of the arch as a structure and
the clarity with which it can be
understood only of course to recognize
that vision is a great part of this and
as vision is in a way displaced for the
acoustic function of that ear you begin
to understand the Animorph the
anamorphic function of that arch as it
acquires different senses being embedded
in it and in fact this was supposed to
be an entry that gets you into the
cranium where a concert hall would be
connecting us to the or akio the
Dionysus which is not too far away one
of those kinds of experiences I had on
on the trips to to Italy where a natural
and geological element within the
landscape of of Sicily takes
gives shape to an important part of its
cultural imaginary now bringing us back
to the prospect of anamorphosis what
intrigues me about it is not the
technical feat because once you've
understood that it is it is something
that is readily done it's mechanical and
and almost anybody can do it
but insofar as it is able to construct
perception it is also able to challenge
it to critique it and in the context in
which we were operating we were very
much interested in the ability of
something to be able to make references
that are external to itself and to
challenge if you like the traditions
from which architecture emerges the
story behind fabrications is actually
not in the first instance architectural
but rather theoretical now Terry Riley
had asked us to not do drawings not do
models but do a fragment of architecture
that is wholly situated within the
discourse of art of the museum but as
that is speaking to contractors he talks
about tolerance he talked about what is
plumb what is level and what is right
and those are all new terms to me
because in architecture school we don't
necessarily delve in those issues but we
drew something that spoke to the
flatness of the modern canvas and we
wanted to create a painting as flat as
can be that was perfectly plumb
perfectly level perfectly right and
potentially something that could achieve
a tolerance of less than a quarter of an
inch over the length of 50 feet now that
flat canvas is in fact what to do
the the the kind of architectural
inroads into developing this is with
Milko Bufton right down the street the
idea of the stitch seam and the folded
surface whereby a single surface of
sheet of steel may yield structural
properties and as it is wrapped around
jigs over 50 feet with myriads of
customized sheets within the context of
a spatial construct that is anything but
flat and in a way undoing that
anamorphic moment at the moment of entry
at once in dialogue with the institution
of art and at the other a kind of
challenge to the construction industry
and its reliance on techniques of of
conception from plan to section and and
construction techniques that require
plumb Bob's in the first place to
achieve something that is built through
jigs I just want to end with one image
here of my thesis project which also
describes the mindset from which we
emerged and it was the beginning of the
croissan'wich in the United States for
those of us who well came from other
parts of the world and understanding
that this is something that can be sold
or bought at Burger King or McDonald's
something we take for granted today was
a real oddity because we had a very
stable notion of what a croissant is or
what a ham sandwich might be but we
relished in the idea that we are a
manifestation of that cultural condition
and during the time of the Revolution in
fact we didn't fit and probably still
does we weren't Americans we weren't
Iranians
and we had to make something of the
contradictions of this cultural
condition and so that thesis was in fact
a a collision between the spatial
cultural and formal problematics that
were born out of these not forms and not
histories but the rituals that give
presence to those forms and rituals is
there something that the two of you
would like to start with or should we
open it up
I just am very happy I just feel what's
very lovely about this presentation is
the way in which you've folded history
as a as a practice of living in the
present into design as a practice of
design in the present and with with
little history but a lot of
understanding memory tactility listening
carefully and looking
the questions that divide you know how
do you use history become really well
but that's why I called it the
predicaments of history because in the
context of a design studio there are
let's say so many ways in which one can
engage the prospect of history and so
and it's wholly different than the
scholarship that goes with history and
so how it's managed without guilt that
is putting the issue of guilt aside and
putting the issue of alibis crutches and
justifications aside the ways in which
one learns from certain episodes in
history as a point of departure as a
point of inflection or interpretation
that is something that if we don't do
explicitly the chances are we're doing
it ideologically because there's
inherited assumptions that are somehow
fed to us by our teachers that we take
as truths which are completely parts of
other fabrications of other history
right so I'm what I'm what this is meant
to show is is the way in which those
histories take on a meta-narrative on
their on their own and and in turn need
to be overthrown once again
struck thank you history the story of
history of your history and I was struck
by how classical is a trajectory you
showed us a new custom would want or he
would do graphically wrong Sicily you
know about the Middle East and so in
that set I mean you know it doesn't
matter I think if it's real or
constructed I mean I think the narrative
was very interesting and I'm wondering
about the moment and even culminating in
the vision and the analysis and I'm
wondering in the comment of jump that
you made from the olq and the
anamorphosis and then the this blue
artifact the request of Terry Riley not
to use drawing not to use marbles and is
it possible really like to not use
[Music]
I'm sorry I should have clarified we
obviously had to do drawings and we
obviously did build models he refused to
present them he wanted the exhibition
called fabrications to be dedicated
wholly to architectural fragments in the
way that you would see in both art
schools where fragments of of Roman
edifices would be sort of lumped into
the building here and there and he
wanted he wanted this not to be about
representation as such or or you know
mock-ups but really the full-scale
artifacts okay but my question was
really to learn from that history
[Music]
the fabrication jump to deserve
exaggerating the request of Perry
royalty removing all the artifact that
actually we used to represent on the
grant rule that actually yourself isn't
right look in that sense the role of
history
is it possible to carry through is it
necessary
probably not but in this instance the I
think there is an importance in the
evident divorce between what
architecture does visually versus what
our architecture does structurally and
to me the the the presence of optics
even in the emphasis of a of a Greek
column is a fascinating impulse that so
many people would somehow sit around the
desk or a construction site and say you
know this is wrong this column should
bulge
now please chip away a little bit more
of the kids the you know the idea of the
narrative that led to the bulge of an
emphasis is something that for me is a
very interesting one in the context of
the history of tectonics where the truth
lays not in the actuality of
construction but in somewhere in the
slippage is between actuality and and
the obstacle and so I under technical
and yeah you know the southern the easy
repetition of columns in mass production
from the 18th century all right really
does give the line to the incredible
artistry or technical artistry of making
a column drum making the college run
with very primitive tools in stun
lifting it centering it making each one
slightly different but absolutely fit
with the one on top it's the most
extraordinary in fact they now think
that and that the invention of
mathematics by Alex
and Talas was stimulated by their
observation of the Masons tools and that
constructed with such perfection the
column drop and it's a very interesting
reversal of the normal history
mathematics in fact did not come before
practice practice mathematics but I I
mean I guess I'd like your question
because it on the one hand it it it
reveals somewhat the arbitrariness of
how we build narratives in order to get
at some place and at some point you can
actually divorce yourself from the
source but also it's a reminder of how
think pungent
culture is that it produces such
directions in in people's work and that
you can see that overlay in sometimes
different cultures in different
centuries and in different
interpretations of common phenomena that
is good history I mean I like what you
presented
mr. seditious I'm gonna speak to macho
Sejal motive first half by the historian
actually so but move to be somewhat
heard is with what you're saying what
Tamar just mentioned but Johnny said
about these parcours who you know places
and memories and all that and earth
takes always use references right come
in all the time as we be stories by the
way I mean you know if you're targeting
and you like these and you like that you
make a sketch or make a note or whatever
we all do that
that's our engagement as as subjects of
psychological subjects that perceive
that create that engage with the world
around us with all of them what he has
to offer us which are emotes it is
whether it's in stone I mean texturing
images or whatever it is no that's one
mode of operation we can't engage your
conscious fosters your creativity and
all that now history doesn't hold or
think young no history is a discipline
and as such even taking was see current
approaches German up talk about here we
have a history himself you know but
there is certainly different approaches
to how we understand history has been
done under people and I said etc will
you judge the areas or whichever the
connections maybe but their concepts
they're that organized historical
material or stereographic of material
whether it is written on the walls or
the books so even if you're parkour
through row orion or whatever
when you take these I'm seeing what
before we see I mean he we always
criticizing India's history but it was
interesting as he was using both he was
using the reference but using
historically as a reference to some
concepts we tend to do with proportions
and substances also she started with a
question about the relationship between
history history and history Alice
brought into design that I was saying
the particular mode in which his throat
that was think where was getting that
the particular mode and is more of a
question for you guys because you you
seem to flow through your creative in a
long period of time obviously and who
wouldn't very student and I but I think
the motive of creation as a referential
object that has historical bearing like
if you go to rob certainly you can skip
history for then it's a history of that
city right and then they're pieces that
personally
they come up or about and then there's
something else you noticed area right
here they're soon present whatever it is
their own consciousness now that seems
like a mode of operation that even if
use history history reference which is
also done by architects more organized
is organized et cetera as everybody's
always coming back to the good stuff
right we all do that for all the time I
we tell students don't look at these go
look at that look at that Witcher period
maybe it doesn't matter right so I'm
saying it's a very different wonderful
variation right so how is it historical
then my question is how is that the use
of history is not the same as a use of
history as you look for specific issues
specific reference in different periods
where they may be that you jump period
jump architects you go to this you go to
that one day you'll like this one next
day here it goes something else this is
why I cite the problematic relationship
between synchronic and diachronic
histories the idea that on one level
there are historical narratives that
estab established oops
seeded relationships between social
economic cultural phenomena that are not
evident to the eye but that require
different kind of historiographical
understand versus the other kind where
we can look at history as the kind of
repository of forms and spaces and
artifacts that we can freely navigate
through without the kind of
repercussions of having to necessarily
unearth their the underpinnings of how
they came to bear on some phenomena or
another now and I'm not saying this
uncritically I'm saying that is the
problem in fact and so what I've tried
to also show here are slightly different
modes of active
particularly when you look at the
discovery on the seljuqs and and the
Safavids and the PAH jars because to my
western eye looking back on you know
with innocence to an Iranian history or
an Islamic history they you know they're
all the same they all appear to be them
but it's flat as a history it was black
and to discover that you know the ways
in which culture operates and the
rituals in relationship it operates may
look the same but they're fundamentally
different is an important discovery and
maybe there's a different historian out
there who can who can tell the full
story there's actually a very good
Italian historian who was a scholar
Islamic architecture following up just
over just a little bit on
Deanna's question I'd like to hear you
both comment on something that you
brought up in the start of your
presentation idea then when you're in
school you're at the tail end of one
relationship to history and the start of
what one could then historically call a
motive theory and I know told me you
just publish something recently in a
flux about this history to theory
theories of history histories of theory
issue and I think that this which I
lived long enough to come the historian
kind of some of the questions were
asking today in a number of younger
architects in their reengagement of
history are coming at it post this
theoretical turn happened and they're
not so just yeah and the big struggle of
someone like Manfredo was to adjudicate
between those what he called instruments
of criticism that would establish more
concretely and more firmly the
relationship of evidence to
interpretation as history and those
which were immediately prone to
construct a history as a project for
architecture right which was very much
our discussions were always to do with
the fact that Foucault and especially
the Foucault as it developed in in Paris
with the faulty a group who were
researching institutional forms after
the both the clinic of the
madness and so on became a kind of
watchword for immersing oneself into the
typology of institutions without
understanding through closed actual
message which was the discursive nature
of institutions in relationship the
ideology or and so on those kinds of
questions were too preoccupied you read
the first preface is from the first
preface to his book on quality to the
last preface to his book on research in
Renaissance there are series of
grappling with the predicaments not just
in history but the predicaments of
theory and the predicaments of ideology
in history of his dream about cumulative
history and I find this very Salinger
and that's what the piece was about even
the quote that you brought up that
distinguishes between the monumental
method the antiquarian and the critical
that speech it is you know exposes the
ideological nature of how the same
artifact may or the same geography may
be like that with three very different
eyes and telling a completely different
story
when I see that presented this book that
Peter Eisenman wrote for his ph.d I
remember I read that I said I actually
had the sort of look within the
correspondence and he argued with
calling for all about the title of the
PhDs a row said that why don't you put
the essays title as the formal basis of
architecture where you have to add the
word modern is this something apply only
smaller architecture is it something as
university within the architectural
discipline and this brings me one
question because there's this guy called
Clement Greenberg that says this guy
yeah yeah yeah so he says that the
modernization of architecture is defined
by its ability to critique itself so
maybe I know me but I so man was trying
to say that the act of critiquing
architecture in the past is actually an
active modernization so I don't know if
you agree with this idea that new
self-criticism defines modernism or
order history after communism or is it
some sort of you know lineage that were
really existed in the past but spread
out in the table explicitly after the
technological advances that happened
after okay I think here that has to be a
distinction between two very different
words Moulton and modernism modern has
always been used since Rome to deal with
something that is now as opposed to then
the ancients and the moderns were you
know always disputed right through all
rhetorical processes from Cicero all the
way through to the present so the notion
of the model movement right as somebody
said you know
no modern went outside bounds right just
nobody nobody nobody talks about the
Martin movement right no architect talks
about the month only historians thought
about the month right so completely
eight courts about esprima there this
Martin spirit right nice didn't say a
thing
right alto did the same thing so they're
all supposed to be the model movement
categorized by peddling as something
that he wants to give movement to as a
renegade Ian's ending brokest right the
most powerful member of the modern
movement everybody dropped off but
Berkeley Stanford yeah so Martin in that
respect
right when Peter is using the word model
it's very different from when Clement
Greenberg is using the word Martin ISM
Clement Greenberg against as as many
have said invented modernism as a
particular way of producing the
relationship of pigment to a flat
surface in modernism was from MANET
through his Apollo and the work criteria
for modernism that he established Fred
Jameson gave a wonderful lecture once
where he actually demonstrated exactly
the process but which greenberg invented
the notion of modernism modernism oh
right that other word in Spanish refers
to in
the area out but late night the early
20th century it refers to on e-book so
the embedded in this question is another
idea about Freiburg where he's talking
about this moment of self-reflection
which is critical by nature right and
whether that and I may be misreading
what you're asking is a 20th century for
a phenomena or actually this idea of
self reflection is something that all of
architectural history can be
characterized by in the overturning of
traditions that reflect back on to the
discipline itself that's you know if you
read the first one of these great books
that he completely refuted but which i
think is one of his finest works his
book on mannerism yeah he goes through
the writing after writing after writing
after writing talking about the way in
which these authors the author's the
architect authors of mannerism there are
in fact demolishing the critical
premises of the previous generation in a
very very rigorous way and yes I think
you're right the criticism is always
that self reflection on the past I mean
in the in a sense history cannot be
critical and cannot not be critical by
inference because you are in fact
constructing a reality that never
existed a reality that is too totally
intellectual periodization is
intellectual styles are intellectual the
only thing that not only use a little
different than Nietzsche used it yes
because he also used the antiquarian and
the monumental right which ideologically
would suggest a completely different
motive
in the political environment in which
we're living in jail imagine that right
absolutely
well what he is saying of course is that
what happens when one or other of those
three moments of living district living
in history if you're if you totally
accentuate the antiquarian there are
those people who live totally for and in
the past and can't act in the present
yeah if you're on one de mentalizing
partners past history you're saying main
architecture great again as you're
trying to reconstruct the past as a
banner for your power and presence right
if you are totally critical there's
nothing left but a pile of ruins that
you have demolished over and over and
over which is why he's talking about the
triad of this which is a kind of strange
Nietzschean on dialectical triad it's a
continuous dialectic between two and the
third one's completely messing up the
dialectic as not becoming the resolution
of the dialogue which is absolutely I
think that which was your question right
correspondence because Peter Osman
Khalid ro regardin who Peter Eisenman's
PhD thesis well it's perfect because
Colin Rowe is giving him a historian
title and Peter could turn this he's
using history all he wants is always use
theory as a way to inspire you to do
architecture there's no other I might be
a peasant because of these known as the
super theoretician who really is not it
erudition the real sense of the word
because he wants an answer before he
only has a question he's looking for a
given answer and he's has a goal there
in real theory you have a question I
think God knows where it takes you it
may take you for you didn't want to go
but you didn't know you would get right
so I would say that and these people in
the runner ways of operating I've
created it so does Isis which doesn't
take his brilliance and other reasoning
he's very good when he's doing analysis
of other buildings they're architects
pregnant he does it you know some stuff
so when he says modern is an ideological
move which says I'm using panel only to
generate a set of formal rules and
operations that I'm gonna use to
generate my stuff and when Colin Braun
was looking at it cover and then he
Trade Centers drunk history of that unit
anymore
better than I do then that's a historian
speaking best hunting Road he says a
form nothing modern
he's not qualifying up ideologically
what it's gonna be
he's saying these are foreign operations
and then it said within a historical
moment context it's a trade center for
my dear Ronnie but I think the other
thing which is very interesting in that
transition during the year that he was
writing a thesis he also went into the
competition for the Boston City wolf
during the two years that he was
teaching at Cambridge he was also
teaching us how to draw like Paul
Rudolph writes very very wise habitats
and eaten right his his project for
Boston City Hall was totally brutalist I
mean it was the most perfect fruitless
solution even more brutalist and more
perfect than the one at once right ah
very elegant I built the model so I
should know so at that point he is
searching for a way out of the brutalist
aesthetic not epic right and at the same
time as he's understanding the Brutalism
in its formal structure was the next
step from say Villa Savoye in its pure
structure it was the next step in terms
of messing things up but still dealing
with the combination of abstract forms
right so abstraction for so how if you
get out of that you get out of it by
breathing pol clay you get out of it by
reading Mahoney naki
look at the footnotes in the in the
thesis they are all they're the ones
that animate and deconstruct the purity
of the pure phones that tribute CA was
putting forward as resolution right at
which point he involves himself taking
from victory over the notion of the
diagram right the diagrammatic
architecture which is the abstraction
fold right and he takes his guru CA
falls and he slices them and dices them
like so many you know Kate's and a
wedding party right and and then at that
movement right which is the movement I
described through the up main to study
that whole movement passes through those
circles and squares and internetting
movement plus the ability of a form a
three-dimensional form to carry with
itself its own dynamics right that's all
play but diagonal is the dynamic of the
cube the diagonal and and so that sets
up on motion then motion into or motion
Altaf set up a series of reverberations
that kind of almost sonic boom through
the through the through the building at
that point and Dan is absolutely right
he is testing out the formulation that
is going to come to fruition in these
house one to another where the you start
with the cube and you start slicing and
you are you're you're adopting a kind of
you know constructed a structuralist
theory of the grammar and so he's a
little chocolaty asking the chocolaty
announcer that's just that that's just
that's just to make it seem like
relevant in fact he's doing no more or
less than any
Mannerist architecture is doing
common roads facades writing but calling
gave him the idea
calling hated the system attention for
stuff right really hated it because
cloud always wanted it to be open he won
in every facade to give another message
every time he looked at it right every
plan to give her another message whereas
Peter wanted it to be his next design
totally run again just to that one I
think it was also the interesting in
Indian Yzerman too great toward the the
bottom of her excited the reading of
Agra movement and at the time was has
this kind of beneath of being objective
about the structural program and so on
it an entire set of question that seemed
to be appliable only tours of the
classical architecture meaning any of a
sick tax or the grammar or the relation
between parts and so on inside a sense
bring what you were talking before this
other kind of modern figure into a
reason it was different from that the
myth of the model yeah I mean any notes
it took all the different elements of
the different potential it's interesting
because his first publication of that
idea which was in Knox Central design in
1953
came at almost the same time as two
other publications write about modernism
and the reform of the formulation one
was the publication of Summerson in 57
on the idea of the program in modern
architecture and the other was
balance stock taking in 1960 which was
to do with the new technological in
other words mark architecture right
which modernism in its version of
modernity the kind of provision / Museum
pertinent modernity had somehow
pretended to solve the relationship
between technology form and M program
right I actually not solved it to the
point where these three strands
architectural form architectural
technology and architectural program now
have their own autonomy ready to be
taken up by Chris Alexander in the
computer ISM and programming right ready
to be taken up by octagram through
through salt report we do in in
technology and ready to be taken up by
Peter in terms of form so that trio
wasn't very it was we called them the
terrible trio in London right Summerson
the classical historian talking about
program that the aircraft fitter are
talking about technology and Peter the
homemaker
should we eat it I slip in one more
question maybe and that's just so I
think it's a it was a thank you both for
doing this
and for s Dean's and as leaders of
schools are doing this I couldn't tell
if blatant in the argument was the
suggestion that I'm not sure my dare
from from your point of view you took
historic history really as an
experiential roam through Italy very
light not so much on readings fear
theorizing our historicizing but looking
for the forms and some of the narratives
behind the form as Tony you looked at
you know the lineage of the great
historians second half of the 20th
century all right are you saying that
these can kind of happen and should
happen in a design school in a way
that's not so formal or a word that were
using
now silo you know they're not in silos
independent silos but actually me to
bring a generosity and yet a rigor to
each other absolutely and I think that
that a design school but does not
situate the objects of its practice in
capitalism in exploitation in richness
and fullness social questions in
economic questions and a design school
that doesn't situate you know objects of
its practice in the in the study of how
those objects came into being it's not
it's encouraging blindness and deafness
and dullness on the part of its
architects but a design school that
separates that out from the sensibility
of experience in relationships of space
and form and technology and technique
and those experiences such as described
by Adair in terms of brick bonding this
is also you have to happen and they have
to talk to each other
if I had to respond today I would say
that because I did actually go to the
history Theory program in the a a in a
much bigger way but I am also aware of
the real challenges of history being
taught in design schools and often even
if not in reductive ways one's aptitude
at a certain moment in time in the
context of a design studio might be
limited and cannot get into the depths
of what the historical research requires
which sets you up in this kind of with
the vulnerability of having to do
something with a certain level of
innocence and ignorance and what I was
presenting to you was that moment of
innocence what I also was trying to show
or Devorah or kind of reveal is that
despite that innocence the prospect that
the artifacts that surround us from this
thing here to this thing here that
they're laden with multiple associations
and an intertext reality that comes from
many cultures and many many sources
reveal something about the historical
nature of how things emerge nonetheless
and part of our maybe part of our task
as designers is a to relieve ourselves
of the guilt of the rational or the
scholarly work and just any things but
remind ourselves that after it's done
there is another work of scholarship
that can be done that revisits that work
in the context of a much
in history from which issues of Labor of
race of ideology are all there but not a
manager I at the time that you're
producing them so I so it's also when
you say histories of architecture
histories of architecture always be from
Vitruvius on right but what is
architecture right so the truth is it
was siege engines it was water clocks it
with ditches Dynes
aqueducts it was the whole thing right
for for art historians in the late 19th
century it was Alberti to Bramante right
and then forced a little bit further
into the borough in the mid 1920s right
so the history of architecture has
always be deeply compromised by what is
architecture in the general culture when
Tesla wrote his history history of a
European architecture in 1937 to 1938
the first sentence is ah a bicycle shed
is a building Lincoln Cathedral is a
piece of architecture architecture was
only allowed into his book if it rains
the spirit of all that stuff right raise
the spirit of man orange with periods of
pop move right so this kind of history
has continuously been revived right
post-colonial history gender basis for a
whole range of theoretical questions
opening up history to those questions
which is wide theory is important in
history and why it's also dangerous if
there's one thing I didn't like about
the predicament it's that with all of
the scholarship in history that can be
done the idea that an innocent piece of
architecture can be in conversation with
other pieces of architecture before and
after them and that somehow this you
know the anachronism that is the act of
design it is always somehow has the
potential to speak outside of the
literary format that that spaces and
forms are pregnant with with with their
own form of scholarship whether you
recognize it
