it's my distinct pleasure
you said Ferrando he is an architect
practicing in Barcelona and a founding
partner of Youssef redundant
architecture
he's also the Dean of the escuela
technique a super deal that the coup de
la salle Barcelona his practice is a
dynamic combination of teaching of
profession and cultural activities and
I'll just describe a few of a few of
these his work has been exhibited
internationally really all over the
world including the architectural
biennial in Venice of 2014 the Aedes
gallery in Berlin and the Museum of
Modern Art in Rio de Janeiro he's also
developed an intense teaching career in
parallel was practiced mainly at the
escuela technical video that I picked go
to the Barcelona as well as the escuela
technical video dr. Victor de LaSalle
he's also taught extensively in one
cyrus in south america at the loot EDT
and he has lectured at harvard the GSD
cornell Licata liga in Santiago at
University Illinois Chicago and the list
goes on
I should mention that Yosef has received
quite a list of international
recognition and awards his study on
collective housing developed in the
housing and the city corset that Excel
was rewarded with the 2016 city of
Barcelona Award and Yosef was also the
winner of the FA d Awards he won first
prize at the International architecture
by Emilio situs and also was a finalist
at the Yakov Chernigov
international award we are deeply
honored to have Youssef Redondo here
with us today thank you you said and I
pass it over to you
for this kind introduction and thanks to
everybody for being today here but
especially to today another tehrani
because a pleasure for me and no no
howler to lecture in poly onion that
what has been references schools and say
were studies and the 90s so it's it's a
pleasure and I am proud of being with
you to share some of my my projects and
especially thanks to the to Loretta to
to organize this this series of lecture
and to invite me again del we have been
meeting an interesting meeting in
differents and several places around the
world so I'm very happy here that we
have this opportunity again so let me
let me share this screen so the lecture
is the title of the lecture is inhabited
infrastructures so in fact for me
infrastructure is the fundamental
facilities or the fundamental systems in
order that a place can be used so
inhabit know so for me when I'm talking
about the inherited infrastructures is
not talking about flexible systems but
rigorous rigorous systems rather than
rigid and rigorous flexibility rather
than random so it's not related to the
rigidity of systems or related to the
random of flexibility no it's just just
the opposite is the reverse city of both
words together so in fact I like always
to begin with this this image of a nest
and normally when I ask who this next
this nest looks beautiful normally when
I ask that to the audience there's a lot
of people rising the hammer like feeling
that this is a beauty always showing or
an example of beauty but normally when I
ask for things that the the the bird
wanted to design something beautiful
nobody arises the heart and this is the
kind of beauty that I interested on no
it's an it's a beauty that is in is
separated to the knowledge it's not
directly related to the taste of
subjectivity
it's an very knowledge that relate that
is related to the objectivity and for me
this nest
and this beauty is related to three
three keywords that are mana materiality
so they are working with only one
material in order to learn from the
material in order to understand that the
material is is your partner because it's
the one that is telling you if it works
better as a compression or attraction or
whatever but the sentence is the way of
understanding that the material is not
skin is not a surface so the space is
the space itself and even the structure
can inhabit the start space the second
world would be geometry so that you have
working by geometry so in that case the
the birth is like assembling these
branches in a geometric way with these
circles in order that they didn't need
to use other materials like glue or
screws or whatever so working by
geometry you can generate space
you don't need to work in another
direction the third one would be
efficiency so there is no waste there is
no waste material so it's zero waste
material in that case and a part of that
is efficient because it's collecting the
branches the branches close to the to
the place he wants to build it so with
these small small branches they're
always more or less similar like when we
work with industrial elements that we
used to work with the dimensions that
the industry is giving us so in that
case the worth is using these elements
and finally when the nest is not use
this nest will fall down will be organic
compost and then there will be another
three with our branches with our nest
with our Birds etc so these three wars
efficiency geometry and mono materiality
are related for me to the knowledge of
objectivity in terms of objectivity that
I wanted to transmit in that sense we
will explain today three three groups of
project sleep or freeze of nine projects
I will try to have time to explain this
this these groups and the first one is
like a female infrastructures the second
one will be domestic infrastructures and
the third one will be public
infrastructure so I will begin with
de fumer infrastructures we have one
project in a urban landscape the second
one in a natural landscape and the third
one inside an existing infrastructure
the first one is an installation that we
met with students from La Salle and
another professor Jenny Bakken and a
guest professor that was one whose
office from Shenzhen and it was a
billion the fibular pavilion that should
be three months in front of the
Cathedral Square in Barcelona and it was
in the 2014-2015 2014 and we had to
build something related to the the word
identity we took the word identity as
the architectural and construction
identity of Barcelona and persona had
had different ages in terms of identity
it was a woman 2000 years ago the Roman
city later the medieval city and
nowadays we have the contemporary city
everyone was more or less shown in
different or with some different kind of
shapes or constructions Roman Roman city
was related to the Roman aqueduct but
the same times with the cargo stock
Amano's so all the organization of the
cities the medieval era was related to
the Catalan vault and contemporary city
was related to dance and the landsman no
design by serda so the idea was to build
something very abstract that is is this
black piece that we see here this 20
meters long / 6 meters wide
that is just located in the in the place
where the former the former Roman wall
was located and it's just in the door in
the door of the decumanus
entrance so what we decided to do
something to do the piece as simple as
possible the disabled to recognize or to
be like assemble in different ways you
not to show these three things no the
aqueduct the world and the daily of grid
related to the incentive I PI server but
first of all that what they were saying
to transmit over to the students that we
were
decided together I'm building that
together is that when means a free meal
or not for me there are three things
that are crucial the first one is that
when something is a free meal you should
touch as less as possible the place
where this piece will be that means no
foundations for example etc the second
one is the V of circular economy no so
what is a female is the use but this
material is coming from some place and
should be going to another place to be
using in in a different use for example
the first one is the material efficiency
so to use the material as it is without
waste material the the piece as simple
as possible that was a piece of 40
centimeters per 4 centimeters per 1
centimeters with some cuts on the limits
in order that this this geometry this
asymmetric geometry that is 4 per one
along was that when you're joined when
you assemble these pieces the next piece
is providing three dimensionality these
are minimum pieces that we should have
in order to to have an inner space
because always the ideas decide about
joining some kind of a domesticity or
inhabited places so it's not only a
place that you see so it's a place that
you have it so it's always like a cave
inside the nest so is that here we can
see there's the pieces and how this
asymmetric pieces are assembled provide
us the way how the piece touches ground
and provide us some a regular perimeter
that allow the people that didn't that
didn't allow the people to climb that
was some of the worries from the city
hall to see from that side you see the
aqueduct following the out they had a
formal aqueduct that we have on the left
side and the other side was like the
Catalan vault that where they organize
different events give different events
during the three months that was the
thing here on the right side we see the
people inside know so it's like this
kind of cave that you can inhabit not
only to cross or to cross in attempts in
the visual way or physical way even
you can inhabit them so as you see that
in order to touch as less as possible
that place all this element of touching
in a several points the ground in order
to to share the loads so they know that
you don't need foundation so whatever
but the same tests to have the nav they
enough weight to be to not be possible
to move by hands or by the wind the way
it touches ground is the only piece that
is different is a stainless steel piece
in order that that this one is the one
with screw that this is the one that
calibrate the the land so there's you
know the public space is always within
donations and then what happens here is
that this still is still piece is
providing an horizontality for the
pavilion but the same time is separate
separating the the boot which is the
material of this installation from the
white area of the floor
after three months all these pieces in
different groups were will move to
different kindergardens the of the city
and when the kids destroyed this
interval at least this syllabus in there
this kind of playgrounds that they that
they made these things were moved to be
used as a organic compost this is
another installation that femur
installation you know chalky or others
it's eight cliffs that is in northwest
areas
Chile three hours by car from Santiago
Chile modeless
in that case a personal engineer that is
doing is organizing a new like housing
community with 16 houses 8 houses
designed by a Japanese architect like
whose motto is always Jeremy etc and it
houses design by 80 Linnaean architects
Alejandra velor max Lunas among them and
the guy who's organizing all this thing
asked me to this to to design a door a
threshold in order to enter to arrive to
that place that's a place this is a plan
with the 16 houses none of the houses
were built when I was asked to design
the door of that place they were sending
me some some images like this one so the
it's called Ochoco brothers eight clips
because this fragmented coast so it's in
the desert in front of the in front of
the Seon when they were sending me this
images the first thing that I was asking
is that world they would they wanted to
have the door they were entering what I
want so this is the worst answer that
you can receive as an architect so it
was difficult to define or to decide
where to put the doorman but one of the
because I was always worried about how
to do something that is right the
mistake city of the
the houses that will be built on the
future at the same time is how something
is related to the landscape scale why we
don't have this houses and then in some
of the pictures that they send me there
is this kind more or less these twin
tracks that are erased because the time
so it was a time that wasn't working
anymore in that place so it was wait
because you know I decided to put
something above no like becoming some
kind of basement becoming the carpet of
the project not to understand that that
train tracks are the ones that are
directed to the to the landscape scale
so this is like a basement because it's
horizontal and it's connecting all the
city from south to north so it's like
like doing a project that is occupying
all the country in the moment I decided
to begin to work in this kind of a
fumarole project that is like is related
to the idea of movement okay so it's
ready to reveal wind I was projecting
Graham Bell and this kind of case that
he was designing at the end of the 19th
century always again working with
geometry with the repetition of small
pieces as we have seen in the previous
project that was eight thousand times
the same piece in this one the one that
we're talking now will be eight hundred
times the same piece or even I was
researching a lot of Encino checking how
the will is not only one will so I will
not to work you have to you have to work
with a will made of wheels so there's
there will that are multiplied in the
speed there wheels that are changing the
direction there are wheels that are
collecting energy exit so finally what
what I design is this will of wheels
will made of eight wheels that is made
of eight hundred times the same piece in
order to work with the with a double
system that needs a wheel that means
gradual system from the center and a
tangential system on the perimeter and
we're changing eight times the angle of
this kind of diamonds so you have the
diamonds that are changing eight times
the angle in or others becoming from
radium to tangential system and there
are only some joints on the steel joints
that are that are connecting the pieces
you know that you have always the pieces
the wooden pieces equal and the scipios
are the ones that are changing the world
there was another challenge is that this
this now friend asked me that that this
piece should be built with 50 students
so after designing that that should be
built with 50 students so what what
minute is that this very like draw
construction with two scaffoldings when
following the other one with a crane and
a pulley with and the axis of the wheel
in order that you can you could build
the wheel on the floor so you only thing
that you have to do who is that to make
the first swing and then you pull up and
then you do that second ring etc and
then the with the smaller wheels could
be done or could be built on the floor
and then put it these are the four
wheels on the floor finally the wheel is
six meters diameter so the more or less
is rented to the wall height so do you
feel that is even some kind of a
domestic scale but the sentence it has
the scale to to go through so the the
train tracks became path a pathway to
write and and that they will became a
door I decided to put the initial point
of the wheel just in between these
students in order to perceive that the
wheel is bigger than the train tracks
but when you see these train tracks from
far away it's different no we can see
the dot the will gossip dot in the
middle of D so finally the project is
all the train tracks that the
construction is only the will and the
location is changing constantly so after
this question that I was giving that to
the client or world I should put the
door finally I am sure whatever you want
because the will was able to be moved in
different places so the door could be
changing constantly
on the third one of this first group is
a familiar installation from last year
2019 in Barcelona in that case the
organizers every two years cause for
about construction is one of the most
well known first in Europe about
construction and as you know what was in
the first is plenty of stands a lot of
stands every one with its own brand and
fathers etc but the organization was
organizing the competition to build and
to the design the common areas you have
to think that this is an this is an
event that with a duration of three days
only three days the space for common
areas that means the space for lecture
six address three thousand square three
thousand not here yes three thousand
square meters and the amount of material
that you need for this construction is
more or less twenty thousand square
meters of material that every two years
they threw out after three days so one
of the for me one thing that was
important in this guy in this case was
how you can work with waste zero waste
material and another sentence how are
you using this material later or even if
this material is coming from another
place another hand I was thinking that
these places should have some kind of
kimono mentality that is not PC because
it that the stands are so if you think
that the fur is more or less like a city
the stands are like the houses so the
common areas are like the theatres
cinemas etc in that case it needs some
kind of a facility scale but there's no
DC because you're not able to just grow
on the floor or you're not able to have
foundations because that means that
every week they will remake the floor so
the only way of having monumentality
solar space is to hang it and to spend
as money as possible and the other thing
is that as this is a construction where
I wanted to work in
in a very didactic way in in terms of
understanding that everything under
construction is rated to the attraction
hanging light etc or compression
stacking weight etc so I was using only
two materials so I was talking with a
geotextile company so the geotextile is
this kind of textile fibers that you use
on Sunday here inside the roof and you
can use it in different different
weights you note on the Sun if you want
to have more weight or lighter or whiter
but the sentence would be more
transparent less transparent so was not
chosen this kind of 180 grams and in
order to define the spaces in order to
define the human scale I was using this
these steel profiles so I was talking
with Sara familiar with the road with
the team that is in charge of the
construction of lisara family above all
the by gaudí and I was asking them if
they could lend me the piece steel
profiles during 3 days these are the
pieces that they use to move the prefab
concrete pieces of the facade lobelia
and they lend me these pieces and the
same for the for the row so I was asking
for this for the geotextile I am going
back these are always coming in in rows
of 2 meters wide per 200 meters long so
he was working a catenaries north to
optimize display the length of these
elements in order to unroll it as a
space and to roll it later so finally I
obtained all the material to make the
space and all the material to make the
furniture for free and with waste
material this is action the action of
the space that is it was called touch
the space for for comfort lectures
there's a space for meetings and for the
future so I will focus in the in the
talks so if we check that place note
that when you work in an insight another
place that's because I was talking that
this one is inside another building like
like a congress building no you need you
have to understand over side you are
embedded in another place so you would
you have to
take care of the rhythms of that place
so every dis always this horizontal
great arcade lines are the truth the
truth that depends on the rhythm of the
structure but the same time distresses
and always separated for meters because
it's the distance of two broads but the
same times the rows are always coming
this catenaries related to the rhythm of
the triangular shape of the dress system
so everything is very very connected and
embedded in order that finally it seems
that nothing happened in order to enter
it's always the idea of door no and
anything is not crossing at all is the
idea of approaching to a place and then
how do you enter to a place for a
lecture coming from a place from a
building that inside has to at twelve
hundred twelve meters height so from 12
meter sky's height you pass to the six
meters height there's the the upper part
of this catenaries so everything was
coming from six meters height and then
you go down down down and then you have
two meters and then you cross no you
have this sensation you have this
process from 12 to 6 to 2 and when then
and then you turn 90 degrees and then
you begin to enter to that place that is
the space for the lectures
some of the images that was didn't
happen like this because not all the
beams were equal so finally what I
decided with the beams is to group the
the beams in colors and in lengths and
then they do stuff as they work as a
beams to have the height the longer ones
in the upper part and the low and the
shorter ones in the lower part in order
to work as a pimp we will see later this
space behind for the for the b.a.p area
the people that were giving the lectures
and this one has some pictures of the
construction so this that same track
that they was coming from Salah familiar
they put these pieces in a way that we
were asking so were designing and
thinking the sentence of the
construction did that's a construction
of this peaceful for the talks that is
40 meters / 40 meters with all the
trusses related to the structure cables
and everybody doing done also finally
when they finish that they move up the
track Center with with the beams they
put the beams and then there we move
down again this again under construction
and this buildin so you can see here how
the the bins were selected / colors and
later they were selected per size and
then the lower the shorter ones were on
the on the lower part in order to work
as a beam now with cantilever so the
last ones are like almost 20 meters and
one tonne weight and they were stacked
nor 2d to define levels of dangers or
levels of tables or level of bars so no
with the shapes of that with the levels
of that
with some small joint in between in
order to build it so to stack it to be
able to start with Toros no I mean and
to be able to remove but it generates is
kind of lab'ring so obviously there were
two entrances but a lot of people they
weren't even throughout place and as
this is soft you will suggest to cross
him that way so the people the well
crossing in this de in that direction
every two pieces or so every four meters
the module of the catenary was moving
half of the module you know that you
were not you weren't able to see
directly in that direction that the
auditorium and there's a VIP area
finally after three days they roll it
again as I said and now they are using
in different rules etc and the beams are
again in la Sagrada família in fact four
blocks from here I'm going to domestic
infrastructures I will talk about three
houses very fast but again and one is in
the landscape and another one is more
like in a urban space and the always
inside another house
this is a house that for the same client
in eight cliffs and he asked me to
design a house mainly in boot but
finally I did everything in boot but in
that case was a house for no word for no
no one so it was a house for no client
and from known place in that area but in
own place now and then in that the same
areas we stay here so the house of the
it is that one so it's a house that is
bidirectional it's a square because it
doesn't application so you will have the
location in terms of how you use it and
the second thing is that how you use a
house that is is for everybody and for
novel you know so and it's a second it's
a holiday house a weekend house so what
it is a square that is made of nine
squares that is called eight plus one
because there's only there's one that is
the only
that you are not able to change it is
the one in the middle so he's in that
case is a very very natural house but it
because it's eight squirrels surrounding
around one square in the middle that is
the fire is the kitchen so it's very
very natural in that way in that sense
um and though the eight on the on the
that are surrounding that piece are
defined but by these blocks that there
are bottom blocks in fact it's this one
is it has weight facility weight
facilities or water facilities or
storage space so in a way of having and
non-hierarchical space not define and
define spaces and you can occupy it that
places as you prefer so that means that
you can have like we're saying here no
the lower part like two single bedrooms
on the upper part one master bedroom or
dining kitchen living and always a
kitchen inside and then the the question
said instead of having a room for the
bathroom is to soak up glory new player
bathroom to have the toilet in one place
is how one another play the sink in
another place and ideas that space at
this here no the space that is like
again like a cross inside the square is
to work like like marcel duchamp in in
in his studio nicer make a door with two
holes so depending how you open the door
you're closing when space and
incorporating one to another one
etc so you can inhabit the house as you
want I was putting some conditions that
I wanted to have like the four corners
to be an open room so not inside room
you not understand that this house that
is not provoking like complexities to
the landscape which only always like
embracing like provoking concavities to
the landscape and as you see here the
floor is a tweed is a booting grid that
would be above four big beams
concrete beams that will be the ones in
charge of separating the wood from the
floor but the centum the ones of
organizing some kind of corazon tality
in that area
and again there's some kind of
assembling special system over so you're
living in some kind of a join of wood
and in this externality exteriority know
that the pavilion tries to be like an
unfinished project
it seems like an unfinished construction
or like a twin no it's some way the
columns are occupied by the vegetation
but the sentence the idea of having
elements that you feel that you're
inside outside or let the swing know so
your swing up down up down and then
inside the house inside the house etc so
always provide nice idea in the Dynamo
we can house a house could be different
so depending on the on the location and
orientation you will choose how you put
the bedrooms rooms or depending on your
domesticity no and it has to happen with
the house next existing stone you know
that the stone became the anchor of the
house but the center is the stairs of
the house so the house he increased the
perception of having a bigger house
through two mechanisms one is the
diagonalizing the space so it's always
you have the Yavin house in every
direction and the second method is that
you would have always like an endless
circulation also because you have as you
have these elements isolated the baths
etc you can't go around constantly
and finally the spacing between the
kitchen has an adverb roof you know that
you feel that you're cooking outside but
you are inside so this is the only piece
that isn't not able to be moved so it's
a house around a fire
to the house the probiems for concrete
beams will allow you to have this column
mentality in Asuncion Paraguay para why
well just finishing a house that is that
one is two beams is like a big table
like two beams inside an enclosure a
brick and crusher and this is the
landscape of Paraguay so it's always
like a it's a it's very nice because
it's called Tierra colorada it's like
color red color earth and it's a
beautiful color and you'll find this
kind of constructions on the on the
roads I'm always with Greek red brick
etc and this is the what is called
culatta Java is the typical house over
the ocular house because para wife has
most of the year is very humid and with
a high temperatures and only the house
works like this so you have two bedrooms
separated with a living room and a roof
with a pitch a picture book that
provides that the heat the hot air is
going up and then you have this guy this
kind of cross ventilation so we were
saying to work in the same way to have
like the bedrooms and the rooms on the
on the side you know that you have
always this kind of circulation like air
circulation and being able to be closer
or not but the same times to avoid
closing doors so that's the house in
fact the house is inside an enclosure
for security but the center's because
the enclosure the brick enclosure is the
one that has the servant some of the
servant areas and finally the houses are
two beams with a roof there will be a
green roof that is the one that will
allow you to be like like an a flying
carpet like floating in between the part
that is in front of the house and the
part that is in the other side of the
house so you are like you know some kind
of a green carpet or green flying carpet
in among to 12m soap so by security you
are close by the same times on the upper
part of the house you are connected with
with the rest of the landscape and as
you see here you can open totally you
can see
through etc and there are only two
blocks to brig blocks that they contain
the bathrooms one bathroom for one room
and the other bathroom for the other
room but the sentence that to brig boxes
are containing the the fire so one is a
fight to cook and the other one is the
fire to heat so when someone's in in in
winter that they set it up with cooler
they have this fire so if the house in
Eclipse was a house surrounding the fire
this is a house in between two fires
and I would say so here we consider them
closure and only to be loose so so this
a house that has like a house of big
with two dogs boxes of brick and two
elements this is a house under
construction in the last months and this
is in the in Asuncion Paraguay and again
as we saw in the how they were stacking
the bricks to cook the bricks with brick
ovens we were using exactly the same
techniques here so with the box inside
this is a box off in the same way that
you can find in the brick ovens the part
no so from outside you only see that you
will see the only thing that you will
see is this kind of a brick friends and
here in the upper part we will see how
appears the concrete platform that
finally this concrete platform would be
a green roof floating in between these
two green spaces and the last domestic
scale is a house inside the house was
built like five years ago more or less
it's a house that we'll see is in in
that place so it's in front of the
monastery so we had to to leave to
maintain the the the main facade and
even the roof because it was the
surroundings of this very nice monastery
so the house is that wonder we see here
with with the light on the right side so
we had to maintain this facade so the
neighbors who have like a house inside
the house you know that to maintain some
kind of distance in between them that
provides light to the lower part for
example that was without light before
the intervention em and to take
advantage of this small house to provide
to provide light inside more or less
reflecting or in spreaded by these
pictures by the artist Marcos we can see
the footprint of all houses like
becoming inside new houses or existing
houses now so we're taking advantage of
this
by my Marcos book in order to understand
the language so fast and for us was
really important idea of not
understanding the the new house as a
stacking slabs it's a newer space inside
the old space that the house so the
house is a house made of brick concrete
pieces so precast pieces sorry and with
a Budin houses inside as you can see the
slabs are in different levels you know
you can see always through the pieces
are always next to the floor next to the
facades you know to have light in order
to generate some kind of a bolt inside
that became the aura of the space among
all the spaces of the house so there are
only two materials wood concrete inside
the ceramic existing house you can see
their houses move and iterates to kind
of kind of particles is a very narrow
house it's a space of 4.5 meters but
instead of having the stairs in
transversal direction I have generated
the longitudinal arity in order to to
again to play with the perception as the
8+1 house so the the surface are in the
longitudinal direction in order to are
always like entering in the party wall
no so it is a particle that is sort of
having 20 centimeters it has 90
centimeters so you are entering in the
wall to go to another level and then
this idea that you are inside the wall
that you feel that you are really really
in a narrow place make them when you
arrive in the booth and areas
differently that the space is lighter
and much bigger than they are
and in the other side would have the
lower particle that is 40 centimeters
wider this space for storage and energy
circulation so these are all the floors
when we go directly to this know so
you're always circulating that area so
there are no more stirs and that one's
the ones are always in will Greeks here
we can see how there are windows that
they are facing the new house to the
left and they are facing to the function
inaudible former house to the left to
the right and then you'll have to
replace
and you feel that these places are much
bigger because the comfortability but
because you have passed first previously
to the taller places but even these kind
of rooms that we have seen like an
archetypes know like houses our houses
because as you're seeing always
discussions from a higher level a point
of level it's better to have the cleaner
and the standard notice of roofs
notice our terraces as a roof but the
same time when when for example the kids
are opening the window the room became a
window of the kids because they open and
then they provide like here or the same
of the bathroom with this archetype with
the peach roof provides the joint
between the old house on the new house
provides light to the core of the of the
house so this is the the core of the
house which is the kitchen and is the
space without windows but you have a lot
of natural light because all the spaces
are shaping the light to provide light
to the this kind of an inner space
well and finally and faster as public
infrastructure so three buildings and
they were working on and the first one
is simple Osiris is a competition that
we won like two years ago more less
seated competition that were
participating pets over hundred house
Nakia bellows etc and we won the
competition to enlarge the university of
Turcotte retailer with a 15 15 thousand
sq meters and what they were asking for
the campus is a building that would be
very flexible inside with classrooms and
offices and we decide to have like a bar
that is more or less repeating the
cluster shape of the campus and this bar
is 60 meters long 20 meters wide and
there are no columns inside and no
installation inside so the idea was to
have like like a tripartite or
tippity-top facade like that one would
you have a white elements of white
Mercia fighter stretch on the floor in
order to provide something of a common
spaces the next two floors are the
floors for classrooms and the next three
are for offices and the terrorists so
what we're seeing here in the facade is
an inverted a structure but the same
times the the structure is the pattern
of subdivision that we can have inside
so again this idea that the flexibility
is not random so the upper module is 2.6
which is the minimum module for
individual office the the classrooms are
two times that so 5.2 that is the
minimum piece for for a small group
classroom and lower part is three times
that you know to have the minimum piece
for a cafeteria for example so in fact
the facade is the pattern of that but
the thickness of the facilities is
almost two meters in order we have
oldest the mechanicals in that place so
in one side of the structure is always
the electrical elements and the other
word the other the other side
elements so everything so when you're
going up the structure is becoming
smaller because you have more structure
and less notes but the mechanical and
the opposite ramifications were coming
their condition is coming from above and
as is going down it's becoming smaller
so if you see the thick facade of almost
2 meters what you're seeing is how the
structure is becoming smaller and how
the the mechanicals are doing exactly
just the opposite so everything is
happening in this facade now in order to
have an empty space if you need it or to
have I divided the space if you need it
and everything was built so this
structure was built in concrete in situ
and and all the pieces like like all the
pieces that are on the facade are prefab
winterize pieces made by aluminium and
steel so that you can build you can
build it in industry and then apply it
in that place like this kind of pieces
by jumper away for the frame Universitat
so everything is all the pieces of Steel
are like applied or hanging as you will
see later thus the main stars are
hanging in order to show how the the
concrete is the only one that is
sustaining the building is the only one
that touches ground with eight columns
only weight columns and then everything
is that this steel is working by
traction so again no like concrete
compression still traction and finally
there is the thermit irreal that is the
one that organized the inside spaces
that are like modular wooden furniture
storage areas etc to organize the space
in between so this is the campus so here
we have some kind of frames that exist
and this former like a water tank with
these columns and very very very nice so
there was two how to work more or less
with the same kind of structural
personality so here we were working
again with the idea of columns and
frames so with this 20 20 meters long
frame and the columns becoming some kind
of a three formal way
so you can see the plan so this is the
ground floor the first and second and
the third fourth and fifth them and
everything is organized in order to have
the McHale girls and everything here but
again as we can as we saw in the in the
femoral intervention in costume at
everything is ready to embedded rhythms
know so this 15.6 the meters that we
cannot have in the ground floor know is
related to the dimension that we have in
the entrance of this former building so
everything is right or this dimension is
related to the four elements that we
have here as we will see this kind of
porch that we have here it's related to
that one so a ground floor the facade is
moved back in order to have a continuity
of this in order to be related to the
scale of that building and the scale of
that one so the emptiness the void of
that one is rated to the lower part and
the and the massiveness of the new one
is related to the old world and we can
see so this is a thick facade that
contained everything this is a facade
that we have been working well with the
renderings for the further competition
this under construction in Buenos Aires
and now it's finished as you can see so
the structure is the pattern of
flexibility these are another pictures
for an under-construction we can see how
we have these 20 meters concrete beams
and from these elements the stars for
example are hanging from 25 meters
height they are hanging and not touching
ground so when they arrive at the ground
they are not touching you note on the
standard - to explain how these things
are related to the to the rest of the
materials inside know how you organize
these things are related to the or
organize with boot these are the most
pregnant at groom or floor so you are in
the upper part and here now it's just
growing this elizena so in some months
we will have like some kind of a red
blue color like hanging in that place
you know to have some kind of shadows
and and again this is the repetition of
this structure every 2.6 meters provide
us this kind of pictures or smaller big
sort of continuous pictures of moon
Osiris
I think I will pass that fast if not we
won't have time it was a competition
that we obtained a second place in
Mendoza that is a very amazing city in
for wine in in born in Argentina it was
a building inside an existing building
so we had to put some kind of houses
offices and commercial spaces inside an
industrial building
and we organized that existing building
we all we only remove the skin of the
existing building not to be transparent
but at the same times to be some kind of
protection from from the climber because
it's a climber with 50 15 degrees of
difference in one day so that was like a
some kind of some kind of protection and
some kind of test like yes like skin in
order to protect the new building inside
you can see here the winter conditions
and summer conditions you know to have
some kind of Mediterranean climate in a
building inside a place that has another
kind of climber to think that this is a
this is a space that is a dresser but
because all the innovation system that
they organize since 100 100 years ago so
every street and every sidewalk has some
aeration at each system that allow the
city to became some kind of Oasis so the
idea was to work in that in that sense
not so to use the old irrigation system
we can see that on the right side to use
all the irrigation system of the city in
order to to to irrigate some kind of a
vegetation layer in this facade that
allow us to have a more humid space in
this industry climber so that was the
roof the space again in between liked in
the pictures and the pictures by Marcos
book that the space on the on the on the
roof for common areas and garden for the
citizens of that place and only to
Phoenicia the Rio Salado project there
is a project that we finished the
executive project some months ago but
because political reasons
it's totally stopped now it's a pity
because what's a nice a nice place a
nice area it was just here in a place
called praia de waka it's the Orca beach
just in the lower part of the powder
sucker and it was an old an old building
there were some years ago was
refurbished by part of the building was
refurbished to become a design
University the same school they asked me
to design our tote or refurbish did the
other part it was some more lesson
greens but it's amazing place because
that was it was in the 20s
thermal baths as you can see here
balneário de Luca was during the
twenties between the 30s was amazing it
became one of the most famous M casinos
in Brazil like Copacabana or Atlantic oh
and we can see here in the image Walt
Disney in that place even we can see
is a movie by Walt Disney with Donald
Duck and cetera that they are that is
happening just in that casino we went
here we can see if we remember more or
less this this shape we will see it
later but here we can see or somewhere
else inside that place it is the place
nowadays so in the from facade we can
see the building that has been
refurbished but all the the other part
that is more less 4,000 square meters
he's not refurbished but more or less
what I was defending in the project is
that this modest building had three
moments now it's in dreams but it has
three important moments the thermal
baths the casino but even the
destruction destruction allow us to have
this kind of possibilities now so we
have windows to the sky or windows to
another space that is facing another
space or to have some kind of understand
the building as a Sun watch so a lot of
opportunities that didn't happen before
because everything was too close when it
was thermal or when was a casino but the
destruction make appear some other
things not like for example the opening
of that place you can you can see a stir
that is going to two places that you
don't know where are going
but this is this some kind of surprise
but this is allowing us to to read and
other kind of things or for example that
space that is next to the to the
auditorium no that is it has it this big
opening now facing the powder Shugar how
the stairs are becoming a skylight
how you can have an auditorium with a
natural light and then with that
attitude I was defending in fact I was
approved by the City Hall to to make us
as less as possible no more less with
these strategies like automatically not
only opening four windows in four
corners of non-connected rooms provide
some kind of connection that when before
and it was to work only in a very like
inspired by Dina Bova you know in a way
that how you can do as less as possible
in order to fix the Queen so in order to
make it possible to be in a habit so
there was two to refurbish in a way that
the only thing that you can do is to fix
this in order to repair the structure or
to impermeable ice everything very good
but the idea was to use the same
structure that you need to build it to
inhabit it later so to use a scaffolding
so on the structure like a scaffolding
that you are using to refurbish it are
the same ones that you are using later
to be colonized by the nature as we can
see here in the new entrance that would
have this building or to be again
colonized for time in that place inside
to be colonized by the vegetation but
even for the people know so that yes all
this kind of infrastructure to fix no
and to stop the degradation of that
place with the ones that we will
organize in the future the culmination
of the people the users the models as
you can see in the lower part cetera so
to domestic the way the way of
converting that in some kind of public
domestic space to the same material that
you are using to fix the degradation
thank you very much thank you sir thank
you very much that was that was an
incredible and moving lecture right now
we will continue this conversation on a
separate call so please please follow
the instructions on the screens for the
live stream Q&A thank you very much
you
