she talking about me thank you all for
coming and thanks to the sponsors she'll
sit down
do you wanna stand up do you hear night
do you hear me okay so it's a it's an
incredible pleasure to be here I was
saying to a few people before we got
started here that I grew up teaching
what do they call you here Johnny James
mr. Lagerfeld professor laudner
professor luck
we sort of grew up at sci-arc together
and I think of sci-arc Cooper in the a a
being sort of know serve sister schools
in terms of the importance of the places
the legacies that's out enough so it's
really really great to be here and I
want just one to thank Natalie and the
students in the committee doing super
generous since I turned up half an hour
ago touring the building and so on so
it's a it's a huge honor to be here I
hope I don't stink the place up so I'm
going to do the talk the talk is
structured around a sequence of four
things the first I'm going to read yep
Jimmy knows what I'm gonna say anyway
I'm gonna read 24 things that I like and
then I'm going to show you some images
of people and things that have been
influential for me and what I'm going to
do third third I'm going to nice she is
Octavia third I'm going to
set some principles into play that I
that sort of travel with me and forth
I'm going to show you a cross-section of
some work and try to link it to the
early thoughts as I read their read not
so much but enough to get you grounded
I'm gonna show you just cycling through
in the background I'm going to show you
some images of speculative houses
gardens and landscapes that I've been
working on I don't know a thing in the
digital realm so I open up Photoshop and
spent sort of one to three hours of
piece on them so those would be just
cycling they're essentially sort of
drone views of things and then I'll get
I don't know that's just fooling around
a little bit trying to work out cut and
paste and so on and then I'll then I'll
try to show you some work that's it all
have different different kind of meaning
so I couldn't work out I thought I'd
just show you some title sheets that's
all I'm going to show you tonight I
couldn't work out which one to pick so I
made three to set up set up the
conversation so here we go and I'm gonna
try to sync this up where the 24 I likes
coincide with what I say and what you
see on the screen architectural
education should be pithy contentious
its head on the chopping block like it
or not - I like thinking about Van
Gogh's lone white iris lady gaga
and nanotechnology all in the same
spatial sweep 3 there are substantial
differences between building
architecture and spatiality a simple
observation with game-changing
consequences like what's in and what's
not for I like thinking about the
abandonment
typological obligations in favor of
ecological provocations
this approach invites contingent and
unpredictable practices rather than
confirming what's already known this
kind of thinking breeds as yet
unimaginative
5 using priests priests spatial language
prompts can trigger inventive
programmatic thinking imagine germinal
objects verdant programs fellow surfaces
knotted thresholds all subject to change
at the flip of a phase shift just like
that six I like thinking about Wallace
Stevens thirteen ways of looking at a
blackbird as templates or a DNA for
developing critical skill sets capable
of gathering heterogeneous characters in
search of a strangely familiar and yet
just out of reach halt seven probing
questions should infectious Lee populate
the educational terrain of architecture
for example when is the time of
rendering um could architecture be
schizophrenic delusional and paranoid
simultaneously might have planned be
made here and the section over there
beau suddenly morphing into a transitory
landscape or something like that eight I
like thinking about the contemporary
architect being many architects a hybrid
species agile and skilled at occupying
contested edges and dusty perimeters yet
capable of turning on a dime
nine twenty first century architects
might speculate on split temporalities
and split geographies imagine
architectural propositions that scan
data surfaces of now then and sometimes
sites morphing at warp speeds while
hijacking or ex
patience and suddenly disappearing just
about like that ten I like thinking
about promiscuous conceptions of
architecture in the 21st century for
example spatial ventriloquism
architecture that behaves like a fast
change artists read three houses in one
I like 11 unlike the language of
architecture the language of
representation positions materiality is
conceptual temporality is malleable and
gravity as negotiable like alchemy but
only just a bit like that I like that 12
sorry I like thinking about developing
digital software if anyone can do this
I'll pay you my salary for the rest of
my life Digital software that could
simultaneously embroider metaphorical
impulses narrative twists statistical
mutants and the consequences of a
psychological whim spatially without
batting an eye anybody up for that
please see me after the talk 13 arguably
architecture education needs to be
grounded equally it needs to be a high
risk taker a tightrope walker a
contemporary hybrid of Harry Houdini and
Evel Knievel I like thinking about this
2:14 I like thinking about the daytime
facade of a Home Depot reconfiguring
itself to become a nocturnal
agricultural surface changing land
values as it morphs from one form to
another or what about duplicating a
domestic interior sending the clone into
the neighborhood at night to co-mingle
with other domestic environments or I
like thinking about suburban backyards
that regenerate themselves becoming a
collection of fish markets by dawn and a
bioluminescent electromagnetic field by
night 15 analogous thinking this looks
like that this behave
like that can increase your formalin
material imagination and skillsets
instantly a hundredfold in a snap of the
fingers just like that 16 I like
thinking about the use of generative
history and progressive theory with big
lush and fidgety velvet cushioned chairs
at the table of 21st century
architectural education seventeen Marcel
Duchamp's three standard stoppages might
be a metric for the construction of
architectural education transforming
accepted norms twisting as they might
approximately like that 18 I like
thinking about architectural and
architectural proposition structured
like paired cuckoo clocks wearing hip
waders the architectural surfaces might
be tattooed like an embroidered and
sequined pair of western boots and the
landscape for the architecture might be
organized like the game like a Chinese
game of go crossed with calligraphic
utterances analogs work like that 19
once an in violet part of a socially and
subjectively constructed figure of the
architect the architectural drawing is
an increasingly complex affair a tricky
business to say the least I like
thinking about that I guess 20 I like
thinking about an educational model
where it matters less what you work on
but more on and on how intensely you
work on it 21 a new city proposition for
China might require utilizing different
design methods in relationship to
hybridizing biomorphic interests in
Geographic data splicing diverse and
highly varied design methods might allow
us to work with different circumstances
just like that 22 I like thinking about
architecture that might materialize the
space of the building's construction
rather than the building
or what about what about motivating
erasure as an architectural activity is
it possible to think about things like
that
23 the education of 21st century
architects should not aim to prove the
profession rather I like thinking about
significant points of contact in
critical points of difference between
professional training and disciplinary
positioning 24 I like thinking about
what the 21st century architect might
think about 24 educational I likes I
like thinking about that I'm lucky to
have studied I'm not gonna read
everything just bear with me there are a
handful of paragraphs here I'm lucky to
have studied at Columbia with the likes
of Mary McLeod Kim Frampton Bob Stern
which we have three illustrious members
of his cohort the red Avenger Elli Tim
Wood Mario Salvador II and many others
I've been extremely fortunate to have
taught at Penn sci-arc and Michigan for
long periods of time um high quality
individuals including faculty staff and
students time spent in and around
Cambridge in the UK and the Bartlett
where I'm the visiting sir Bannister
Fletcher professor this year is not
inconsequential working with Peter
Eisenman Bob Stern and Denise Scott
Brown and Bob venturi also stoked the
fires much of my thinking is the work of
an amateur hinge - no forms of expertise
or real knowledge but motivated by a
willingness to probe relationships
amongst things conceptual frameworks and
phenomenon constructing a discipline
likely teed up as a young character out
of Columbia when I started road bike
racing with little to no understanding
about how to do something like that is
the discipline by which I now cracked
these experiences coupled with observing
and occasionally participating with my
father who is a fine cabinet maker
opened my eyes in the early days I
followed the leads of the lead of others
trying to find my way in the deep
horizons of education the profession and
the discipline eventually I started
thinking around things and I hope up the
sleeve of things testing the roles of
mischief while making while trying to
keep my eyes on the ball
venturi was a real import he was a
friend sir I'm gonna stop here you can
you can scan this venturi was a real
import he was a friend and mentor I
lived with he and Denise for two months
when I moved to Philadelphia to work in
the office things that are both and and
multiple things to do with ambiguity etc
got locked into my radar I began to
think about reframing what it means to
practice how one might need to live
multiple or parallel lives many amateurs
composited into a character always on
the hunt for transformation I've tried
to care about cultural and disciplinary
responsibilities differences between the
discipline the profession how to frame
things outside program or context
discussions and how to construct
something like a practice or many
practices there's real value in all of
the experiences I've had and the people
that have been incredibly fortunate to
be around develop and have tried to
develop a dexterity to value many
perspectives the work the understand
understanding the roles that things can
play real real and specific workable
discursive rhetorical structural
sacrificial and so on mattered to me in
preparation for this Eve I was thinking
about things or characters that might
emanate they might animate an education
the discipline imperfect
my practices as a teacher an architect
for example grounding things in the
history of ideas positioning the context
of architectural education the
discipline and practices as critical
constructions identifying the players
and roles the constructed parts of both
for example what are pedagogical models
curricular options studio culture the
use of language history Theory other the
review types of practice shelf lives of
Education and so on developing a
vocabulary of operative terms in
architecture articulating the difference
between the language of representation
in the language of architecture exposing
positioning or framing representation
techniques and design methods for
working acknowledging sliding languages
between disciplines the import of
relational thinking and structuring and
that's all I will read so thanks for
your patience
I'm now just going to work through a
handful of influences you've had a
chance to look at some people things
phenomenon here
I've got about ten of these of each one
of these sort of plates these are people
in the drawing or representation realm
who have been important to me this is a
road map for the ways in which I try to
conduct my life and practice Marcel
Duchamp opened for me who can make art
and what qualifies as art through both
his large glass and certainly fountain
man-ray was also important in his the
work that he did with other Dada's here
the photographing the large glass with a
bunch of dust on it desperated
or Joseph boy is an important artist in
my realm here with a coyote locked in a
gallery with a coyote for a handful
days where the American artist who hangs
out with Bjork Matthew Barney in his
interest in surrealism autobiographical
conditions and physical training of
athletes where the photographer Richard
Barnes who essentially documents things
but documents them in ways that render
or reframe a World War I way way the
Chinese dissident artist who in
innumerably has political and social
activist tendencies in his work or
richard ms rach the great california
photographer in his in his desert canto
series or something like the boneyard
if davis-monthan Air Force Base in
Arizona where 5,000 military aircraft
occupy the ground and interest in the
eraser got developed here for example or
a morale as a photographer who lives in
Boston or on Herron Market Graham
walking City
broadsky Newton the great russian
architects and their project for a
doll's house the great hieronymus bosch
the earliest surrealist in my opinion
the Garden of Earthly Delights Leonardo
da Vinci of course in his advent of the
construction developing instruments that
might work on certain kinds of things
ooh a Cenotaph for newton paranasal car
cherry drawings in which the openness of
the drawing is in direct opposition at
conflict with the suppression in the
containment of the prison drawings
themselves or diego velázquez is las
meninas
in which the subject is rendered
transformative or mutable we're not sure
whether we're the artist whether we're
being painted whether we're in the
mayor's whether we're standing outside
of
of the scene so the subject construction
is important here or the great
surrealist painter rene magritte in the
human condition beginning to talk about
what's real and what's artificial and of
course probably my famous the most
famous building for me in the repertoire
would be borromini's st. san carlo well
like quattro Fantoni the great baroque
church in rome this is what my work
table looks like this is what my other
work table looks like these are key
things that I care about that travel
with me don't need to go through them
you can put your eyes on them they're
all they're not a descending import
they're all important to me in some way
or ways we don't have time to move
through them but it looks like there
might be a recording of this if you're
interested or contact me and I'm happy
to share them with you
I care enormous ly about design methods
that is the ways the ways in which we
work not representation techniques
design methods it's probably it's
probably the most under taught aspect of
architectural education in my opinion I
wouldn't go to a surgeon probably and
ask them to work on my heart and they
say well methodologically I don't have a
clue how to do that so these are these
are very important to me I've developed
hello Michael young good how do you men
yeah you as well
so Michael Young's just come where you
come from Dallas yeah good for you
yeah baby see these are a few drawing
types that I've worked on things when I
work on drawings or representations
they're tailored for the phase of work
that I'm working on their task specific
sometimes they use conventions sometimes
I when I try to invent things
these are 13 drawing thoughts which also
travel with me I won't go through them
in detail we'd be here for a long time
tonight but you can again put your eyes
on a handful of them they matter to me
quite a lot these are different patterns
in my work when I look at the work over
some 20 plus years now there are a
number of things that turn up in the
work fairly consistently no matter how
how much I try to diversify the interest
diversify the approaches make pieces of
work different from the next there's
stuff that I always do there are many
kinds of ways in which I try to develop
a practice although I work almost never
I probably work six months in the last
12 years one of them are conceptual
catalysts have identified seven key
categories that I think are contemporary
in nature and I basically make language
folds to produce projects so I mean
again you can look at these out-of-focus
architecture spatial ventriloquism
architecture that makes you races and
remakes itself the categories for me are
important whole set of discussions
around materiality fabrication and
production things to do with atmospheres
ambient structure character things to do
a change flux temporal fluctuations
multiple temporalities interesting a lot
so these are finished projects really
time lapse architecture what might that
be
architecture that scans a site and
diversifies its commitment to distant
geographies rhythmically
things to do with duration that is how
long things are in play how strong weak
how they fluctuate according to temporal
frameworks conceptual things growing a
building three houses in one
architecture that produces false shadows
and so on and the architectural drawing
so these are things these are word games
that I play with myself there are many
of these just as a way to train my
imaginations and to imagine what's
possible conceptually I'll show you some
work it probably gets increasingly less
interesting now if it was at all
interesting to begin with so I've made
750 landscape drawings I was just trying
to sort out we were taking we were
taking students out to those American
Southwest and for a week and we it's
IURC I didn't have a clue what the
landscape was about or what we what we
might talk about it so I just started
making one-a-day drawings and there's
somewhere between 45 minutes and maybe
an hour and a half a pop I haven't made
any for 12 years I don't make any
judgments about them sometimes they're
thick's that I'm working on like the
upper left-hand one I was thinking about
Pompeii archaeology's and I was thinking
about red ponds over here and I had some
pigment on the work table and made some
stuff so I just made just make it much
thinking about monochromatic landscapes
and so on now I'm going to show you
Michael
you'll close his eyes real take up
snooze now for a while I'm going to just
show you some work that I made when I
left a nice and Bob's office and I moved
to LA sort of teaching it sigh okay I
thought it was gonna be a real architect
and I got some commissions I got a
commission for a little guest house and
I was invited to an international
competition to do a do a house based on
a 15th century tack
so I did that and then I had a another
real commission for a little house in
the desert so sixteen hundred square
feet and they were all at the same time
and I I thought I had some skills and I
knew I didn't have much of a brain or an
intellect but I thought maybe I could do
something that proved not to be the case
so none of these got built I didn't
think they were very interesting and I
really had a really really difficult
time sort of psychologically emotionally
I just started to teach it sire and I
was a I was around sort of giants to me
at the climb Erik Bosse Thom Mayne the
open re Marianne Rea burisch all kinds
of people Mike rotundi and I sort of I
sort of beat myself up pretty seriously
for a period of time and then said this
is ridiculous you don't you don't have
any other skills if you have any skills
as an architect you don't have any
skills at all for anything else so I
started then to think about the
architectural drawing a little bit as a
way to maybe see things a little bit
differently so I made a series of
drawings that I called aspect title
drawings and they challenged perspective
they're really they're non-synthetic
uncoordinated fragments of critical
fragments of architecture so this is a
second desert house and at the same time
amy was doing a PhD doing an MPhil and
PhD at Cambridge in England
we lived in a house that was about 1/3
the width of this room and I just made a
room basically at the same time as those
other houses I was moving back and forth
between pens IARC and Cambridge England
so I just made a little house a room
actually with a double aquarium and
leather floor and it's got all kind of
stuff to do with sort of held the
basement there's a rubber lined basement
and heaven above and then there's a sort
of working-class Street just outside the
window here and then a cemetery the
other ways of sort of Cross axes of
heaven and hell and cemeteries and sort
of blue-collar neighborhoods and so on
really quick very quick piece of work
and then a little bit later on I got
onto an open competition for an island
that's not far from here David's Island
and these are probably the most
important marks of my life just whatever
little stuff that I do whereas they're
called strategic plotting you try to
plot conceptual things phenomenon and
objects over in through time so this is
1996 so I told you already I don't have
any digital skills so I couldn't have
done it if I if the digital realm was in
play but I was interested in things that
basically shifted over and through time
and I developed I tried to invent
programmatic logics that work in contact
with a kind of thinking I was doing I
was trying to work on the back trying to
work on things like remoteness panoramic
and panopticon nocturnal transgressions
cyclical things mythical folklore things
to do with the sea and so on and I
developed programmatic things like
labyrinths of emptiness landings for
mythical sea travelers polished
metamorphic rock gardens multiplied
officers headquarters and so on so I use
the architectural draw
to start to deal with content but also
to hold for me with my little brain just
to hold a number of things in place
simultaneously using language notations
diagrams figuration found stuff and so
on a bit later I took on another
competition for a museum and I developed
another series of drawings this is a
thematic join where I'm just trying to
visualize the content for the work so
what the works about scientific historic
and aesthetic understandings of
collections the problem of the gays and
the Glantz collections as a cultural
construction the Greek muses is an
etymological ground for the contemporary
museum and so on and I've been developed
a series of drawings that I called
cryptic drawings they're basically
genetic they're like DNA they're not
formal or figural but they are they have
intelligences for me that aspire to
formal and material makeup then a series
of proto formal that is prior to form
drawings as is for uh there's an
alabaster surface in the project where
there are nine drawing instruments that
fetch away at the alabaster and they're
based on the nine Greek muses and their
characteristics and so on and then
things that get increasingly
architectural but they're not quite
there yet another proto formal drawings
a sectional drawing some things have
material properties in this drawing some
things have geometric logics other
things are punches wanderings remnant
thing
and so on so I'm happy to leave lots of
things in play things that are more
certain about and committed to other
things that I don't know that might be
in play but I don't have a sense of that
and then essentially a kind of first
sketch for the museum just a drone view
and it was got interested in this
project about how we might erase things
that are familiar to us in domestic
realms to produce a new house so things
like thresholds and programs and
equipment and furniture and so on so I
made a series of relational drawings
where I was just trying to work on
erasure and recoating the erase marks
and they're not plans or sections or
anything like that they're not
architectural they're just relational
drawings that work on a very bracketed
set of questions um in the early 2000s
my work was super slow it took I was
working hard at it when I worked but it
took forever so I decided to make a
house project that I called fast which
that basically tried to summon fast
which design muscles and I used analogic
thinking that is this is like that this
behaves like that and so on as a way to
get the house in play so the house is
like an English tea setting there's
their landscape milling machines that
mill garden surfaces like you're seeing
it like a CNC milling machine there are
all kinds of likenesses to try to get
booted up really really quickly to make
a house proposal making yeah it's just
very pretty conventional drawings
there's a composite drawing that's half
elevation half section with some
notational things and some displaced
fragments and then again a very
preliminary rendition of the house I
would say this is the equivalent of a
quick sketch model so there are a series
of milled garden surfaces there are
chrome shadows that
to the three big architectural objects
the architectural objects you eat in one
you sleep in one and you live in one the
trouble with the one that you live in is
it's filled with logs and you can't get
inside of it and it's calibrated it's
made of steel that's um and the steel is
calibrated to be materialized over a
hundred years leaving a pile of logs
essentially on the site there's a
labyrinth that you can't get into but
there's a red object that makes noise
there's a pink dust garden along which
the sleeping vessel moves when people
aren't there they're milled and real
cacti there's a chromed billiard ball
and so on so I'm telling you what the
things are this is a sleeping so
sleeping around there's a cuckoo clock
like objects that you sleep in and so on
so I'm not telling you anything in this
one about the content I basically was
just describing what things are there
things to do with copyright issues and
mass production logo developments and so
on and here you see you can see the
chrome shadows and they're real shadows
of course from the desert this is
looking down the face of the living
space the space that's filled with logs
and you live in two baskets and as a
miniature version of the house built as
a part of the living space um I was
invited to the prog bein Ollie to deal
with architecture as a transient
phenomenon when I developed what I
called a meta spirit Zoo which is a
cross between Metis it's a cross between
metaphors and atmosphere and it's based
on if
got developed which it never did it's
based on animal behaviors species
interactions breeding territorial is a
shion's and so on to try to produce an
alternative landscape and architecture
based on beastial characteristics
essentially so this is a these are these
are these are biopsies of a of a drawing
that was about 15 feet long and it was
it was made of materials and so on and a
strategic thematic plot essentially ten
years ago I got some cash from the
school Monica Ponce de Leon we had these
brilliant things called research to
making a good twenty thousand dollars to
do something so I spent four thousand
dollars because I was totally
unorganized and were trying to do 23
things and so anyway I was interested in
how we might breed landscape types
landscape types the picturesque garden
formal gardens not Gardens and so on
landscape elements dikes revetment berms
fences with landscape biologies which
have to do with temporal constructions
so instead of breeding those three
aspects of landscape and trying to
produce a more temporally sensitive and
choreographed and unquiet raft
architecture and now let's say when I
show this that of things like fabric
predators they're a series of analogous
drawings to try to look at how things
behave over and through time there are
graphic notational and real landscape
conditions there are zip or blooms these
are all early studies for things just
got about mmm twelve percent of the way
it where it should have gotten and
sixteen thousand dollars went back into
the kitty so these are some of the final
images there are things like
the zipper blooms and there are
test-tube berms and that cultivate
miniature Ecology's and then the fabric
predators distribute those and the
notational landscapes and so forth there
are a couple of examples of just I did
do when I'd work there just lots of
kinds of work these are these are really
really quick so I took a trip to
Vancouver BC and saw some killer whales
and thought might be nice to make some
architectural sections based on killer
whales so I made a bunch of these just
horsing around really and then a Jimmy
and and Michael Jimmy for sure knows
quite Howard we made a series of we made
five rooftop houses before move to Ann
Arbor and this is a plan that's a plan
for one of them got a bunch a bunch of
things around so I'm interested in
building envelopes surfaces skins so
I've got six this is called vertical
surfaces I've got six of those in play
these are a couple of them I'm working
on a floor triptych so I'm really
interested in I know I share this with
Professor young as well interested in
diptych sand triptychs paintings
historically grounded things and I'm
trying to work on a floor triptych which
discusses ceilings and takes
perspectival constructions out of place
that this has just cut paper pieces from
a floor triptych that I'm working on and
then
Nach my friend my good friend and
collaborator sometimes we do a little
bit together not much but we were real
fortunate to win
pamphlet architecture of 34 and we were
interested in contingent and
indeterminate architectures that is
architecture architectures that don't
predict how we participate that open set
of possibilities so I made a series of
drawings this one has to do with a
spatial setup that might allow
contingent architecture to be practiced
this is also part of part of that series
of drawings and then we made made a
series of drawings of which this became
an important one for to occupy announce
maybe these you know know Nats work it's
really incredible we have a
proportionate to have an exhibition at
the Bartlett right now and this this is
the only collective piece that work
really but he's made these drawing
instruments that have put quite a lot at
risk from the picture plane to narrative
constructions to indeterminate
conditions and so on so we made two
instruments one housed by drawing one
housed his drawings and we basically
staged a conversation between them as as
a visit is a specific part of the work
for pamphlet architecture so these are
these are these are images from these
are time-lapse images here from the
paint being thrown sort of medieval
catapult style from I'm my world to his
world there are a series of things a
dome that has narrative constructions
and in it an object that interrupts the
paint flow the drawings themselves and
so on so we have we continue to have
conversations about lots of things with
these two characters I'd like to have
more conversations but they're more
important than I am so they don't talk
to me
so now their fantasy Jermaine a long
time so more more recent work than I was
I started thinking about architects not
really dealing with the sky and I and I
made three analogic drawings for what I
call aerial diptych Follies and the
Follies do sort of clandestine work to
do a surveillance but they also are
meant to be sort of spectacular aerial
things that are deceitful in terms of
what they're actually doing so I made
made quickly the analogic the follies
are sort of a central piece and then was
able to get a little bit of money from
the school to try to ketch out try to
get under the digital hood to try to
work out within digital protocols if
there might be opportunities that that
we might that we might work on so how an
image becomes modeled how you might
model light sources through shadowing
how you might take flat things and
imagine deep space within them so this
this is really really recent work and
early days so we're it's sort of they
sort of care about this this kind of
diagram and then we're working on some
things with it with a former student
Gary Chung who's graciously come tonight
to waste his time the guy called Oliver
Popovich of Gary knows and so
everything's modeled in this
everything's modeled and we're trying to
just work out it's just a series of
conversations about in the operations of
digital management what might be
possible as
content or meaning construction so this
is the second one this is a physical
this is a physical construction that I
made there about that big and then we
did a little bit of Photoshop and this
this is all digitally modeled everything
swallowed the images of the image stuff
small everything's modeled so we're just
trying to just a little bit there's not
very much time we haven't had very much
time to work on it Oliver but we I think
I think there's some open terrain here I
think this and stuff to be worked on and
then the third one is is by some the
most developed so this is the image that
I made this is this is a bit what the
workspace looks like this is an
elevation of a digital model that comes
from it and then there are a series of
things which come which come out of
trying to work trying to work with the
image and digital modeling so every
every everything's modeled and again
we're just so if we go back this or a
city realm
that left-hand patterned paper bit that
I put into the original drawing the city
realm is on the other side of that don't
ask me any questions about this stuff
we're just just got the feet in the
water
don't make yeah so anyway they're quite
quite a lot of fun again modeling things
which are normally they're not modeled
at all and digital you're just doing the
operations we're trying to model
operations and things and relationships
between things it'd be quite quite a lot
of fun quite a lot of fun but not very
much time in a sadly but if they've got
I think it's sort of getting somewhere
that they feel is this interaction
so that's that and then so I got invited
two and a half years ago or something to
design a prairie motel and there were 29
architects from other places in the
world and everybody got a foam blank
like a like a an iconic house and I said
I'm not doing that
so we tried to try to then just work on
another just another birdhouse with a
burden hotel which so I have an idea
about designing of thirteen Burton
motels but through which I frame
essentially try to frame my work and my
teaching and this was the first one so
it's interested these are these are just
inspirational images that that got built
to try to get it get our legs underneath
us for what what we're gonna try to do
in all three of them to date are
physical they're meant to be physical
things there's a rhetorical one
eventually if there's a discursive one
there's one that only produces
alternative shadows to a former one bla
bla bla but the the bird motel
essentially all of them try to invert
human non human relationships and they
do that in different ways so this one
it's a physical thing just describe the
parts we don't okay for time
they're like Friday what half okay okay
you're bored stiff almost finished so
there's a bird landing strip there's a
garden there's a bird landing strip
where they arrive at the motel
there's um what's called a deep
taxonomical bird that's a yellow thing
underneath there are three clouds and in
the big cloud there's a windsock room
special room for people like Michael
Jimmy louder that's also where the sign
is called the flights of fancy bird mode
there are three hedges and one of the
hedges also stores bird purchase there's
a watering trough there's a bird rug
there are surveillance objects and there
are five others of diving board and
there are five bird perches and there's
a bunch of content that goes with this
but those are those those the elements
that make that comprise this the fun
thing to make but probably 90% of the
ideas had to be dumped because couldn't
figure out that's really really short
timeframe I couldn't figure out how to
build them so but it's there are there
are quite a few 3d printed pieces there
are some milled pieces and then it's
it's painted so this this bird is about
the size of a dove and the first one we
made it's 3d printed at really high
level and the wings we miscalibrated the
wings the wings are like that the wings
are thinner than paper when to ship it
to Italy another 300 bucks out of the
pocket we would quadruple yeah quadruple
those wings just learning stuff
quadruple the thickness of the wings so
that the thing you could put it in a box
and ship it then there's a second
version of the floating bird motel and
sadly we basically cobbled together um
the landing strip from the first one and
we used that as a kind of carcass or
chassis for the second one I wouldn't
have done that we'd had no time no money
had needed to get under way so it's not
what it should be but it a little bit of
traction so this one
this one uses programmatic features
primarily to reroute human and human
relations so there are things like
there's a stuffed technology garden
which is based on trophy rooms but in
this case there are aerial there Rockets
planes satellites they're clad in floral
and berry materials of the birds can can
enjoy the stuffed technology garden
there's a Dymaxion as a Bucky fuller
Dymaxion rug there's a fireplace there's
a fountain there are bird perches and so
on and there are several versions of
this floating bird motel so they're also
dancing bird alphabet topiary figures
these things and they inscribe on a dome
there's a sophistica let's see forget
the gestures parent
go here so in the hall there windsock
rooms and there's a bird ballroom and at
the top of the bird ball run there's a
dome and the dome is inscribed
continuously by these dancing bird
alphabet to bury pieces the track
themselves then there's a talisman this
is the bird table there's a micro
weather system and for the birds there's
a sail sail there's the sale there's the
sail and it's an homage to Wallace
Stevens 13 ways of looking at a black
bird blood loss in it and if so in the
the serpent did the the objects in
depending on what environment they're in
they change their surface
characteristics and the surface
characteristics are developed through
drawings which I've made in an other
context the Photoshop bits blah blah
blah so it's quite fun there there there
are different styles there are singles
and there doubles and there one and a
half birds that make these up and they
they occur and domes of churches over
runways of important airports in
taxidermy workspaces and so on so
they're a bit promiscuous is this set of
things are there three and a half of
them so another character that Gary also
knows a guy called Carl Heckman we're
working this is a like a two-hour
exercise for a dissipate maybe the
fourth one the bird motel this is a this
is called tugboat and this is a kind of
working this is like working class
burden hotel and eventually it's going
to have a
ranek sort of entertainment center for
the workers that floats as a kind of
halo around this object and so on
I should have mentioned one of the
things I like a lot in the bird ballroom
okay at first in that lesson is there's
dynamic wallpaper which stands distant
landscapes and projects those as scenic
views relative to the interior bird
ballroom so just just horsing around
really just just funny stuff so this is
this this is literally this is literally
a two-hour Jarrah thing and just a
couple of last things so a friend and
colleague Jeff Halstead Michigan we were
talking and he's he's interested in the
Photoshop things that I made he saw some
of them and he said let's have a go at
translating those digitally I said all
right sounds sounds good so I'll just
show you a few images so this is this is
the image that I made and and then this
this is the first take on on that image
and so we're this the house landscape
garden problem and in this one now I'm
interested in trying to bring a second
house landscape and garden into the
topography of the first one so you can
they're they're starting to develop that
a little bit and these are these are
early early early days they're they're
they're primarily formal so they're what
touch problematic maybe in that regard
but I think there's plenty of room in
these this is another one of my
one of mine some drone views of the
landscape house garden problem and this
is a this is the first pass sort of
digitally modeling that one obviously
just a rendering and then this is the
drawing that I made and this is these
are these are translations of that of
that particular version 83 digitally
modeled and just one last piece of work
the most recent floating bird Motel Carl
Heckman worked on this just finished
thesis again there's an interest in
inverting human non human relationships
there are things to do with how birds
optically perceive things it's a it's a
it's sort of a straightforward program
there's a log this elevation on the
right that so there's a log that has
various technologies and various degrees
of finish refinement and wildness on top
of that there's a micro weather system
this is really or this these are really
it's really underdeveloped the middle
piece is a shrine float piece and then
from the right-hand side essentially is
the housing for the bird motel and you
see elevations of the housing there's an
honorific bird which
there's an interior this shrine space
that exists in the middle vertical piece
gets topped out with the bird with the
helmet on the top there's a theater
which is these sort of screen three bits
on the nose of it and yeah there there
are other things but just just just
trying to work on this
yeah relatively quickly the log is a bit
interesting there's a lo J's summative
Hut that belongs to it out here on the
sort of gantry piece yeah there other
things to the non-human human
relationships a bird motel and a lineage
of bird motels the log the log the log I
think is is interesting the other the
other parts are there more known there
they're things that I might normally do
well but the log though I think there's
some room and the log and what it
entails and their micro worlds now being
inscribed in the log they don't have
anything to do with the birds really but
have to do with sort of emerging
characteristics it's a first pass at the
weather sort of weather system garden
the micro
this an image of you see the yeah we're
not talking about the ideas thoroughly
to seal OJ's but sort of skinny of that
some things happening with that the log
breeding birds and having tattoo like
things and different technologies
involved in it and so on
yeah just views of a I'm a
straightforward views of the object so
it we're just writing a piece for a new
ad to do with the 60s and 70s
avant-garde we're gonna take this up
this is this will be that be a couple of
images of this work on it a fair bit
between now and the time that the
writings do and then just lastly to
return to the work of the amateur the
work of Shana and Robert Park Harrison
the brothers architect
it's a beautiful series do you know as
it's a phenomenal and so they get up to
no good as amateurs and they're just
figuring out trying to work out how to
develop a way to practice their trades
so that's it thank you all for coming
thank you for lasting
again a super super humbling to be here
amongst the Giants that both belong to
the place now but have also populated
this place it's if this is a special
special place as I said the AAA CyArk in
this place right here right here so
thank thank you all very much for the
invitation and for listening anybody
have any questions
yeah please ask you about the black and
white plants the black and white yeah
yeah the ones that are drawn but it
seemed like a notational system has much
emphasis as the actual cut through the
walls and for me those interests and I
feel like the notational system gives
them a lot of their spatial energy so
I'm wondering in the reading of a plan
is a construction document would you be
interested in the intentional reading of
those notational systems yes I would so
I'm trying to I'm trying to think about
an architecture that has the
simultaneously has indexical notational
and physical properties that change over
in through time so the answer the
question is absolutely yes
in the back please yeah yes arguably
perspective one-point perspective let's
say was us developed six hundred years
ago and it's essentially the dominant
mode of representation but also spatial
articulation for six hundred years
that's not so hard to argue and it's not
so hard to argue that prospective links
through things like conical and
spherical perspective accelerated and
decelerated perspective and amorphous on
and on and on through virtual realities
and blah blah blah
so the thought with the floor triptych
is to try to to try to work a set of
relationships which are not linked to
subject horizon picture plane vision and
the floor triptych is just helpful
because the floor the triptych can hold
for me can hold quite a lot in play but
to to take it into the Jackson Pollock
round the floor around were painting it
for me too pivotal to when I first came
to New York and to Columbia and I didn't
know anything about art is still done
but when I first saw Jackson Pollock and
realized wow this is radical stuff that
somehow lasted with me and it's just
just a few thoughts coming together now
to try to challenge subject object
relationships perspective foreground
middle-ground distant ground and try to
get it try to discuss something that
might might have to do with that kind of
contour so it's early days it interests
me a lot and I've been thinking about
Michael's what do you that is still life
yeah we're you know they're trying to
take they're trying to work with
historical evidence and put sort of new
stuff into it so you know in Michael a
little bit so there's a number of
connections that got me thinking about
the floor triptych and how it like it
was meant to be a key part of the
Bartlett exhibition but I couldn't I
just couldn't work out the discussions
and how I might make it a physical thing
was meant to be about knowing
and pieces of marble and you know
middled pieces and cast brass cast brass
pieces on I'll get there may be new
please two questions sure there was a
project in the beginning where you were
talking about social cultural context to
my question about
[Music]
I should have said blue-collar
neighborhood so sorry it didn't let you
finish the question it was a kind of a
working-class neighborhood yeah
[Music]
relationship how I interpret that was
thinking about spatial relationships for
the burden and how the humans are
perceiving Network becoming the
spectators so it's like that's part of
the idea I think that's that there are a
number of discussions in the last 8 10
years which have to do with non
particularly in the last 8 or 10 years
certainly before that have to do with
non human relationships and how you know
for me starting to think about again
it's a perspective that's seen the eye
the eye the station point you ie that
there would be other other kinds of ways
to think about as an architect certainly
design strategies and spatial makeup and
so on that that are not that are not
subject oriented let's say or human
centric so that's a much larger I've
spent no time really with that thinking
but that interests me you have things
like object-oriented ontology and actor
network theory and the things that are
in the air that are other things that
tickle some things about maybe we're not
maybe we shouldn't be the dominant
species and the authorities you know
ruining the earth and so on ecological
and environmental discussions so just
being the bird motels are a very very
meager you know attempt to try to to try
to open some questions for me in that
regard and then I was gonna try to get
back to the so the blue key those sort
of working-class from the cemetery
fanatically constituted quite different
worlds so I was interested in the
interior of the house somehow being able
to discuss things to do with
paradigmatic cycles and life and death
and blah blah
blah and also the Telly's that are on in
the living rooms that sort of every
house you go by and you know sort of
people riding bikes that if every Dave
practices how that how the interior of
the house might start to discuss those
things but also its sectionally then how
the sort of deep symbolic and
iconographic structure in the earth and
things like the heavens might white
might start to see me speak a little bit
about that sort of sectionally so the
way the upper spaces are arranged a
rubber basement of the way they
intersect with a devil aquarium and a
leather floor and cactus and sort of
things that burn and inscribe things and
steel walls and so on it an upside-down
object st. Paul's Cathedral in London
and the double look where and there are
a number of things that try to start to
triangulate that the house is not
primarily an interior it is but it's
also trying to figure out how to discuss
things outside of itself again a super
quick piece of work that would require
you know if I spent 75 hours in the
house it's probably it to get it to
really work it's probably six or eight
hundred or a thousand hours to work on
it properly I'd need to change a lot not
just detailing stuff yeah Octavia please
started doing work like this I mean it's
obviously good stuff I mean I don't mean
this like if anything it's such like the
major compliment like I I understand
everything he said but yeah I get
nothing it's really telling you if I
totally get that I'm gonna I'll make a
confession to me to me the work is
totally normal work out everything it's
totally normal work the question in the
back
about notation and indexical
morphological spatial conditions that
are moving through different centuries
and time frames and collapsing and
temporalities and so on that's maybe a
slightly different story but this is
really this is figure ground work
essentially but to try to try to try to
try to draw your question you have to
try to so so for me it it has it has a
lot to do with the naming problem that I
call the naming problem so in
architectural education things like
typology and program and context have
very for me pretty inscribed deeply
inherited worlds that come with them and
I just probably be enough CyArk where I
think stuff got rattled around a little
bit when I was there and it's still the
case it began to it occurred to me that
maybe those things weren't shouldn't be
as sanctified as they were that so
that's been a me problems part of it
then I began to understand a little bit
that things were things but they also
structured relationships so I remember
seeing a trash can and for me it was a
trash can it was an object and I
remember going away and taking a ride
and first
stuff in the trashcan it was outside I
started to sort of got interested in it
I was I was writing and that Mulholland
Drive and it occurred to me that there
was quite a lot going on in that trash
can from the labor forces that
participated with the geographies from
which things came the kind of
obsolescence of things and bla bla bla
bla bla so it occurred to me that there
was quite a lot in that trashcan and it
was it wasn't it wasn't a thing any
longer it was a set of structured
relationships that were temporally
active and so on so moving from naming
to structuring was a big part of you
know whatever I do so okay I give you a
simple example if I ask you and Gary and
Andrew know this Jimmy probably and
Michael if I ask you to design a house
you know likelihood people are gonna
work you're doing it something
interesting but there probably be things
like bedrooms and bathrooms and maybe
kitchens and maybe a garage and a yard
or garden or something interesting but
if I ask you if I ask you to think about
hi a beautiful daughter I assume that
you belong to Jimmy and I know that's
what I meant to say I'm totally
politically incorrect tonight has got
got it totally I'm I'm in the tub but if
I asked you if I asked you on Ava or
others in the room if I asked you to
design conditions for hygiene and
defecation the profit the privatization
of sexuality the conditions of illness
and psycho psycho traumas you might not
design bedrooms where there's a bathroom
probably nearby where you can kind of
get easily to the kitchen this all you
might rethink the typological condition
of a house and open it up in terms of
what kinds of things might be structured
not what kinds of things are named
and assumed to be the default conditions
so it's simply moving from naming
destructuring was a big and big thing
for me and then opening up the drawing
in David's Island that the drawing
didn't have to be simply a description
of things that I knew but the drawing
could do quite a lot of work they could
hold things in play that were hunches
things that I've forgotten about things
that other people thought about that
there could be very varied languages
languages used in the drawing so all
drawing types all conventional drawing
types are relatively consistent I would
say you have line work that whether it
dotted lines with centre lines of
profile lines water so it just occurred
to me when there were a lot of people
doing this stuff but it was you know for
me it was a bit of an awakening that I
could you know I could I could write
stuff in a drawing I could I could I
could cut paper out and that figures I
could I could make notational marks and
they could coexist and that eventually
the hope was that they would that they
would discuss one another and I could
work out what was being discussed and
that there were latent and tacit
knowledge is being constructed by
holding quite a few fragments of things
in play that in the construction of the
drawing that there was there was
learning that that was learning things
so that the drawings really really
critical for me
but I feel really hamstrung now because
I don't have digital skills and it's
really really hard again I think about
all kinds of things which are
morphologically active material states
are changing things are rescaling and
non-scalar relationships and things are
stable and things are there for 10
seconds and gone forever and come back
in a memory construction those are
really really difficult for me to draw
I can image things but it's really
really hard to work on things the way
out of the way they don't work so I
really feel hamstrung I feel like I'm
gonna don't have any skills to work on a
lot of things that won't work yes please
sir I don't I don't hear so well
the thought process when you would make
where's the extra horses and what comes
into your mind like what we're joining
the way it is
whoa where is the sofa and so and people
who people have worked with a bit they
know it's one of those design methods
identified 14 and they're probably a
hundred and fourteen design methods and
we use them in combinations and and so
on analogic thinking for me is really
really helpful because I have really
limited skills and understandings about
what to do with ideas but when I work
and think analogically I can connect to
things which have similar relational
properties that allow me to concretize
certain aspects of what I'm working on
so if I might have a set of ideas and I
think well if that was organized like a
traveling freak show or the relational
properties of a traveling freak show are
not dissimilar from some things I'm
trying to think about when I can lock
into the traveling freak show things
become more concrete to made because the
traveling freak show is something which
is known and I'm trying to find what I'm
trying to discover what can be known so
analogic thinking allows me to connect
to things well outside of my own skill
sets
hey be analogic thinking can increase
your formal immaterial range this isn't
to do with your question as I said in
one of the 24 I likes a hundred fold so
that the top of a building could be like
the I'm just gonna make it up it could
be like the crown of the Queen of
England
crossed with a rave and tattooed like a
rattlesnake and by making those analogic
connections for me I'm interested in
increasing my formal material range so
that I have more ability to contact the
ideas that I have in mind I need I need
to have range
the deliverables to contact the ideas
that I don't have enough clue what the
deliverables will be so analogic
thinking is helpful in that regard to
answer your question a little more
specifically then it depends what I'm
working on normally when I work in an
amusing analogic thinking I normally
have a set of ideas in play so I talk
about smart analogues you don't have to
have any ideas in play like crowns of
Queens of England and whatever stupid
stuff I said to rave cross with
rattlesnake-skin so analogic thinking
you know it doesn't rely on having a
bunch of ideas when I work with it
amongst other methods that I work with
normally I have us an idea or a set of
ideas that I can't yet convert sighs
either conceptually philosophically
materially so I make the try to make
analogic connections if that's
appropriate and then you talked you
asked about how I make how do you make
them depends where children depends what
I'm working on so if it's an analogic
conceptual structure that's different
than if it's an analogical formal and
material condition that I'm trying to
register so it depends and it don't
always use analogic thinking I think I
use all kinds of design methods
sometimes knowingly sometimes
unknowingly we all do we all work we all
work in particular ways I'm just trying
to it mostly comes through teaching my
interesting design methods becoming
slightly more frontal because they do
things they don't do certain things we
interface with them I thoroughly in
different ways they have different
relationships to spatial makeup or not
some shuttle ideas some are direct I
just think it's really really important
I think it's architecture 101 design
methods and representational techniques
are fundamental in relationship to the
history of ideas those are absolutely
fundamental
things so I think they're really
important and I like the the sonic yes
[Music]
how that collides with the name
this is super good question so I've
gotten in a little more I don't
sometimes we need to talk about
narratives and allegories and metaphors
you can sound like an old fogey like
this is this is this is business stuff
of a distant past but increasingly with
social media the distribution of
knowledge and so forth I'm starting to
think a little bit more about narrative
constructions as a form of you're more
than welcome here I'm starting to think
a little bit recently about narrative
constructions or what what we might mean
in terms of shared we're not going back
to the symbolic realm where symbols and
the Renaissance and the Baroque start to
get a little bit fuzzy but what we're
not going to go back there so I'm just
trying to think about story tellings of
certain kinds that might increase the
audience rate but the desert house for
example the one with the chrome shadows
death not that that one did not emanate
from anything like a narrative and it
emanated from a series of interest to do
with ground sky and horizon things to do
with archetypal conditions in the desert
things to do with optical structure in
the desert there was no story I tell it
like there's a story there's no story in
that word motels are slightly different
[Music]
yeah you're asking a really interesting
question because I'm I'm oscillating
between an interest and indeterminacy
contingency got a critical fragments and
you make their applause abilities which
you can construct your own possibilities
out of those plausibility x' so that's
that's quite a lot different than
narrative constructions which in
narratives yeah no no narratives i mean
think about it
think about mythologies they mean they
may be visceral to you but they're not
they're not things they're normally not
things but they have they have cultural
construction they have cultural handles
that allow us to participate with them
so i just think a lot about things like
mythologies and folklore and a lot i
think a little bit about those things
and just shared with the number of
Instagram you know someone someone said
you know Cyrus
pennyroyal Cyrus said something like
there's a guy who teaches a Michigan
super interesting guy
Jimmy knows him Cyrus Penrod you may
know the facts they're alike there's
something like four million images
uploaded like every ten seconds in the
world so there's quite a lot of stuff
and I'm just trying to work me it's it's
an outrageous amount of amount of
material and as the narratives and
allegories and myths and separates just
just have to do it maybe try to rethink
a collective some some some some some
form of collective and we did the
theatres
libraries and silver they're not the
things which we rent us culturally but
this thing those institutions those
things with they mean in New York
generally now say so the narratives that
come out of a small interest in in a
shared shared communication about
subjects politics of communication
things that might matter culturally
these are really really good questions I
know I got it yes sir
Gary you don't come yeah go ahead
yes I do
so Gary you need a little bit touch this
could feel like a total non sequitur to
all of you as if the work didn't already
not there
so Gary I had the pleasure of working
with Gary last year at the University of
Michigan who works for professor Stern
now he was a he was in a thesis cohort
and he did a really really an amazing
piece of work to do with rerouting and
rethinking part Laviolette via koolhaas
and he manufactured a whole sin through
through sort of what are they kind of
iconic objects things which which are
familiar to us watches and cameras and
so on anyway as part of the work I have
no idea how many the the the thesis unit
was called double purple there they're
always colors so we've got I don't know
how many I'm gonna how many cattle how
many how many cows are in that thing
double purple cows yeah
yeah so the other guy that helped on the
bird Motel worked on some rubber ducks
that were a bit
they're like buoys but there were sort
of Trojan horse like things anyway so a
couple of those things turned up in the
and the bird motel and Gary's just
wondering if they're wrong for purple
cattle and the question the answer to
that question is absolutely they're
gonna be doing work on the log Munson
yeah they're gonna be grading trimming
pruning seeding fertilizing the log that
all right you're gonna send us your send
us a digital models okay
the pleasures of having people which you
know in the audience yeah that's a good
question Gary there is one yeah please
so how would you differentiate between
them because they're pretty similar in a
lot of ways because the baby the
procreation it's taken from
yes you're up yeah you're absolutely
right those two methods both start with
a so that's a shared Constitution I
would talk about those as cousins but
with appropriation for me when you
appropriate something you use it
normally in a direct dish way when
you're working analogically are thinking
analogically you're only in the world of
likenesses so this there's a
translational problem that comes with
analogic thinking does that make sense
this is like this this behaves like this
this references things that conceptual
structure references things like that
you're only in a realm of likeness
you're only in a proximal relationship
you're not appropriation you got it
that's it is yours does that make sense
so so analogic thinking is always a it's
a what I call a shuttle method it's a
method which allows you to shuttle
between ideas and things or phenomena
but there's still a translational
question in there that makes sense yeah
so if the house is organized like the
game of go it is not the game of go it
is not that is organized like that and
then when you're working on the
logically are thinking that way it's
important to think about which aspects
of the game of Go is it like because
analogic thinking you can take fragments
of things phenomena conceptual
structures not the whole thing so I'm
interested in the way the Odyssey is
structured but I'm not interested in
linguistic that go on in it so I think
sometimes I pick and choose partial
conditions and analogues that's that's
normal you can do that with
appropriation but with appropriation
you're you're in the game directly the
extreme version of that of course is
plagiarism which is a legitimate way to
work is not something we condone but
it's a totally lose
way to work Shari Levine who makes lots
of money with her work she's plagiarized
Brancusi
others and then straight up so I'm not
when we talk about design methods I'm
not I'm not really trying to locate them
in terms of this exposure ethically just
trying to say these are ways that you
can work so plagiarism is on the other
side of you chucked out a school right
or run out of the country but it's it is
still a legitimate way to produce work
architecture gets in trouble lawsuits
lots of lawsuits recently people copying
this and apparently copying that and so
on but it's still a legitimate way to
work are there other questions out there
yes please how are you situations what
you're like the viewer yeah like you
know this fluency in language this both
spoken and drawn and super generous
again I wouldn't have thought myself it
seems like you're like a lot of things
that you say and that you're drawing I
like like recognizing there there's like
a resonance from within the archetype
discipline but it's like obviously feels
others still and so I'm wondering like
when I see like your work that's of the
over psychology and like there's a name
for everything else there's like you're
against naming but then you like make a
new name for it and I like sure it and
I'm like yeah I know what that means
that I think about it I'm like no I
don't know what that means but in terms
of the drugs where you're connecting
different ideas like am I meant to get
it or is it for you like yeah this is a
really nice question not it's not
uncommon to get this kind of question
when I'm sure working I'm sure have with
other people as well I don't mean this
in a demeaning way I got really lucky to
have someone seems see a few drawings of
mine some years ago and then asked me to
exhibit some things and I've been
incredibly honored and humbled to be
able to be a part of a fair number of
solo and group exhibitions on the one
hand on the other hand it's really
really difficult for me because it's
simply the way that I work and I'm quite
honestly this is the part that I don't
mean in a demeaning way I'm trying to
make in the early work I'm trying to
make drawings that ultimately structure
the things in spatial makeup that I
think might be relevant or appropriate
or even necessary to work on the ways in
which I work on them so I care about
that at a cultural level the ways in
which I work on them I couldn't give a
toss if people understand things that
are there and I don't mean that in a
demeaning way those are worksheets for
me that's what I mean by getting the
opportunity to exhibit I mean head for
literally the world I'm not making those
to put out in the world that's just the
way I work on stuff so what what I would
have what I've come to understand is
often there are enough marks where
people can participate in some way or
ways in them they'll say they'll see
sending
grid and they'd be able to see that this
map like where they'll see characters
they begin to think about well this
might be a stage set that's staging some
sort of characters so so you know our
paint chips where they say la we've
painted our daughter's bedroom and we've
looked at some paint chips so the hope
is that maybe they you know working on
stuff but that they might have other
ways in and but Octavia's observation
and question is a really really good one
and to me it seems that really but now
it seems like really really
straightforward work to me and I don't
mean that facetiously or it doesn't look
like work necessarily that I'm going to
go out and you know when I'm walking
across on the bow ramp I might not see
some of that work but it's not it's not
I don't think it's unusual work
you might be slightly more unusual if I
worked on something and develop
something properly there's not a single
piece of work that's even half-cocked to
be perfectly honest I know better I've
been around these kind of places people
institutions I know better and they're
what this stuff is and I mean that I
mean that wholeheartedly I mean I've
been around I've been at 75 schools I've
been around characters places like this
I've been super super fortunate so like
I should be it should be better than I
am seriously I mean some of the best
minds some of the best work some of the
best institutions the best people the
best resources I've been super super
super fortunate and I simply should know
better and I don't mean that in itself
what do you call this self-deprecating
way I don't mean it that way no I just
know what good work can be Panik have
another
the society advisor see it again half of
the idea drawings I don't know what you
call them how come this can't consider
those good work I mean the thinking
might it might be something thinking
it's decent but there they haven't found
the maturity ins in spatial
representational makeup it's really the
that you can come back always to Wallace
Stevens thirteen ways of looking at a
blackbird you're talking about a
blackbird
but he's yeah you're talking about it
from thirteen radically different
positions and to make good work in in my
in my world you need to understand those
thirteen positions and they're really
really different I might understand two
and a half of them at best in one of
those pieces are working to be perfectly
honest with you and to make work that
has cultural durability that that might
contribute to someone's life or they're
they're thinking about it it deserves
their team ways of looking at it and
then to work the relational properties
to the degree that you're actually
structuring things that you say you're
doing
I wonder what want to try to do
this place what point in here is
designed for drying processes color
cumin and in specificity and do you
think it's linked to narrative I mean it
could be like generative you know no
it's not it's not directly related to
that color comes in it when I wore it
when I work half properly I'm working
trying to work on the things that matter
in that phase of the work and I'm trying
to tailor the ways in which I work on
those things so it depends the answer
the question about colors it really
depends what I'm working on when I'm
working on and how it matters relative
to the other things that are that I'm
trying to work on so it does not a is
not a wholesale answer or ubiquitous
answer to that question it's not like I
always do it or never do it it's just
some of those Photoshop the first things
that I cycled through some of those
probably the color and the figural
properties of color and figuration that
some of that was probably early but
colors not normally not early that's not
normally I've worked on a kind of
content so form method a meta method
where I have ideas and then I try to
like everybody probably try to
collaborate ideas with methods and try
to work out how to produce form from the
content so normally I begin with ideas
the Photoshop 140 Photoshop light I
don't have a single idea just that I'm
trying to work out I literally didn't
know how to work like Gary knows this
and rebuild when he was in school Jimmy
Michael
I literally Photoshop I literally could
open it but I couldn't it was the thing
that I could do in it
so I said the magic wand I did a
tutorial so I'm literally just working
and trying to work out how to cut
something on an image that I can to put
somewhere else so I'm not thinking about
stuff too much it's try try to work it
out that seems like a pretty interesting
pattern and if I you know complete a
kind of an exquisite corpse game with
things that I began to bring into the
Photoshop realm could I reach
domestic practices gardens and
landscapes those have rib does have no
thinking I mean I think about them but
I've you know making them at 1:00 a.m.
in the morning I'm up there finished
teaching or you know whatever and just
work on them for an hour and started
those about a year and a half ago so but
they're they're getting more interesting
out to me what they could become
anybody else anybody else have a
question I'm happy to is that still
Friday
I just want to say it's so great to have
you thanks for always know it's like
somehow I describe it as two sort of
parallel worlds constructing each other
simultaneously the drawings are the only
one thing in it the way that you are
able to verbally articulate them are
doing something in parallel and always
wondered if you do it the same way twice
and you don't have to answer it because
you can have all this work for yourself
and I will do that whichever way but
it's I think it's important for those of
you who may have seen your work it's I
think it's also crucial
I would say it's not necessarily
explaining the
it's building a kind of parallel track
investigations simultaneous
thank you very much I really yeah I
super appreciate that and yeah these
characters and some of the characters in
the back of know for a little while I
don't know them well but to hear that I
mean it's just it's really really
meaningful to me for you to say that but
the other thing is it's really hard for
me to talk I don't I don't think of
myself as as smart um at all and I don't
think that I articulate things so it's
really really hard for me to do things
like lectures I just don't think the way
to work on things and think about things
is much much more interesting to me then
then I'm able to share so it feels like
a I go back to the hotel tonight with my
head hung another gosh that was
miserable they were totally bored why am
I doing this the next time someone asks
me I'm just going to say no thanks but
I'm really humbled for super honored yes
how they came about yeah yeah Natalie
Brandi Jeremy and Javier or super
generous it's amazing here I was saying
that in the middle of New York City no
not the middle but in New York City to
have the stuff you have here it's
absolutely phenomenal
yeah so I've seen a little bit of it
yeah I asked one of them I said is there
an empty desk here Amana
but I'd have to bring my iMac I'd have
to bring my iMac as well and work on a
little bit on Photoshop any other yeah
thank you very much Michael it's so it's
total pleasure I can't tell you it's
totally totally great to be here and I'm
not saying that it I'm not saying that
just to say that Cooper is a it's a
super super special place pay attention
you're constructing the place I'm not
telling you it's amongst the three or
four most important schools in the
history of architectural education
without doubt without a doubt question
I'll say just one last comment I think
it's great to be here
I think I'm working my first back here
to come out here somehow we tried to do
it for a couple years that didn't work
out so and knocked a deal at the Kmart
Davies mission a couple years ago it was
like for it and so I'm really happy that
you're here
so do you guys that I have some studio
say stuff like you know there's 20 if
you work for 20 hours in one day two
days a week sorry this is still Friday
so I'll be quick so when Jimmy was it
when he was at sci-arc I used to go when
we pitched
vertical studios I don't know whether I
said it when he was in the pool I said
if you can't spend 50 hours a week and
studio don't bother because it I think
it's really really hard I think it's I
think buy some I know it might I don't
mean this in a demeaning way to other
disciplines I think buying miles
architecture is the most interesting
discipline in the world right you can in
a sentence that you can talk about
philosophy of film you saw last week
what you had for lunch and some drawing
that you speculated about
a month ago in the same sentence and if
you think about the history of ideas
optics geometry mathematics philosophy
religion architecture is participate if
discuss it's discussed through and by
those things and it's discussing those
things it's incredible I think it's
really hard to say therefore I think we
have a responsibility to humanity to the
generosity of allowing of enabling
people to live the fullest lives
possible we have a gift of participating
in the discipline which I think touches
all disciplines it's it's something the
trouble is I couldn't live six lifetimes
and touch begin to scratch the surface
of the complexities of spacial makeup
sometimes I'd do this
I'll hold a Ticonderoga pencils up with
the students and I'll say what kinds of
things make the pencil possible I sort
of look at me quizzically okay talking
about he gets paid to teach them what
the hell and they don't ask them I'll
say deforestation mass production the
history of writing then a point to the
eraser and say censorship and they say
now this thing's our pencil those aren't
frontal in the world of the pencil but
they belong in the network of
relationships to be simple about it
based on now belong to the world of the
pencil if that's the pencil we're not
even talking yet about the body holding
the pencil and the body and space and so
on our spacial realms are phenomenally
rich yeah it's it's an incredible
discipline we're so lucky to be part of
it
[Music]
yeah yeah yeah yeah this is one of the
many things that I like about my friend
Michael Young anybody else had enough
thank you all very much
[Applause]
