good evening welcome everybody
thank you so much for coming I want to
welcome as well to the Cooper Union our
distinguished colleagues from ka DK the
Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts who
very generously are uning us today in
this panel discussion as part of a first
hopefully many more coming
collaborations between our institutions
dedication of an architect is
challenging we all know that balancing
the responsibility of preparing students
for the everyday more complex world on
the one hand without completely losing
the speculative nature of an academic
environment that allows for invention
and the unexpected it is always a
balancing act of risk and control and
always embracing failure as part of the
process so just like taking a quick look
to the mission of the KA DK school of
architecture
the mission for the School of
Architecture and I'm quoting them the
fundamental condition of the program is
that architecture is not simply about
designing buildings towns and cities
components but it's also a special form
of reflection and practice within which
can change the world of an our
perception of reality so if we compare
that with our own nation we m2 provide
and I'm quoting again our students the
finest professional education available
with an intellectual environment that
fosters and expands their creative
capacities and sensibilities and
establishes the foundation for a
creative professional life so today we
are going to have a discussion that will
confront the visions and strategies from
these two institutions in how to create
a pedagogical environment that allows
for exploration while responding to an
increasingly more complex reality so
coming from Denmark I want to introduce
and the other is really difficult with
the columns but I want to introduce
firstly Arne hi who is the head of the
architecture and culture Institute
within the School of Architecture also
we are doing by Peter Bertrand right
there who is the head of the master
program of art and architecture and
finally I want to introduce Ann Braun
who is the head of the of the VR program
called taking place also within the
Institute of architecture and culture
and who is also Cooper Union grad who
knows very well this place as she was
also teaching architect onyx between
2006 and 2009 then of course we are
thrilled to have them here in this
conversation with three of our very own
distinguished colleagues as well we have
professor emeritus o castle and that you
are
distinguished professor I'd you know
they did Kirsten who all you know right
well and assistant professor mercy
holodeck with another part of the core
of Cooper Union so we will have a ten
minute presentation from each of them at
representations from K decades
representations from Cooper Union and
then hopefully productive discussion
with respondent Naraka we who is joining
us here today and myself and everybody
who wants to also okay and also joining
us by John Oakland who who will be part
of this discussion so I'm gonna be a
little strict with time as we have like
six percent ations and we still want to
have a little bit of time for discussion
so without any more delays we will have
our narrowly presenting first thank you
so much for joining
[Music]
well thank you very much my name is anh
and I'm head of Institute the Institute
for architecture and culture at the
Royal Academy of Fine Arts School of
conservation design and architecture
it's a rather long name so usually we
just call it k 8d k in my job a set of
Institute for culture and architecture
well we are running this Institute there
is approximately 150 ba students at the
Institute and then we have three master
programs at the Institute so all in all
we are around 270 students at the
Institute we are one of four Institute's
at the School of Architecture the
Institute for private sector and
Technology there is an Institute for
architecture and planning understand
Institute for architecture and design
and then was this Institute for
architecture and culture allow Institute
we have a common focus of what we call
the culture of building
and in our research and in our master
programs we especially focus on a
triangle where we talk about a political
culture an artistic culture and the
historical culture and let's try ankle
is a basic of our Institute the Royal
Danish Academy was established back in
seven three hundred and fifty four by
King creatures by King Frederick v an
odd signal nineteen hundred and nine to
six we were situated in an old barak
palace in the middle of code make it
sounds a little bit like a fairy tale
but now we are situated in the old ass
Anala for the Navy outside arrived near
Copenhagen be a part of Copenhagen where
the Navy has left and we lived there so
pale over the school of film the school
of modern dance the School of Theatre
and the conservatory and for rhythmic
music on the topic today pedagogical
risk I will talk from my perspective as
a part of the leadership of the school
with a long for a tradition which I flew
to it a lot of great architect and not
at least have made a great impact on the
society to understand the frame about
the contributions from KDK today I have
to tell you that all education in
Denmark is free and it's paid by its
axis so our Academy is fast financed by
that
and all students are there for free and
there are no private school of
architectures and her private architect
academies in Denmark or in Scandinavia
as well although education is free it's
not unlimited so the government decide
how many students they were let in at
each education and four years ago the
government decided to cut down the two
school of architecture with 30% and the
reason they gave was that they were
assumed an candidate who didn't kick in
who don't get a job in the first year
after they graduated and this was the
only parameter and the message to the
school from the Commonwealth fix it or
we'll cut you down again
so when we are talking about the ricotta
curve risks today you have to see it in
that light that we our school who is
just in cut down and we have a cool to
make jobs make our candidates to get a
job in the first year after they're
educated
at that time four years ago we also made
an analyze of how people will say
professional people architects
politicians organization constructors
etc and looked at us in short they found
us a little self-control
[Music]
the pictures you see here is from our
where we located
it's an old seaplane han where the PA
pro criminals it's a listed building
it's very nice restored by the Danish
architect Metro and its physical
surroundings it's a good place to be
well we had this problem which
government had asked us to fix and as I
see it there were two ways to solve this
profit
one obvious thing one could do is to
strengthen the corporation with some of
the big architecture firms let them tell
us exactly what they need and then seize
the student in basic skill which is
useful on the bottom line and a company
from day one they hired a new person
that's one way luckily there's also
another way and what we saw it as a way
it's roots of this problem was to give
the students the architectural and the
statistic competences and skills to a
knowledge formulate and solve the future
problems a future which we don't know
anything about yet and a future which is
take changing on particularly and that
was the way we choose to go
at our Institute we decided to establish
an even stronger partnerships and to
make some assignments in cooperation
with different external partners it
could be on the cessation municipalities
artists architectural firm and our
schools of architecture we establish our
own dialogue panel the leading profile
in the field of architecture of
construction and bill heritage with whom
we discussed the actual agenda of the
built environment
and we do not only want to discuss it we
also want to make an impact on the field
environment and we do not only once we
want to make an impact to our research
teaching education and cooperation so we
have this toughness a lot of fun
contrary cooperation from the biggest
financial fund Adamic who contribute
with almost 1 million dollars to our
Institute to our cooperation with this
workshop in the house bed of Denmark but
still one of the leading producers of
would enforce worldwide its front
innocent
so we establish these youth
cooperation and from my perspective
there's also a pedagogical risk in these
partnerships although they are very
strong I see a pedagogical risk if we
forgot that we teachers the team at the
school are the experts in education and
that we are the one who are responsible
for making a choreography with a
progression and the risk is that we
start miming the professional of miming
the world outside the thing called
reality instead of develop competences
through exercises and projects I think
we succeeded rather well with that and
I'll return to that with some examples
at the end of this we did analysis again
because in 2016 we decided that we have
a special focus at the 17 UN curves and
we ordered you to all candidate to
relate the master thesis to 17 un counts
they could be critical or invent new
goals or they could make assisting and
architectural questions on solutions
related to the 17 un girls and we were
the first academic institution to take
this thing so attach the second sinew
and girls and of course is also a
pedagogical risking this see from my
perspective is that is pedagogical risk
that we start making solution instead of
asking and that we get so focused on
fixing fixing that we forget the
academic and artistic way of living
we are architectural like an artistic
academy
we're not polish technical school but
anyhow I think it's feel extremely
important that we as architect this
involved and truly engaging in designing
the food future I think that's the
essence in our profession and who that
is what motivated us I also hope that is
your motivation for true I'm
disappointed if the girl for you and our
student as well for our teachers is to
build fancy houses for each client or
designing more meaningless products on
the picture we see two of our students
the spam and Camille from the Institute
there's a gala with the Danish architect
Association and they are presenting our
projects to the uia General Assembly and
soul in 2016 we presented the idea of
having the this conference in Copenhagen
dua a conference concerning about the UN
code in 2023 with focus on architecture
and the 17 UN brows I hope to meet some
of you there
just
and how do we manage the risk of not
becoming a technical for the Technical
University well we have a strong team of
teachers and I think that we on the
Institute are very aware of the risk and
give you one example what you see here
this master thesis is done by a student
called fire school and one can ask how
is this related to the 7 syndrome and
girls I'll show you on the next slide
the trauma change is also a serious part
of the agenda in code made so rain shall
rain happens more often and the existing
water system cannot handle this the
result has been several floods in Pasco
made
[Music]
to solve this a big system of hidden
tunnel under Copenhagen this plant which
has lead the water away and receive
these hidden tunnels on the map
and the strategy is to create urban
spaces which use of order as an
architectural element to use it to
create
recreative places in the city we have
the student and he was working with the
floods and the water system and Khomeini
and his project project was posed like
most good projects it was both a
question and a suggestion for an answer
and the question was this is life this
is the right thing to hide the waterway
or make it into a cozy thing how could
we do something else and he experimented
with a series of monuments with
different function which reminds us of
the water and the climate change and at
the same time he reinvent and actualized
lies the monument of the think man as I
call it in Germany as I said before I
see an Eric article risk in our girls to
make stronger partnerships to make an
impact and not at least to our ambition
with a 71 girls
yes well I have to end this story about
Feist project
each year
[Music]
each year we have a great event in
Denmark called the people's meeting
it's held on the small island pond hole
in the Baltic Sea a place where all
politicians and organization participate
it's a big party there's a lot of
different things going on and you can
meet the politicians and you can talk to
them we arranged an event at ktk
inspired by a celebration show and see
you know in America - it's called and I
think here is something called the
Dragons Den we as you know it
okay it's a civic concept
there's panel business people and some
people will and gear come and pitch the
project for this panel Shelton okay
someone just watching terrorism okay you
know them we did the same and we have
three candidates from the Academy who
participated and the dragon saw the show
the Sharks okay among them were the
Minister of Finance the former Minister
of Environment and Sue the directors
from two of the biggest function Denmark
pension fund and the fund for
architecture
and we have nominated this project from
fire and you had to pitch it for the
charts and he had to battle with
something which was a little bit more
easy to understand because there was a
guy who are making new building
materials out of seaweed and the other
guy has made a home for homeless to put
on the street and fight had this object
I think this was not a pedagogical risk
it was from my side and strategic risk
or a risk as a leadership but I
succeeded the presentation and I'll show
you here in the next place yeah he
brought that for the Sharks and say I
talking about
the climate change and talking about
flood in Copenhagen and he was showing
this monument and I'll say well this
fellow I'm interested how this will have
ended but then on the end I have this
tweet from the head of the biggest
funder in Denmark yes when you go and
I'm not sweetie said this is a huge
eye-opener for me
normally we hide climates things away
but we could also show them so he
reached the point
so this project with an artistic and
architectural ankle that's a point of
view succeed to convince some of the
most influenced people that the Denmark
about there could be all the way than
the usual way and I think that's our
application as a histah tution we're
dealing with the architecture and heart
so in short I'm glad that the teachers
at the Institute manage the balance
between the academic and the artistic
skills and that they challenge the
students as well as the society and
through that contribute to South the
future challenges as an academy it's our
obligation to coach the scene for the
next season right although we don't know
the rules yet thank you okay thanks
first of all thank you for the
opportunity for speaking here I consider
that to be a great privilege my name is
Peter Bertram and I'm the head of the
master's program for art and
architecture
the Institute for culture and I'm gonna
talk a bit about what perhaps the
relationship between artistic research
and teaching at least one way of framing
it I think fundamentally speaking the
reason why these terms failure risk etc
somehow attractive to us is that you
cannot premeditate difference I think
that's the fundamental reason why we
somehow talk about or feel a necessity
to discuss what the role of failure
risks taking risks etc means a
relatively short time so I'm gonna kill
perhaps just simply make a couple of
statements initially and perhaps later
we can we can talk more about a more on
death and I think that I think my first
statement would be that in order to
understand some of these things what it
means that you can premeditate
difference we have to think of a process
not in terms of solutions or its finding
solutions however important it is to
find a solution to something I think the
the real issue is how you create a
problem or rather true invention is to
invent a problem a new solution is like
it says merely a kind of variation of an
existing problem there would be the
first statement and then the the second
one would would have to be well what is
actually a problem in all of this and
I understand what problem perhaps um
fundamentally not as a negative
condition that's really important in
other words it's not something that is
to be dissolved by a solution I see I
see a problem brother as a kind of a set
of dynamic set of factors that can
manifest itself in many different ways
and I would then think of a that's a
very broad definition of a problem but I
will also think well a more concrete
version of what problem could be is to
think of a a medium drawing or promise
draw and model as a kind of problem in
other words test that's the the the only
thing you work with directly it's the
only problem you can engage directly now
because it's a medium it obviously
relates to something other than itself
and in that sense you could propose that
you had in a sense to province were
related in in the process of making or
creation one could be like the medium
problem and another one an external
problem the external problem is only
external right sort of compared to the
medium that you're working with it
should not be understood as a negative
the definition of it but the fundamental
hypothesis that you have when you are
for instance executing a drawing is that
the drawing is a problem somehow relates
that somehow operates in a manner that
is similar to another problem I think
that fundamental inquiry or assumption
hypothesis is the starting point when
you when you do something
now I would try to exemplify this a
little bit and how suggest how it could
be connected to to teaching by showing
first a couple of images of some things
I've done and then a couple of images of
an assignment that is related to it and
the first images of a display case of a
series of objects that belong to a
project I began some years ago and we
were in the middle of a structural
reform and I thought that a one way of
answering all of this would be to design
an academy and imaginary Academy we one
way of being part of this this
discussion this is a display case from
an exhibition showing some different
models that belongs to the Academy
project another set of models a studio
to our small library a kind of archive
 collection with studios that's like
kind of archive structure etc and the
last one being this small game board
that could be understood in at least
three ways first is just as a pretty
straightforward representational model
of a kind of campus structure the second
it could be understood as a kind of game
port of a kind of mental map of a
project under development and finally it
could also be seen as a way of managing
an academy and the latter one I would
think would have to do with how you
somehow frame heterogeneity and enforce
heterogeneity in other words the the
problem that was still relevant to our
Academy and the problem that is somehow
at least by try attempted to be captured
by me and the model is it has to do with
the census how you create and enforce
the census now the second series of
models come from a student for student
projects together with the colloquy gave
an assignment of ask them to make an
academy of design an academy but in such
a way that each student developed a
small fragment of it sort of contributed
with a single space to the
the entire structure in that sense you
could see is think of the all of the the
answers put together what innocence form
a kind of Academy but obviously they
also in the sense a cat enacted the
Academy simply by participating in the
assignment so in the sense they
performed an academic practice and
reflected upon it which would obviously
be a central part of an academic
practice while designing different
elements of it and these are just to
show give you a sort of overall
impression of the work these are a
couple of interior developed drawings of
two of the spaces and these are a couple
of larger Martins builders showing
fragments of the different structures
now - this is the last slide just to
suggest a couple of ramifications of all
of this for for pedagogy and first of
all I think that one of the defining
things of an artistic process is that
one has a kind of an affair with
singularity and I think that poses a
kind of difficulty to pedagogy because
you cannot really communicate exactly
how you deal with this it the whole
concept of method or methodologies is
difficult in relationship to an artistic
process at least if you think of it in a
kind of rigorous term so is the term
communication because a lot of these
things cannot simply be communicated and
for that reason
there are a lot of what what the way you
connect these things is to in a sense
like it says pursue problems you're
already working with through teaching or
put in another way in a way using you
somehow recontextualized problems you're
already working with in your own
practice in in teaching in other words
you to you you you at least aspire to to
sort of teach not to communicate but to
be inspired now that that poses a lot of
problems at least in our corner of the
world a lot of people would be slightly
offended by this because they would
think that it it installs a kind of
old-fashioned master-apprentice
relationship between teacher and student
I don't think that's necessarily the
case but certainly there's a strong
element of involvement between the two
that you somehow co-produce
the work and it is in many ways for the
same reason I often a precarious thing
because you really have to administer in
administer that with a lot of respect
but you cannot you have to you have to
nevertheless create this this this kind
of involvement and also very direct
transposition of material and problems
that you're working with yourself into
teaching and this means a lot of things
for for for for the steps a lot of
conditions for teaching but I think one
one one way of approaching this there
are many others but one way of
approaching is through the question of
technique if methodology is a bit more
problematic in my eyes anyway I think
technique is a good ways of thinking
about this and also a way of steering
processes as a teacher because technique
is obviously a way of thinking not
simply a tool
but I think a lot of the the kind of
framing and the steering and that goes
on in in in a sign Minh has to do with
orchestrating a set of techniques and a
kind of material in relationship to that
in this in this respect technique is
really a kind of exploration of a medium
material because differences
it cannot be premeditated but I can not
I neither can it be intended and
subsequently manifested in a material it
was always a kind of negotiation of the
differences of a medium material and but
as the as the assignment exemplifies in
a sense the simple division between the
two problems of more traditional
problems I I suggested in the beginning
quite quickly becomes a kind of medium
environment in which the cessation is
more difficult to make
so that the the the students
simultaneously in the sense to sign an
Academy of Records for Academy and
that's in that sense treated the
material in in a straightforward
representational way but the whole thing
also became a kind of academic practice
in itself and that in this underlines
what I think a fundamental sort of
hallmark of a medium is that it is not
so much defined perhaps by its ability
to translate that is morph instrumental
capacity it needs to have but it is
fundamentally concerned with
potentiality
that's it
[Applause]
okay thank you and thanks for everyone
for inviting us here it's it's a great
great pleasure and honor to be
remembered and recognized by everyone
here all the way down to the doorman
that remembered me after ten years it
yeah it's really touching and it's
really great to see my students from
Denmark making new friends and for
myself to make new friends so thanks for
that hmm
I'm one of the dinosaurs of this
institution stated our professor on our
first day of school at the Cooper Union
in 2001 an announce our first assignment
draw a Chris no further instructions
we all took break here to measure
precisely draw with the showers possible
pencil account for down to fractions of
an inch all of us except one student who
took a risk he was called Cooper mech by
chance and this great stood out us as
they were all pinned up the day after
the greatest heavy graphic like graphite
lines thick and tangible spoke across
room they were precisely measured but
that was not really their reason for
being
they were precise in another sense they
translated the idea of a crit into an
architectural drawing this anecdote
introduces the idea of translation as a
pedagogical idea these cylinders box
fork house from around 1918 represents
that idea beautifully as the artist or
in our case
the architect translate from one media
to another from one language to another
or the idea in this case of a cow
persists and develops at one at the same
time if such a thing as possible and
most importantly the idea moves beyond
symbolic representation into precise
abstractions or representations of
structure and relationship and new
readings I would argue and that's
perhaps my main reason for insisting on
translation as a key pedagogical
strategy that banal and symbolic
translations or even symbolic renderings
costs a lot of problems in architectural
education and certainly beyond and that
prevents us from seeing new and also
transformations of old questions that we
need to discuss today I would argue many
decisions are made based on fear
fear of missing out as young people tell
us from Oh surely but also fear of the
threats and systems which controllers or
which we believe control us this is not
a life claim nor light ambitions but but
a pedagogical strategy nevertheless has
been formed at our program around the
idea of making decisions based on trust
courage and curiosity
we try to cultivate an environment based
on trust so when I explain to my new
first-year students that we are the
architecture of the Institute of
architecture and culture I present them
with these two images of against each
other and talk about conservation each
spring I cultivate my own garden and and
weed out the plants I don't want and
keep the ones I I do want but as soon as
you start doing that and talking about
culture it all of us right away becomes
problematic and as you might perceive
the one to divide us weeds and the one
to the left as a beautiful cultivated
flower but very soon when you start
thinking about it it's much more
complicated
so in cultivating an environment in
which
decisions are based on trust and courage
to curiosity polyphony or many voices
also becomes very important to us so the
anecdote of my first assignment of
Cooper unit here at Cooper Union in
first year many years ago in this sense
also in my mind needs to be turned on
its head because it represented very
much the idea of one voice telling us
the assignment and what we are trying to
do is and it was also representing a
kind of idea of a apprenticeship but we
aim at inverting that having many voices
overlap and nikich negotiate and
sometimes merge this is a picture of a
Danish newspaper and I always tell my
students that you see the second one
there is the culture one and I always
tell my students said it's not so much
the facts it's not so much that cultural
part of newspaper that we're interested
in in the industry of architecture and
culture but more the facts that we had
all have a newspaper that you know as a
as a civilization we have newspapers
nowadays they are online but the fact
that we have a language that we can
speak through newspapers and discuss
things in there this is a drawing from
my own for now I think second year
nevertheless from Cooper Union days I've
always been interested in how we are one
and many in questions of identity
individuality and community building how
we are one and many together being ahead
of program I use this interest as a way
to understand the contemporary situation
in which I'm teaching and to understand
the generation of young architects going
back to the question of fear Italian
philosopher Peruvian or distinguishes
between fear and anxiety
fear is something which a community can
unite against circumscribe dangerous
whereas anxiety comes from not feeling
at home in the world
Vienna uses the term multitude to
analyze contemporary life forms the
multitude is a mode of being where the
many share the feeling of not feeling at
home in the world and they placed this
experience at the center of their social
and political practice the multitude
consists of singularities who no longer
delegate power nor aspire to the unity
of an authority
[Music]
I just have to receive where we are well
German sociologist andreas which
characterizes late modern society as a
producer of singularities things
individuals events places and
communities no longer aim at the general
and the standardized and the average as
we did during modernism high modernism
but rather we promote and expect
uniqueness we curate and perform our
lives and strive for authenticity and
positive valuation and we only feel that
we succeed when we distinguish ourselves
from others these questions Christians
that I think about both in relationship
to the young architects that I teach and
their lives the lives their world that
they are going into but also then also
to the to the questions we asked in our
program and the curricular response to
this is based on translation as I
described and non perfection mistakes
and many voices the program that we
teach at first year first semester first
year that I was also teaching here today
at Cooper Union thank you for that
cemetery because in we are all
singularities the starting point is
surely I'm gonna go there one of the
white male master architects cemeteries
in Europe scalp and of arsenic in liquid
eyes and aspirin in this case it's Aldo
Rossi but they are immediately subject
to polyphonic translations much like the
cows I showed before and translations
lost in translation you know that Heidi
inevitably leads to glitches and it
demands negotiation and constant
constantly questions authorities nobody
at home maybe at our program I don't
know but everybody has a voice so I'm
gonna just flip through I'm trying to
keep track of time here but I'm going to
just flip through the whole series of
images of our first-year education first
year first semester starting in the
cemetery beautiful cemetery by Aldo also
make it costly making 2 by 2 meter
drawings going home and creating these
little architectural objects they get
translated into larger ones but you can
see the little ones are still embedded
in there then it becomes a large field
of negotiation why she is still visible
but certainly a lot of other things
starting to appear as well drawings of
these
I could take tongues how do you tectonic
I guess you would call them
plans then they become dark and black
closed in on themselves then a plan
appears this is a very large drawing of
all the students work together to create
their own cemetery negotiate who's
placed next to who and all take care of
the programs of the cemetery who needs
as we all know both toilets and clock
towers and priests offices or non
priests offices what-have-you and here
you see the final cemetery with all the
arts watching it the witnesses of what
we have been through and then the
cemetery is the ring around and then the
cemetery in the middle being built as a
kind of community communal work with
lots of negotiations from all the people
I just want to show a few images also of
this kind of conservation that we try to
practice we try to create a culture as a
culture where one where all our young
students can study create community and
negotiate the singularities but also be
part of a community we do analysis
projects this one is a very polyphonic
drawing of what's the name of the
architect now
I forget it you probably recognize two
plants that are all drawn together and
this were one large drawing that's
passed on from one student to the next
as they are studying the architecture of
who is it
clearly lazy thank you I have a lot of
things in my head and a lot of
translations from Danish to English we
go to visit we went to visit a slaughter
plant and there's literally where
pickles slaughtered every minute or more
so to understand the cultural condition
we live in we went to visit that prison
built recently by Danish architects I
remember that that question being very
present here at Cooper Union may an
architect build a prison to remember we
discussed that a lot those days so some
Danish architect states and we went to
see it he is Hasina who's right here now
studying doing a workshop based on that
idea or those ideas of imprisonment
another workshop also after visiting the
pig slaughterhouse and then of course we
have the freehand drawing based on the
legacy of Tsukasa who we are going to
hear in a moment every Wednesday morning
we need to draw there are some of the
drawings from that
we have a chest truck we have students
teacher a very kind of a formal system
of students teaching each other as we
have less and less resources to students
that pop and teach each other and
Amelia's was the initiator of that is
sitting right over there we have a
student-run exhibition practice
exhibition hall as a large word for this
building but Gallery we travel to places
that we in the Western world ignorant
called places of active architecture
without architects that's of course not
true but architects that we don't know
of yet this place to Iran and this is
from Ethiopia also from Ethiopia we
always draw on 2 meter by 2 meter
drawings that's a kind of obsession we
have and this is our studio which looks
a lot like your studio 150 students plus
- in one large room a community in which
you have to sit right next to each other
and concentrate even if you have one of
the many diagnoses that people have
today of ADHD oh sorry there was a bit
of advertisement in the end thank you
[Applause]
nature's inadvertence has it so I'm
starting with a quote from Marcus
Aurelius meditations nature's
inadvertence has its own charm its own
attractiveness the way loaves of bread
split open on top in the oven the ridges
are just byproducts of the baking and
yet pleasing somehow they rouse our
appetite without knowing why or how
things ripen and begin to burst and
olives on the point of falling the
shadow of decay gives them a peculiar
beauty
and flu
failure is inherent in the very act of
hand drawing no matter how exquisitely
executed there is something wrong with
every drawing ever made
here is the painter dellacroix
describing his practice I must make many
sketches and take my time that above all
is where I need to make progress the
main thing is to avoid that infernal
facility of the brush instead make the
medium difficult to work with that would
be completely new make the medium
resistant so as to conquer it patiently
the artist who aims at perfection and
everything achieves it in nothing
dellacroix is purposely setting up a
scheme for difficulty at acting for
failure and why to what end
I returned to marcus aurelius is
speculation that in inadvertence ii the
thing not expected the flaw the moment
of decay we find possibility perhaps
something completely new
in the act of drawing Marcus made on a
pristine surface leading to another mark
in another it is a risky business what
will come of it
perhaps the marks agglomerate to
something in the wrong position must be
erased modified added to subtracted from
struggled with reassessed and finally
considered finished more or less
a colleague I am told once described the
advanced drawing seminar as quotes dirty
drawing and broke I believe it was not
meant to flatter
however it gave the title for a chapter
in my book architects draw I quote from
it here
imagination lies in the realm of memory
and dreams deeply rooted in the facts
forms events and spaces of our actual
lives flights of fancy take off from
that which can be touched tasted
measured and observed we dream in images
we seek to translate our fleeting images
and our observations to paper the dirt
in the chapter heading referred refers
to the fallout from charcoal pencil
pastel pen and ink wash it is the
fingerprints smudges erasers spatters
and drips of wash it derives from the
repetitive process of searching through
drawing of sifting through layers to
find the gold the essential element
the struggle to conquer a particular
medium is only part of the endeavor it
is the struggle to find resonance
between the visual world as it engages
our eye and the realm of our imaginings
like the process of creative writing in
which the author writes and rewrites
again and again the drawing process goes
beyond merely correcting or expunging
lines or tonality x' that seemed
tentatively embraced in the first study
it simultaneously leads to rethinking
and at times altering the direction of
the intended work itself
so what is being said here regarding
risk control and productive failure
I would propose that the freehand
engages that is engaged in drawing
travels in a landscape constantly
reconfigured by these three coordinates
not infrequently I tell students I
promise to teach them nothing useful
in the advanced drawing seminar students
are asked to create a folio of drawings
on themes of their own choosing often
enough we wander in the desert for some
weeks sometimes it is in the odd corner
of a page of sketches that a thesis is
discovered the inner surface of an
orange rind leads to the unfurling of
the landscape a small portrait sketch
evolves into studies of dreadlocks
sculpting a head scale can be in
significantly tiny small shards of glass
and the reflections and shadows they
cast suggesting monumental dimensions
the fumes of Niagara Falls contained on
a finite piece of paper what are the
skills needed what media best suits the
project invention demands stumbling
failure if you will
the term drawing implies stretching
pulling but not yet arriving
we draw an arrow it has not yet been
shot
it might reach its target or not
we are drawn to one another but we have
not yet embraced this talk draws to a
conclusion but I'm still speaking
in the space between the image yearn for
and the stumbling tentative sometimes
mistaken failed attempts to get there in
such inadvertence ease lies the surprise
the possibility for invention for
something entirely new
[Applause]
hi nice to see you great to have and
wrong on the house thank you so much in
we taught together here and I think that
their work that she's doing in
Copenhagen now is it's it's beautiful
and it's incredibly moving to see that
grow and also it's great to meet you are
named Peter thanks for coming this is
weird I can't see anybody anyway thanks
for coming so I wanted to start with a
short film clip from Dean John and Hado
how do you teach architecture
osmotically by osmosis I never I never
draw for the students you know draw with
them and I never tell them what to do I
tried to in fact draw them out
in other words draw what's inside them
out and just hit certain key points and
that they can then you know develop
their ideas I mean that's what I'm I'm
against that kind of like the didactic
teaching that you they're told exactly
what to do all the time I mean the
younger ones okay right yeah perhaps but
later on by you know by the fit end of
the fifth year these are people in their
mid-20s and I always say you know what
that the Darwin took the the voyage the
five-year voyage at the age of 22 that
guy's sea captain was 25 so we have to
be cognizant that that the time of life
is more I think one of the great
creative periods maybe there's a later
on another great creative period but
that's one of them and that should be
gently really gently
and gentleness
so there's a lot in there osmosis
osmotic drawing people out gentleness I
want to highlight two points in in what
John said first is that he links
education and a journey of exploration I
think it's an important way to
understand our studios and our spaces of
Education understand them as sites
actually sites of exploration
he also links this to a specific journey
of exploration to Darwin and the
Galapagos to evolution to transformation
and I find this also quite fascinating
in thinking about risk and exploration
if we think about it in fact Darwin he
was not setting out to find what he
found a theory of evolution the voyage
of the Beagle was not about living
systems at all it was a survey a voyage
they were going to measure the coastline
of Islands
and a few weeks before they left Captain
Fitzroy the 25 year old thought they
should bring someone who knew something
about natural systems going out for a
long time so he asked a 22 year old
Darwin to join and while the crew is
working right surveying Darwin was left
on the beach with the Turtles and that
changed the world one of the finer
points in that story is the fact that
obviously no one would argue that
evolution is only happening on the
Galapagos Islands right that's not part
of the story not by Darwin or anyone
else but I think that opens up a pretty
interesting question which is what did
happen on the Galapagos Islands because
something happened there in that
encounter right something happen so
while evolution is obviously occurring
everywhere and all the time the density
of biodiversity in the living systems of
the Galapagos allowed Darwin to perceive
the transformation right he was immersed
within a density and complexity of
difference and that led to an epiphany -
an apprehension about transformation
itself about evolution and that led to
an evolution of knowledge so knowledge
transformed in that encounter so I
sometimes imagine you know Darwin sort
of staring into those turtles eyes a
kind of face to face exchange and he saw
us he saw something about how we
transform
he perceived something of our
transformations and this perceptual
shift allowed a shift in understanding
it allowed the evolution of knowledge
and in fact as I'm sure you know the
theory of evolution itself has evolved
quite dramatically in the last 160 years
and I would say that this is possible at
every given moment in our Studios in our
labs and our shops and classrooms all of
them can be understood as sites of
exploration as spaces where a density of
difference a density of different
questions a density of diverse voices
can lead to discovering new
understandings and it will ultimately
come from you it will come from your
curiosities your actual embodied
curiosities your creative urgencies your
voices and your exploratory works all
right that's how your questions are
going to evolve so our spaces of
Education are allowing a kind of
inhabitation
of your questions and they allow us to
create the transformations that our
world needs today so to speak to this
question of inhabiting your questions I
want to very briefly share the project
that we did in in Denmark in 2012 in
Aarhus did this with an Rock
it was a drawing board film screen for
about 150 people it started it actually
started with a question or proposition
from a philosopher named Emmanuel
Levinas Levinas was a giant mind and he
said of incredible things about ethics
and space and one of the things he said
was that the most heightened sensation
of the human condition occurs in the
space between two faces looking at each
other in silence like Darwin and the
turtle
there was an empathetic exchange he
positioned that is the beginning of
empathy and ultimately ethics emerges
from that space so in office we sort of
took that proposition and we created a
spatial situation of communication right
so we took the two phases looking at
each other and just drew a line between
like if there was a veil let's say or a
tissue or a drawing that could somehow
capture something of that communication
so how did we do that we built a huge
curved wall you know in a theater in
this school and we skimmed it with paper
and then
and then each of the students went out
into their town who's right there
geography obviously you have emotional
and memory relationship to your to your
place and we asked them to go somewhere
that that they had a relationship with
an emotional relationship a memory
relationship something that they felt a
proximity to a closeness or intimacy
with and to kind of with a with a 1
meter by 1 meter she'd try to capture it
rubbing your photography or drawing
however they wanted bring it back and
then in this theater we placed them
around the outside wall so I'm not the
curved wall but on the flat wall around
the whole outside of the theater about
200 of these and then what we did is we
had people get in in in pairs now this
is where you get the leve nos right you
start to see that the two faces the kind
of veil in between what happens is that
her drawing is outside on the outside
wall and she can't see it but her
partner Ken the other channel that other
begins to reenact her drawing to whisper
through the wall to her right so it's
both a reenactment and a form of
communication had to be invented to
allow her to be able to perceive her
memory okay now in this is the classic
loveliness moment in this what that sets
up is an emotional interdependence II in
the sense that if I'm her my only access
to my memory moment is the other is you
and you have a kind of ethical
imperative to try to whisper it to me
with as much precision as possible
through that wall
so all kinds of things were invented
pulleys and cables and you know amazing
inventions and then we took an
interesting turn we introduced live feed
film so you see there's a bank of
projectors along against the black wall
each one of those projectors is cued to
a camera around the outside of the arm
so it's a fairly simple geometry the two
heads right one their head still there
one becomes a camera the other becomes a
projector and they're still there and
what that allows is another form of
communication so this is happening in
lifetime
so now they're actually drawing together
a lifetime and communicating
[Music]
here's a little detail
[Music]
now watch these guys because eventually
when you're in that space this is the
whole thing happened in ten days but
after a day or two you start to move
into it because you're inhabiting a new
kind of spatial situation and your
questions emerge you sees now watch he's
got to throw it through the hole
[Music]
he throws it through the right those're
through the hole that it comes out the
hole because there's a slight crack in
the double mirror right in the projector
and film relationship the last clip this
is a kind of for me it was a stunning
21st century levy nas it's a kind of
Eclipse that happened there's beautiful
piano playing
[Music]
and eclipse
[Music]
[Music]
so I want to end by saying you know
education by definition is a
transformative pursuit right individuals
come together in a community and they
engage in transformative interactions
and experiences and knowledge evolve
comprehension evolves so the very
tangible potential of Education to
transform the lives of the most
vulnerable creates an urgent call for
new spaces of Education spaces of
interaction among a great diversity of
voices and ways of knowing spaces of
searching for unknown linkages and
asking the questions that have not yet
been imagined in creating
transformations that embody our best
hopes and aspirations thank you
[Applause]
hello everyone for those of you still
here I'm very excited to be part of this
panel especially with an Rome and her
colleagues from the Royal Academy in
Denmark and my own colleagues from
Cooper unions well I was really excited
by the title of this panel pedagogics of
risk control and productive failures so
being a very diligent student myself
when I was a student of the Cooper Union
two years apart from an room at the same
time I took this very seriously this
prompt so I will show you I'm going a
little bit off the script and
essentially I will show you examples of
four studios that to expand over the
last two years during which I was the
coordinator and also I taught those
projects we will go in the spirit of
powers of 10 from first year to third
year to graduate program and back to
at the very beginning and I tried to
take apart in terms of the categories
that we were asked to engage with and
show you some of my own ago self
analysis of ways we use guidelines and
parameters to encourage risks and expose
students to really find their own
methods of invention experimentation and
productive failures so the first one at
the moment I'm teaching first-year again
but this sequence of projects relates to
a project we tied all this animate
architect onyx the risks that were part
of that project was integration of
descriptive geometry material effects
structural systems and methods of
fabrication each of the students had to
work individually and part of additional
for instance also how to really teach
the students the foundations of
architecture the work tectonics itself
we wanted to make sure that they
understood projections of scale in
habitations or sequence of elements at
the same time I was trying to figure out
what are the so-called controls or
guidelines that obviously comes down to
the syllabus guidelines the drawing
guidelines fabrication guidelines I was
and I was writing this down and I
initially had 30 pages of typical
syllabus in there and I thought
everybody would just start to feel the
angst of architecture immediately I took
them out quickly but I will just show
you a couple of the works and examples
of those controls or guidelines
and how they can actually provide
structure for the students where they're
able to find their own voice and their
own system so every single studio
usually has something similar to this
diagram where there's an objective a
sequence of drawings that would be
listed out spelled out their techniques
methods of processes you will notice
everything's based on a module in it we
also project from two-dimensional
three-dimensional methods of thinking
and then when you look at the actual
parameters that the students are able to
achieve they're actually extremely
unique and individualized so you
realized very quickly this is one
example when project in the span of 12
weeks Cindy who's currently in third
year was able to in the top right image
show material effect so metalbending and
for example top left look at a system of
walls that were constructed to construct
pavilion part of the parameters aside
from obviously the drawing techniques
was also just scale so they had to
design within 24 foot limit which is
exactly the columns right now are 12
feet apart just to give you a size of it
and I would say experimentation
iteration became very critical aspects
of that process of discovery and at the
same time pulling those exact same
controls that I spoke about previously
you notice that we have a radically
different result in this example
these three projects are part of the
2018 studio prize so even though almost
departed I'm not talking about is that
every single one of the rules were also
essentially broken by each of these
students I would actually argue that
many of them literally failed as a
result because if they were asked to
design within a 24 foot limit that would
ask well can I go and make a cantilever
can I move against it so the purpose of
this is in the level of first year is
that those guidelines are actually
buried to help liberate them and help
them find their own voice I am just
showing glimpses of some of their works
and this is during the vector game where
they had to experiment and discover and
part of you know for me it's very
important to combine every method of
thinking from analog to digital back and
forth so a lot of the methodology in
terms of how this was taught was looking
at practice of construction and learning
from experiment and then challenging the
drawings and the models to just think
beyond what was initially perhaps
expected
you see this example right here oops
shows a matrix of lines on the left and
then on the right you actually see how
they become a ramp all the way through
so slightly very quickly this is an
example of 30-year which I caught that
with Hailey Eber last semester the risks
were hard to construct a building at the
size of New York City block shifting
scales from city to room to building
6-tier wall in back city which was
unexpected how to integrate
affordability and yet encourage
creativity and how to challenge the norm
meaning we issued social organizations
such as single living living with
disability nuclear living millennial
living we also collaborate when
organization called help PSA that
designs housing for this enfranchised
part of our controls of course syllabus
methods of guideline scales zone
regulations the literally the unit count
after that structure or the controls
were provided something like this pops
up which literally begins to list the
agenda or the goals of each of the
drawings
students then have to provoke and work
against and work within to discover
unexpected and here we have an example
by Isaac who's currently in fourth year
and he chose single living with kids and
what he did is on the design 300 units
but his idea for the unit was to
actually use a sequence of individual
rooms and apologize it's hard to see at
the scale of the slides but the drawing
that you see right here basically takes
the idea of a mat building and an
upper-level has all of these individual
beds toilets that was in that part of
the guideline of this studio that are
interlocked together and the lower level
he proposed he took apart the convention
of an apartment Union and he designed
the public of Tyria kitchen shared
bathrooms so this is an example of
taking something that's very real
working with a real agency in York
helped us a and yet finding ways to
engage creative processes that still has
to be reflective of actual real
parameters of construction does the
knight example again following that
controlling guideline with by risako
akari who's currently also in fourth
year and she chose you'll notice that
they each had to complete a certain set
of drawings from three dimensional two
dimensional studies composite techniques
and this with geometry drawings were
part of this I an attic
through different years through my time
at Cooper so it always keeps too sharp
and on top of things and has a way to
basically part of this is also tectonics
right so what you see in that drawing
the second one towards the right she's
actually unfolding the two facades of
the space she that she decided to do
herb analysis where she exposed there on
the side the relationship between bad
food and health risks the increased
death rate in areas that actually were
financially deprecated and she designed
housing block where the entire community
would be self-sustaining and you know we
were you know we challenged her in terms
of if the materials that she were chosen
were affordable if the best rooms were
lined up and yet she figured out a way
to make this spatially innovative
efficient but also creative it's also
tectonically a perimeter scheme and then
this is a third example that changes
it's actually sequence of vertical
elements eight eight hours by tracy and
she was looking at nuclear living but
she was really intrigued by the
educational lack of facilities at the
ground level on the site and she chose
to integrate part of those programs
throughout these stars at the ground
level but again you'll notice that the
drawing - these are per those guidelines
everybody was required to generate a
certain
planted assigned scales of the models
they each student had to construct a
sequence of volumetric models just the
way that you see on the top right
detailed building Tec exterior wall
models this is part of a building
integrated studio and again each of the
students found their own creative voice
even those controls were very strict at
the beginning and they just kept
multiplying I did not include all their
projects just their names and their
categories they chose but you get a
sense of just multiplicity of scales and
challenges that they had to swell them
through this one will be just two
examples
this is graduate theses last summer the
risk here was you're working with nine
dividual students who are finding their
own voice so it's it's actually they're
finding their own risks but they were
prompted by the word animate and how to
create their own argument they had to
prove and again this person Shantanu
bala he was really intrigued in how much
reality can be used to influence
pedagogy and school systems through
provocations of the senses each of the
drawings you'll notice that I might have
an obsession with squares at this point
had to be within a specific format and
he had to prove how the sense of light
sound air can be contradicted with
materiality most of these drawings even
though they seem digitized actually
always came from material experiments
first so he would scan the drawings we
transform them reconfigure them codify
them set of the processes back and forth
deteriorate them to their limits
anyways I would say make the material
fail and those discoveries which were
premeditated in the sense of the
technique but not is not in the result
became the actual project so you'll see
that even the the residue of some of
these techniques literally become his
formwork and this is an example of
another person who else it's the word
adamant looked at materiality and
structures through the game of Towers in
New York City and I'm trying to refrain
from going over time I know I can feel
the heat but again had to create the
visual evidence to prove his hypothesis
and then lastly this was the most recent
was this summer I had the privilege of
teaching for the first time high school
level program in pre-college program for
students who are interested in going
into architecture and put a risk is the
site for me never having done it before
is that it was fixed to 24 days only the
time was limited and I was curious to
see how I could begin to introduce
various techniques from methods of
thinking to just building up their
skills
so the idea for this was to combine a
very rigorous program that slalom
between analog and digital techniques
back and forth came a very robust
schedule that I worked with where the
socio dean Elizabeth Donnell very
closely but you know I would say if I
have to categorize there within the prom
tonight I would say these are controls
and then again there's some kind of
formats and students for example in this
case is somebody who embraced material
techniques and then work back and forth
and they each had to learn how to draw
by hand drive by you know to LeMay Elida
to a rhino to a Photoshop the tool of 3d
printer
and it was risk okay that's it thank you
[Music]
thank you all for this I think this in
itself has been a wonderful journey
it's really fantastic to kind of take a
step back and think about the
pre-diabetes that we are employing and
also learning from I thought that there
was something that kind of came across
throughout and there was this these
indicate in different ways it was just
this notion of polyphony or the
multiplicity of languages the
heterogeneity within the academic
institutions the densities of difference
and the journeys and explorations I
think this reminded me of two characters
that I thought maybe we could somehow
throw into the conversation perhaps they
leave something
and one of them is Edward Hyde who was
actually he was a scholar at the time
when he was writing a text on academic
freedom he was writing and speaking in
the context of Cape Town but brought up
this suggestion of the student or the
scholar as a traveler in opposition to a
character who would kind of you know be
static and in protection of boundaries
and so on whether disciplinary or
identitarian etc and I thought that I
think this this idea of the Academy as a
space to voyaging to travel through to
inhabit a multiplicity of identities is
extremely important especially today not
only because it reflects the many places
that student body represents and comes
from it works in but also the
interconnectedness of the risks that we
face on a planetary scale
the other character that kind of brings
it more specifically in the
architectural curriculum let's say would
be someone like a nanny Roy who speaks
about the blasting open of new
geographies of theory where she speaks
specifically of the global self but as
we all know now this is not this of
course not a purely Geographic notion
but blasting open new geographies of
theory to study from within those spaces
that are usually not taken into
consideration let's say within the
architectural curriculum and not as and
she talks about the risk of studying
those spaces not as places the dark
corners of the world that needs you know
help or saving or that are used as case
studies but really as spaces that allow
us to rethink the future of the world
differently and and integrate new
languages that say into the ways in
which we think about the world in its
future I
these two characters perhaps would be
bringing some interesting ideas and
notions of the ways in which we think
about territoriality let's say within
the academic institution and and
identities are the multiplicities of
those
you want to respond to these
I understood exactly all the questions
or whatever sin posed by it or if I
could hear we think it's oh here we are
it's a bit hard to hear I think you were
talking about the student who is in a
position as opposed to the one who is
seeking the boundaries to begin with and
or seeking to stay within the boundaries
and then you were talking about the
specific person who talks about in a or
spaces that we have not yet put our
attention towards is that right yeah
[Music]
yeah I don't know if someone else's I
can say for myself that I find it
enormously inspiring to be a teacher in
these years because these times because
we don't necessarily need to look so far
beyond because a lot of our students are
present or present to us a lot of the
problems that we don't have it that we
haven't seen yet it is a very different
school that I was growing up in and one
that the students are presenting to me
today just I mean she's surely not a
student of mine but just the extremely
fascinating event of tried to perk
speaking in the UN today
extremely innocent child at one point in
one way but also a child with a
diagnosis a child that it can be very
hard to disagree with so you can't
really say anything but also a child
that there's so much evilness coming
against her and she's not my student yet
maybe she will be one day but some of
all these questions the innocence and
the insistence and the pure ecstasy
representing a lot of my students to
some degree represent that and bring
that to the table so that was a very
long answer but it tells us about new
times I think in which we cannot sure we
need to look towards the global South we
need to look to the communities that
here amongst us that we don't confide it
we consider at all but we also just need
to ask our students and try to to work
and try to see if we can talk to her
and not meet her with all this evilness
or what would you call all the all the
men are throw into water these days and
women mostly minute yeah who wants to
say something yeah yeah I think what you
said made a lot of sense
perhaps especially in the first part of
it at least as I was concerned I think
the asana has also frayed initially
obviously the conditions under which we
work here and every different was a
Scandinavian welfare state but it's also
a kind of it's a welfare state
capitalism obviously and we've so
finally after many many years of sort of
hiding we've been caught up by new
Public Management and all of the
instruments of mobilization and systems
of control etc and on one level it's
really really hard to disagree with some
of the things because they are are
really pertinent questions I mean is
really hard to disagree with the UN
sustainable goals I mean who can be
against them
I mean you can always say it's a problem
it cannot be a consistent but in any
case that poses a kind of political
agenda
that you have to respond to very
director it's like the free space in
between the political agenda and the
Academy is sort of blurred or all kinds
of systems of control and measurement
are installed in order to both control
not in many things and necessarily in
the negative sense but in order to
mobilize whatever goes on right so it's
it's about innovation about getting
answers to important questions etc and
on one level I mean there's nothing
wrong about that and how could you
possibly be against it because it has to
do with impact and making a difference
etcetera that's all that's all we're
really important but what it does the
negative side of it or the aspect of it
is that it is a danger of tampering with
the most important things about the
academic institution which has to do
with its sort of be poised on the edge
of things right and another way
and I think it also absolutely in my
mind anyway there's a sort of real
contribution of of an Academy in the
sense that it can somehow sustain a
character who later Genuity as you
suggested is that it really serves as a
model for democracy because democracy is
defined by the senses or they have the
ability to sort of maintain the services
without breaking into an open wall so in
this my mind is really the defining
thing about the democracy that it can do
that so in a sense by sort of fighting
for this on one hand obviously
addressing all the things we need to
address be placed on on the kind of on
the the edge of things doesn't mean that
you abandon it all together it just
gives you a kind of sort of delay in
response that we really need but it says
so I think that that whole part is
really really important and there is I
think a tendency to forget that
may-maybe sometimes forget it for the
innocence right reasons but nevertheless
to forget it so constantly sort of a
restating that really really simple
question about the Academy institution
is as important as ever I think said
very beautifully about trust
the essence of it is to trust of
students and when I say that I'm talking
about trust of curiosity Trust trust the
impulse sometimes I think the students
are the curriculum
because they have the Coppola curiosity
and and and I want to look to the SDGs
crises of our time sustainable
development goals I think I think our
greatest risks
our capacity to comprehend
transformation itself due to the nature
of transformation is certainly exceeding
our capacity to comprehend and and at
that point even the most challenging
risks we face and I working this VG's
out in the world and they are they are
crisis of comprehension
and once you start to absorb
and you realize that it's theirs it's
too urgent to accept the pre-existing
forms of pragmatism we actually need to
transform how we perceive pragmatism
because see so I'm saying that it was
actually a better for me deep well of
course is always politics but there's a
deep urgency
in broadening the spectrum of what we
think of as an education brought our
experiences so that we can rupture the
geographies and get to pragmatism that
may have a chance to respond to the
multiple crises were facing
for real it would be interesting if you
could talk a little bit more about the
format I've seen an Peter you were
mentioning before about democracy in the
process of India academia and I've seen
a couple of cases of kind of like
collaborative design for us more or less
is how I understood when you were like
talking about your project we need a
Academy of parts of the Academy made by
individual new student that then trade
kind of like compose something similar
happen in the cemetery project if I'm
not misunderstanding the images of the
of the work of the students and somehow
something similar happens in the courses
that you've presented mercy from
architectonic that the process is more
clear with in with our critical mass of
of work produced by the students so I
guess that my question is what is the
role that the format because in all
three these three cases I can see a very
rigid format in terms of how to present
the word in terms of even medium used
materiality even like a color
treyvion that is super defined what is
the road that takes in the in the area
of living kind of like a breathing room
for creativity singularity for expect
speculation and exploration from the
student side
I mean it's the easiest trick in the
book
to ask 50 students like I have our 30
students here to make something slightly
similar and then put it next to each
other because that's gonna look good no
matter what you know that already even
in first year right and I try not to
abuse that trick yet of course it's also
a very important community building act
to do that but that points towards the
question of originality or authenticity
which certainly soos fantastic or not
you have personal drawings but the
drawings that were done in your class
that were behind you when you were
speaking I mean that kind of
individuality that comes out of not
putting 50 slightly similar things next
to each other rather it comes from your
personal confrontation with a piece of
paper with nothing on it right and it
comes from personal voices and personal
struggles and and really deep
risk-taking I just wondered so you
should answer that but I just wanted to
touch on one thing down there about this
again or having your own voice as a
student and I must say I have to talk to
this Cooper Union student sitting here
today that I was really amazed and a
little bit shocked when I was teaching
first year there's today that's Chris I
was forgetting how much trust in
authority you sometimes have I when I
was teaching here was all Professor ROM
but when I'm teaching in Denmark I'm
just and and that's a small thing but
it's nevertheless a student you need to
find your own voice you need to dare to
speak up against the teachers maybe you
will when you get to the upper years you
need to find that voice that's
democratic voice that's being talked
about and they're down there we trust
you but you also need to trust us but
you also need to oppose to us and find
your own voice right soon
[Music]
when you speak um thank you when you
speak of yourself
do you hear me when you speak good
results you get from pinning like work
you know which is always a kind of show
pleaser end of the year showed please
sir you know a whole wall paper of
similar works yeah and then as I'd like
to say when people are brought by
finally in it those who would like to
take that balance growing and I tried to
persuade him that this is not first year
done better that this is where they've
taken those chops of God in the first
year the
of doing similar work because we have to
go at some point through this adventure
together and learn similar things use
them
as better pecan so yes the work looks
all pretty splendid but then what do you
do with it what gives it in each of you
to find inside here inside here what is
there for you to do to challenge
to find out about herself and to make a
mess of it because in first thing we
don't particularly let you make that
much of a mess maybe we should
something that's wrong we first came
from
it's a question I ask myself now that I
don't
to think about what's that such a good
[Music]
so I wonder about
procedure I don't have an answer I'm
just asking myself
I really
I do in learning skill I do believe that
at first we are trained to some extent
they are training
again into it
yes well I think for me I think that
comes down to scale but I would also
argue the word precision we're teaching
students how to be precise both in the
conceptual endeavors that are trying to
achieve but also precision of you know
how you read the surface of the drawing
how you actually activate the agency of
drawing technique but also method of
construction because that's our visual
evidence of what we do as architects and
I think for me you know a first series
it's kind of the militant discipline
that you have to really make sure that
the foundations are set up in a way that
they can keep building on that as they
move forward and part of what I've
always intrigued by is no matter how
many parameters students especially the
you know the older I go there they do it
seems that they're always intrigued by
different technologies and variations
and these guidelines actually really
encourage them to break them apart and
to challenge them and that's when you do
notice oh this person actually
that part and but if there is at the
same time I would argue it's completely
a lazy affair then I would place the
piranhas but you know how what are we
doing to really make sure that you know
we enable them the moment they graduate
from here to confront practice of
architecture how we think and you know
how you actually use these processes at
a larger scale it's something that every
single one of our students will have to
engage with in the other basis yeah he
was talking about this individual
assignment and the common assignment
before we discussed sir we asked the
dialogue panel the the people we cover
it was and we asked them to give to tell
which competences they think was most
needed for our candidates and it's
rather interesting because what they
said was the first competence I asked
for what do you think it was
they said we like people we want people
who can work together with other people
who can go into a team and we don't want
any prima donnas or so list so I think
this so when you're chose a bird saying
it's easy to make this first year task
whether were together I also think it's
a very important competences as a part
of the paper pedagogists
that afterwards we're going to work
together with other people and we'll
call X and we're going to discuss and
we're gonna go shade soup you reach the
right result so I think it's more than
you are talking about an easy point but
I think is very effective and I think
it's an important competence for us
[Music]
work isolated anymore zone
not just a quick conquer coming to them
this question of the fort and and how
open it could be you should be
obviously there are differences from
from the different years in education
and how much notes but I think that
maybe it has a bit to do with this the
necessity that they talked about because
I'm generally not that concerned or
scared of giving a sort of handing a
kind of density to the student or a lot
of boundaries a lot of things that are
something set up because it's a really
very much a question of how you
administer it I do think of teaching
that it cannot really and not and it can
kind of create there are many different
forms of teaching but which we're just
talking about to create a part of it
III I cannot understand that as kind of
communication and
I think it has to be a kind of code
involved process and it simply just
involves that you almost have a come
into responsibility as a teacher in
order to to involve yourself in a very
direct way by innocence furnishing the
assignment with the things you're
interested in on the other hand it is
super important that you are not sort of
trying to reproduce yourself but you are
simply in a sense hoping for for the
students to over take your things and
just take them in completely different
directions so that's what you're looking
for you can also go obviously you can
look for for simply for your own image
but that's not terribly important or is
not terribly interesting but you can I
think you can also in a sense do all of
this and then make this this really sort
of them
sort of highly articulated assignment
and give them a lot of materials but
really with the hope or and intent of
of them sort of overtaking it and then
taking a different direction I think
that's so this relationship teacher
stupid relationship it's sometimes this
particular relationship becomes to
menaces moral when it's discussed and
you need morals obviously but you just
don't understand relationship through
morals so I think that's it's it's it's
a students then you get older or
defining thesis to it you expect the
main lessons to furnish that rule
themselves much more than you you do
initially but the tendency always has to
be the reservoir I'm longing back to the
time when we didn't write assignments we
just took them do you remember that time
and you can't can you imagine doing that
today I mean you would get all the
Commission's on top of you and the
jurors who come for the exam where's my
paper but I mean it was a fantastic time
when you just speak in the room and some
would not be there didn't hear the
others were misunderstand and others
again would start discussing with you
whether that was the right scale that
you assigned and you know it was always
a bit of a surprise what would wait to
you next week when you came back or next
day when you came to teach but I think
those were more community building kind
of assignments and they were demanding a
little bit more autonomy by the students
yeah so maybe I will try that
again soon I don't know what to do with
the paperwork I can just hide it or do
it as I must hide it yeah I think we
should start like wrapping up but I
would like to hear some questions or
comments from the other side from the
students
fantastic
professors
in the studio framework oh all we've
been talking about
what are like then
the necessary rules that you need to
provide in framework of a studio so that
you didn't know what to do but still
leaving some breathing room for them to
improvise or for the process to start
like defining the next step instead of
starting with a super cure a syllabus or
exercise so any question we comment
[Music]
Oh
yeah
[Music]
that's a super nice question this yes we
have a lot of I'm sure you do too
like a lot of measurements and facts and
so on and facts in Denmark show that the
is that only 40% of all creators will go
to an office you know maybe 30% will go
to the administrative legal kind of
system and so and a lot of people will
go to I don't know where and a lot of my
classmates from Cooper certainly are not
like traditional architects today
actually that's very true of many of
them was a lot of my Princeton
classmates they are architects today I
don't know what or I know what it says
to me about Cooper Union back then that
they it was a really good education I'm
really proud of this Cooper Union
education because it's prepared us for
so many different things and we made all
my classmates made their own pathways so
when I write an assignment for students
I yeah I am attending I don't imagine
an office architect architecture office
architect at the end of that road yeah
without sounding too kind of
serious a powder or something it's about
you know when I was at school we were
talking a lot about architecture as a
discipline another profession if you
perceive or think of architecture as a
discipline something larger than the
profession then you will be prepared for
the profession as well I mean that's a
very abstract bold answer to that
question but and but and that's all for
us to discuss and what our disciplinary
questions of architecture and what what
are not yeah
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
when he
[Applause]
I mean we all want to be architects we
all want to think and work and talk
about space rooms questions of
inhabitation in in the widest sense but
we don't all want to become dare I say
slaves in an architecture office at
least when I was working in an office in
New York it was they owned a lot of my
time and I didn't like that so so I
chose another path yeah so of course you
guys all need to be highly professional
and I trust that you will be if you
[Applause]
listen to the kind of precision that
Mercy is trying to teach you I think we
used to say that precision is an
application did we David there was kind
of the headline of a first year then and
I feel like it still is in Massena
studio so if you have that kind of
precise attitude to things then can I
tell a small anecdote when I got to to
Princeton after having gone to Cooper
there were so many wonderful digital
machines standard we didn't have at the
time here but people down there students
under they forgot to think that material
has dimension so when they used the
laser cutter they were like you know
right I'm just going to trace this you
know building
when they put it together Devika oh wait
a minute my model my material is like
whatever a quarter of an inch and I
forgot you know it is a quarter of an
inch missing in each corner now this is
like a really kind of lame way of saying
and I'm not criticizing I'm also very
appreciative of my Princeton education
but what what do you guys here at Cooper
Union should be really proud of and
happy about getting is that kind of
sense yeah material has a thickness I
need to prepare sighs when I use this
tool I use it and celebrate it and
appreciate it while we have laser
cutters fantastic but I also understand
and criticize the limit of that tool and
you know do you know what I mean is it
this is anecdote makes sense I mean
nowadays I'm sure at Princeton they all
know that material have a thickness
right Haley but to read that story was
just such a kind of an epitome of of the
differences between these two
environments back then at least when the
Princeton classmates they all went to
the high-end high-profile architecture
offices and Beaucaire to the competition
teams and today they have their own
super successful offices and to
competitions and win them and all that
and that was that's just such a given
for my
Cooper classmates but they do really
cool things like Gary sitting over there
she became a painter you know other
people became last variety of other
things and I think that you will as well
you will be part of reinventing what
architecture is and and you should be
proud of that doesn't mean that you if
you want to you can I'm sure you can
take a job in a competition in a
high-end office if you want to but it's
a strong tradition I think it's worth
keeping or cherishing here at Cooper
that architecture is much more than that
it is also that but it's more than that
this one yeah I just
short answer
you know I taught the first year for a
few decades
one of the things I would always cyst on
us
people not to make drawings to show me
anything
I wanted them to make drawings to see
something
and that's a that's a very simple
very simple difference and it's part of
the art of teaching it's part of the art
of learning which is to recognize that
the intimacy of the relationship between
the person of their world that a hope to
see some a hope to explore a question
that foster freedom some situation
within which people develop the intimate
conversation of the article is literally
listening to their world that's the the
most we can hope because the the you
know architecture is the you could say
it's the anticipation of the connotation
so how do we how do we anticipate the
other how do we anticipate inhabitation
that has to come from a deep poetic
imagination and deep ethical imagination
that is that emerges in trying to see
something and trying to listen do your
work
it doesn't make take much to realize
develop your capacity to listen to your
drawings or see with your drawings is is
developing your capacity to listen to
the world
it you know it is it is a relationship
that you build ultimately with the world
either gonna tell it what to do which is
unfortunately what most architects think
the profession is war
you develop the ability to listen to
what is asked and what it what it is
trying
it's all of that's happening at your
desk dude it's the beginning of
developing fear of capacity for this
[Music]
we're running out of time thank you I
want to thank you again
I
[Music]
Peter for coming to the University
however participating and everybody
interesting discussion thank you
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
