[Applause]
mmm-hmm thank you that air y'all hear me
back there yeah well thanks so much not
air for the invitation I have to say
it's a it's a really an honor to to get
an opportunity to share some work with
you all this this place and it's rich
and intense history and legacy it's just
it's it's humbling indeed so thank you
so much for the invitation what I'd like
to do today is share with you some work
from both the collective llk and as well
as the the woodwork
I'll show about eight projects for from
collective L okay and then for from from
butcher I just wanted to give a bit of a
background about the two practices just
before diving into the work the ladder
clock was started about four years ago
as not err mentioned with John Lott and
Michael Kubo and we got together to work
on a competition of the Van Alen
Institute the reason I mentioned that is
because the shared agenda between the
three of us at the time which really
centered around the questions of the Van
Alen Institute questions about like the
public engaging culture as you know Van
Alen Institute is really all about
increasing engagement in the public
realm through design advocacy so the the
the way that we started off around that
first project really became the the
agenda that sort of is stitched through
the other projects that clock does
together now the wood er is my
independent practice and I think you
know although there are some overlaps
between the two practices I would say
that there are some distinctions as well
a lot of our projects are motivated by
several preoccupations that have to do
with form and representation we think a
lot about the agency of symmetry and
asymmetry we think a lot about the
deadpan and the non emotive we think
also a lot about the possibilities of D
familiarize ation in architecture in
other words trying to make the new from
the known as opposed to the new from
from the alien and they're also several
other preoccupations that have to do
with representation as well and that's
what the the book is about I'll talk a
little bit about that later on the book
really tries to unpack three different
categories of representations and talk
about the agency of each of those three
so if you'll bear with me what I'd like
to do is go through the first seven
projects four o'clock then three would
reporters relatively quickly and then
I'd love to dwell on the final winter
project for a bit longer
this is a square that's familiar to you
all this is a project called heart of
hearts and it's a project of the Time
Square Alliance runs every year and for
the past eight years actually they've
held an invited competition to
Commission an architect to design a
valentine heart and the heart marks
Valentine's Day and it's become a place
where hundreds of couples now come to
renew their vows becoming gay to get
married historically the winning designs
have been objects and they have
integrated the icon of the heart which
is a mandate by the way objects that
have some mode of interactivity for
instance integrated lights or sound and
we saw this really as an opportunity to
to make a space or to carve a distinct
space within the urbanism of Times
Square as you all know better than I the
the context of Times Square is unique
and so one of the challenges was to kind
of out spectacle the spectacle of Times
Square and arguably it's the most
hyperbolically spectacular urban space
that we know so one of the ways that we
tried to do this was to essentially
augment Times Square through the use of
these reflective of mirrors the ambition
was to augment the spectacle and also
introduce other ways of interacting with
the piece as well but I'd say first and
foremost one of the things that sort of
stitches the clock work together is this
ambition to try to either evacuate space
make voids make holes or fill in space
so in this case this is one of these
projects where we're trying to
essentially make a new void in the
center of Times Square so the the
multiplication of context happens in
these reflections and depending on one's
proximity relative to the piece that
kind of acts like a kaleidoscope does
and at some moments producing the
condition of infinite regression the
formal premise couldn't be simpler it's
based on the string of folded paper
hearts the kind of decoration that
children make around Valentine's Day and
so one of the challenges was to achieve
that thinness and and do so in a way
that allowed the the reference of the
paper heart to still be maintained so
one way that we did that which is kind
of a simple way to deal with that is to
make a ring and so the string of folded
paper hearts comes together and each
folded heart relying on its neighbor to
make an overall continuity of 12 parts
for stability and rigidity and then also
contributing to that structural diagram
is the addition of six interior folded
hearts which offer a kind of
stability as well but it also offers a
different scale of space so there are
arguably three scales of space here
one could argue one is the object itself
the second is the space that is sort of
cordoned off by the ring and then the
third is these what we ended up calling
kissing booths areas for two maybe three
people you know to be in alone in a way
outside of the context of Times Square
and to have a moment of privacy so here
it is where you see somebody in the
center and from the center you actually
cannot see oneself and then here you see
looking out for one of the kissing
booths which of course acknowledges
context but at the same time does its
best to sort of frame something which is
otherworldly something which is outside
of the context of time a second project
with clock is a project that we did a
competition called for the Peace Corps
commandant or works competition and the
the competition asks one to produce a
commemorative work which is distinct
from a memorial so it sort of already
separates itself from objects that one
might find around Washington DC
the site is a triangle and so one of the
ideas that we had was to fill the site
with this a single ribbon a ribbon that
would both on the one hand sort of fill
out the site fill it live with with
matter and also produce a sidedness so
if you follow this ribbon if there are
two sides one side that addresses the
hypotenuse of the triangle and then
another side which
the other two sides of the triangle so
the idea is that one might explore these
spaces and come into contact with others
in a way that they might not otherwise
so it's called mappa Mundi as a way to
suggest that there's a new kind of
terrain that one could explore and find
these different connections through the
transparency of the class but there's
there's another aspect to the project as
well which is about allowing one to
register the long one to understand the
kind of shared aspect of the project as
well so there's this one deformation in
the top of the piece which indicates you
know kind of continuity in the beef that
you wouldn't get otherwise so if we if
we fill this triangle in the ps1
proposal that we made a couple of years
ago we tried to evacuate that space so
many people here I'm sure I know have
worked on this this project before so I
won't go into detail about what it's
about but our approach to the ps1
project which was the second time I lost
it actually the first time was a three
or four years earlier when would you got
a chance to lose the competition but
this time we we lost because there was
already a canopy apparently ball nodes
had one already with the canopy
apparently they're not able to do two
two of the same kind of project but our
proposal was to essentially get outside
of the of the bounds of the ps1
courtyard in other words there was a
kind of critique on the Institute what
are the ways that we might get beyond
the walls of that iconic triangle so we
did that in a number of ways one was to
quite literally lift the edge of the
in a kind of maybe dumb extrusion and
from that extrusion hang a canopy but
that canopy could also act like a kind
of periscope if you will and I'll
explain what I mean by that if you can
imagine the canopy team clad with many
many small triangles the same geometry
as the as a triangle of the courtyard
you could imagine there being a an
opportunity to look up at the underbelly
of the of the SAC in order to see
outside the walls of the ps1 courtyard
and there are other ways that we're
trying to get outside of the courtyard
as well through a kind of doubling or a
kind of mirroring and and this was done
without the idea being that there would
actually be a Amir alongside the
entirety of the wall facing the the most
public most prominent side of of the
institution and another way we were
aiming to get outside of the courtyard
was to build a burn to allow one
actually get a view outside of the
courtyard the thinking though is that
there would be no architecture in the
project if if you allow me to say that
the thinking is that the the koi yard is
is evacuated and anything that needs to
be thought of architectural II is a kind
of amplification of something that's
already there so in the case of this
perspective we're introducing rocks that
are essentially large gravel as a way to
produce the necessary seating and then
you know arguably the canopy is
architecture but I would I would argue
that it is it is not at a scale that it
is conventionally architectural I would
argue that it's really at an urban scale
that it operates and so this is the
canopy in the longitudinal section and
there are moments of surprise in in in
the
Pease as well where underneath the berm
reminded of Ben's proposal we also made
a grotto maybe not as elegant as Ben's
but
but we made a grotto indeed and linked
that to the one of the windows that
would allow one to look outside of the
of the wall there's one last way that we
were trying to get people outside of the
PSone courtyard and that is through a
kind of erosion of these newer tiles
toward the center of the sack and at
that point where it comes most close to
the participant there's a kind of you
can imagine it almost producing a kind
of dog collar like condition where you
can look up and hopefully all of the
context is sort of blinded by the rest
of the mirrored tiles and so as you'll
see in the next project a lot of
drawings that we do as a way to imagine
narratives that take place in these
these projects is through over what we
often refer to as scenario diagrams so
playing out a multiple multitude of
scenarios as a way to help us understand
whether or not the the project is
actually doing what it claims to be
doing and so in this case obviously by
evacuating the space were maximizing the
potential of different scenarios to to
occur and one of the requirements is I'm
sure many of you know is to also have
things like water and other sort of fun
elements like that so rather than
putting them in the space proper sort of
pushed them to the outside toward the
colonnade and use them as the way to
kind of reaffirm
that edge
and then of course you have to have your
party seen as a way to try to lure the
jury so we imagined this becoming
similar to a kind of very large urban
disco ball in the evenings the last
project I'll show just before I shift
over to the clock work is this project
the project that we did first together
for the ventolin Institute and it's
similar to the previous project in the
way that it aims to kind of evacuate the
space and make it as sort of sort of
span the most generic space with just
enough specificity by way of the figure
of the of the plan so for those of you
who have know the the new ground floor
or know the project rather the the aim
was to kind of take everything above
that was on I think four or six maybe
four six or seven and everything that
was below the the sort of makeshift
gallery that they had before and sort of
conflate those programs and have that
have those happen in the new ground
floor plan so a lot has to happen in
that space there's a gallery space
there's exhibition space there's office
space there is also a small library
space so the idea was to really kind of
pack as much of that fixed program into
what we made a kind of bowtie figure so
that there was one bottleneck between
the very public and the backup house but
at the same time the idea being that
there would be some ability to see from
the street all the way to the back of
the space so as you can imagine to do
that a lot of the work really happens in
the ceiling and so there were there was
the idea that we would sort of embed all
the infrastructure into the seal
and hide that behind this sort of gauzy
white coffer system that we developed
but as I mentioned before the the
scenario diagrams were really helpful in
so far as they kind of explained how the
generic space the open space could
accommodate the widest variety of
possible programs something that was
really important to to David at the Van
Alen Institute there was one other
aspect to the project that didn't that
hasn't happened yet
regrettably and that is the this idea
they had about the street seat so in the
in the brief there was this notion that
there would be a physical extension a
potential physical extension of the
project down on the street so we
imagined it being a way to literally
pull the figure of the bowtie out into
the street and and produced yet another
frame that would indicate how to pull
out the program that is happening inside
so hopefully that happens the near
future these are some initial photos and
I sort of pains me to show these photos
because of the way that the curtain
meets the ground it's since since been
corrected but if you can see like it's
as though someone's pants are just a
little bit too long and that's happening
all along the edge and so I don't have
better photos in this yet regrettably
but just if you can kind of crop that
out or get that out of your mind or
maybe you like to wear your pants long
so this is actually like exciting for
you
so to shift away from the the more
public oriented cultural and
institutional work I wanted to shift
gears and chat a bit about the woodruf
projects so we recently published a
monograph and it's called room for
artifacts and we tried to use the
monograph really as a way
to look at the projects with fresh eyes
if possible sort of unbiased eyes as an
archaeological as an archaeologist might
look at a found object and so we tried
to use it as a way to identify new
consistencies and in the work that we
may not have understood previously so in
the book we show 16 projects three times
through three different modes of
representation one being conceptual
drawings really distilled graphic
drawings a second being orthographic
drawings plans sections really drawings
of edges and then finally we show the
projects again as visualizations or as
kind of photographs of the project and
so implicit in the end of in the book
and plis in the argument in the book is
that each of these types of
representation kind of helps us
understand projects in radically
different but overlapping ways one of
the projects in in that in the book is a
project called the bay Berryhill house
which is on which will be on Block
Island
these are visualizations by the way and
it sort of a really charged site in the
sense that it is a an archaeological
like goldmine features from the
Narragansett people who used to live on
on Block Island and so the the site is
it's really covered with archeological
features that we are doing our best to
to to avoid and which is one of the
reasons the house is sort of pulled up
off of the ground
and will be be held up with a
distribution of piles but the the site
is unique on Block Island in that it is
large typically most of the sites on
Block Island are
of an acre or less this site happens to
be I think it's 1111 acres and what's
kind of interesting about about that is
that despite the large size of the site
given all the setbacks from the wetlands
from the ocean and several others - too
many to name really our our site is if
you imagine a bounding box around the
house that's really the site so there's
a lot of constraints on where the house
goes despite there being a large site so
the project really tries to get some
traction from the vernacular on the
island and this is maybe where some of
our interest in the D familiarization of
existing projects comes comes through a
lot of the houses on Block Island if you
haven't been are just beautiful
extremely simple cedar clad gable roof
houses and so we were interested in
trying to use that as a kind of default
but then to augment certain
characteristics in certain ways so the
first way that we're thinking about
augmenting thank you is through a kind
of sort of relentless extrusion of the
house and really there are two main
experiences that that the house offers
one is on a lower level which is kind of
relatively speaking a sort of expansive
horizontally connective experience to
the landscape and that's also helped by
way of the porch that wraps all the way
around and then by comparison the the
upper level being something much more
introverted and much more utilitarian
actually in terms of the way that the
the bedrooms are laid out because of the
length of the house there is an idea
that the that there's a possibility of
opening of all of the
between each of the bedrooms to produce
this sort of telescopic view down down
the length of the house allowing one to
understand that that the organization is
a non colada so this is one of these
conceptual drawings that's that helps us
sort of distill what is important to the
project so in this case really
understanding the the figure allottee of
that upper level and the continuity
between each of these sort of static
moments along the length of the project
this project actually didn't get past
the board because of its length the
Planning Board so there's a new version
of this project which I'll show next
time I come which is two squares so it's
about twinning and it's essentially
taking the project and like splitting it
into two so regrettably this version
won't be built but the next version
takes many cues from this but tries to
deal with the issue of splitting it
apart into two so as I mentioned before
there's a lot of interest in the
relationship between symmetry and
asymmetry and how one can sort of use
the relationship between asymmetry and
symmetry as a way to convey ordering
principles in inherent in the project
shifting gears to a project that we made
for a company called Aesop I think a few
of you and under there has made one or
two of these projects before and maybe
others it's a project that we made
several years ago now back in 2012 for
for Aesop and one of the the prompts is
is that they asked you to consider some
of the more traditional architectural
elements in the city in which the the
project will be be built and so one of
the reuses has really an opportunity to
look at crown molding and wrought iron
in in potentially new ways
if not new ways then maybe ways that D
from the D familiarize those
architectural elements so in this case
we've invented I think seven crown
moldings and combined them in various
ways as a ways as a way to produce both
a surface and simultaneously a kind of a
shelving system which is is really the
requirement by a Saab and the hope is
that there might be an understanding of
this which is sort of ambiguous between
whether it is a utilitarian shelving
system or a kind of decorative surface
and so trying to strike a balance
between those two archetypes the the
project is is embedded in the ground so
you come off the street and you you come
down to half flights of stairs and I
mentioned this because there's another
way that we're thinking about the
defamiliarization of crown molding and
that isn't in its the rail of the stair
so as you descend the stair there is a
one profile that then transforms as as
one descends into into the space so it's
hard to see in these images but I'll
zoom in but one of the reasons I show
this project is because it begins to
show an attitude that we have about
modes of fabrication I think so if there
are two different ways that we're
manipulating crown moldings in this case
they each use a method of fabrication
that couldn't be more distinct right so
in this case this is a foam test of the
rotation of the crown molding you know
which relies on CNC milling in a in a
pretty serious way whereas the the
extrusions you know are couldn't be
simpler to make so sort of interested in
in the
the the potential that a project might
warrant different types of fabrication
digital or you know more historical
methods and that the project wouldn't
sort of push one agenda over the other
and then here are our catalog of crown
moldings and there are many many crown
molding to choose from but you know as
as any good architect we we decided that
that catalog wasn't wasn't right and we
had to invent our own so these are are
the ones that we invented which led to
another project about ornamentation
which is a project called totems skip
ahead
now totems is a project that also deals
with ornamentation questions of
ornamentation this is also a project
from about five years ago but one of the
added layers of intrigue for us was an
idea about high fidelity and low
fidelity so these are objects that we
made that aimed to include both are kind
of highly articulated and formally
expressive profile the one on the left
and and also a profile that was
relatively dormant and so as one moves
about the the totem there's a sort of
oscillation between the expressive
profile and the dormant profile and this
is this is something the kind of the
conceal and reveal of information is
something that I think is embedded in
other aspects of the work especially are
interested in the kind of the role of
elevation in in conceiving of
architecture which we'll come back in
the last project that I talked about so
this was a project for us that really
made us maybe productively uncomfortable
in the sense that we hadn't really taken
on questions of ornamentation with such
a such Gaston for lack of a better term
and so we made I don't know maybe 70 or
100 of these these maquettes as a way to
start to have a discourse in the office
about about about beauty actually it's a
tricky thing to talk about in in an
academic context maybe but this led to a
number of debates in the office about
about the role of ornamentation and the
role of beauty in architecture in and
how one might start to develop a bias
about about the role of ornamentation
and so you know we use this also as an
opportunity to develop a set of drawings
that looked at two different methods of
representation simultaneously the kind
of straightforward very explicit graphic
of the totem as well as a way of
describing it that's much more about the
surface and about
three dimensionality and about the
contour
and so these were made don't usually
show a lot of process but but these were
made with a robotic arm and just to give
you a sense that these are made simply
with extruded profiles and the same
industry good profile that happens four
times as we rotated 90 degrees and
they're symmetrical about the center
axis which is at at I height now the
last project that I'd like to chat about
maybe with a little bit I think you have
a plenty of time is the mask house which
is is a house that we've been working on
for quite some time and it's not built
yet but the hope is that it will be
built this fall or next year
this just requires a little bit of a
backstory so it's a tragic story
actually this is a project for a
filmmaker who purchased some land in in
next to Cornell University on cayuga
lake in Ithaca and his younger brother
was a Cornell student and an
environmentalist and I'd spent a lot of
time in Cayuga Lake going out on on the
canoe quite regularly one day though
that he went out early morning and and
he was never found so this project
quickly became an extremely charged
project and started to ask us questions
that we weren't sure if architecture
could really have answers to questions
like how does a project help someone
grieve or how does a project you know
provide a space for someone to
memorialize and remember his is his
brother who had perished in the lake so
the site looks at the lake actually it's
on the edge of a cliff that overlooks
the lake and really what we've tried to
make is it's a kind of separation for
for the client a separation between
the kind of real world the world of the
everyday and an other other world and so
this is sort of led to a lot of thinking
about about masking about separating
about coming into contact with with a
mask and and and sort of participating
in a transformation from one world to
another world this is an image of the
site and the site itself is somewhere
right right here and the younger brother
perished just up the ways of the lake
some way we're we're imagining that the
project will have two forms of approach
one which is the sort of more formal if
I can use that word approach to the
house where there's a perpendicular
relationship between the one who's
approaching and the mask and there's
another approach which is which comes
from the other side of the site which is
a set of ramps that lead one up through
the trees into this slot of space that
separates the mask from the house proper
and the thinking behind that is that
there might be an opportunity for family
and friends who might not enter the
house to experience the connection to
the lake without having the same formal
experience of having the threshold
between experiencing the threshold
between the real world in the other
world so but for those who do approach
in the kind of more formal way there's a
kind of separation between the mask and
the house which is imagined to kind of
reorient one so as you approach then you
go behind this gasket and then there's a
new line of symmetry that as you as you
walk in reveals that there is a box of
space or a frame rather probably a
better way
talk about it that is now in line with
with your entry so this lot of space is
really imagined to provide a pause a
kind of reorientation if if at first one
approaches with the kind of horizontally
expansive view when you get when you
enter into this slot of space there's a
kind of disorientation or an orientation
vertically that sort of separates your
previous horizontal expansive view from
from the next one so this is the slot of
space that we've visualized and you you
start to get a sense for how the the
ramp kind of comes behind this lot of
space and allows one to go up into the
to the deck space to have a view out to
the lake so the way that we were
thinking about the plan was that we
wanted to kind of produce a single space
that would act like a kind of frame that
one could inhabit than all the other
programs that that were asked for things
like the bedroom the kitchen and the the
bathroom would be really conceptualized
more as sort of niches or frames that
were hinging off of the main main space
so as to not impede that that primary
space so this is the view as we imagine
it as one enters where the chimney
blocks the the mullion in the back for
that moment and this is a view of the
rooftop where you start to get a sense
for how these other elements interface
with the roof deck and we imagine it
looking something like this and I should
say something about the the way that we
think about these visualizations I would
say that we we try to use them as a way
to convey
a narrative about the project that might
not be as evident in the orthographic
drawings so we talked about these in
terms of how they're really kind of
cinematic and how they aim to convey a
kind of in this case a kind of
mournfulness
and you know it it could be argued that
this way of representing might do that
in a more charged way perhaps then then
the orthographic drawings and I guess I
would I would call these aspirational in
the sense that when this is built I
suspect that there will be differences
but for us they're important as a way to
both have conversations with our client
but I mean really more importantly for
us it's to have conversations with
audience like like you all about you
know how this kind of representation
might produce mood or effect in a way
that orthographic drawings might not not
yet it is
this is the back side of the house and
what you see here that you might not see
elsewhere is the is the underbelly
underbelly of the project also has a
meal a mirror which acts like a kind of
frame in and of itself and so one who's
walking underneath the house might have
occasion to look up and see the context
changed in some way this is a drawing
that tries to get a power imagine the
hierarchy of the plan where the light
gray represent these these niches that
are separate in a way thinking about it
as a kind of tree branching plan where
you know all all spaces hinge from this
primary space but that none of the
spaces can compete in terms of like the
the purity of that frame space and then
here are the seven I think there are
seven frames each of which tried to give
visual access to the context in
different ways through a kind of a
vertical window a horizontal window a
large picture window of view to the sky
through through this tube and then
there's one other very very small window
which is at the scale of the body which
allows one to lie in bed and be oriented
toward the location of the brother's
death
so just want to spend a few minutes just
before I wrap up to talk about how this
project has started to get us thinking
about about masks and the potentially
the role of artifacts in architecture
this is starting to get us thinking
about we've used this as an opportunity
to investigate masks from from a kind of
or more conceptual lens so we've
developed a set of artifacts one
artifact being this which is a bar
relief model of in stone of bark
tracings that we made and the reason we
done that is because one of the aspects
of the project that didn't talk much
about is that that the mask does a job
in camouflaging the box behind and so
we've spent some time looking at bark
patterns and trying to reproduce them in
the possibility that the that the wood
that we used to make the mask mighty do
you to be milled in that way to produce
more camouflage more disguise for the
for the house behind or it might be
charred wood that also starts to produce
a similar kind of pattern but we've used
the mask house as it as a way to push a
different conceptual project about masks
and so there's a show that we're gonna
put on in a couple of days in Zurich
that's called other masks and for that
show we are showing a large model of the
mask house some drawings but also seven
new masks that deal with the sort of
characteristics of a form that we're
interested in for the mask proper so
things like symmetry and asymmetry games
of flatness and elevation that get where
death gets revealed as you as you move
about it and so we've made seven of
these masks also all these masks try to
take advantage
what's unique about a treehouse which is
that the potential of the top and the
bottom of the house to be identical
which is what each of these masks also
also does so this one is a circle an
elevation that then has these Coria
gated wood this is an image of an edge
this mask might be most like the totems
and somewhere between the totem and a
mask where as you move about it there's
a kind of conflation of profiles to
produce a kind of dormant profile of the
rectangle this is this is milled in in
vaults quartzite may be the most
postmodern of them of the bunch being
this great mask which is also vaults
quartzite which is the one I probably
feel most uneasy about given the sort of
freedom with which we've selected these
different shapes most of the other masks
are more maybe you could say rigorous
and with respect to using repetition in
the mask to produce difference rather
than selecting sort of ad hoc which is
maybe a more moral kind of postmodern
sentiment maybe and that that grid mask
has ANSYS and we've also spent some time
to develop these brass armatures that
engage the masks in in different ways
there is an interest in anthropomorphic
qualities as well so the evidence of
that might come about when you see the
the nose in in this mask for the
armature popping out and producing your
nose this is the brush mask
and in the last mask and then I'll end
here is is this would mask where this is
called the strike mask the grain of the
wood is going in a kind of 45-degree in
opposition to the to the grain of the
mask and so it ends up producing these
bizarre forms on the edges and and
that's the last slide that I have for
today
so I will in there thank you so much I'm
not interested in this question from a
technical perspective but insofar as it
can form an attitude about your work why
does the is the block island houses
why do you provide a gutter for a roof
strategy that is precisely about the
overhead and it's such a symmetrical
fashion so that the I would assume that
for you the figuration of that end is a
very important one and maybe you can
describe that a little bit yeah
unrelated to that or related to that
could you elaborate off what is more
than less postmodern what does
post-modernism yeah maybe I can start
with that one and go to the first one
okay
I mean that you're the second part of
your the unrelated part of the question
the postmodern question is something
we've been thinking a lot about and the
the grid mask that I showed is is is a
is a mask that I show kind of
reluctantly so but I can but I can tell
you why we we've made it in the office
there's a sort of spectrum
attitude toward for making on the one
side is that there should be no choice
that one can make arbitrarily in a
project on the other side of the of that
spectrum is an idea that there might be
kind of whimsy or sort of humor that
might be possible when selecting things
that don't really seem to have an
apparent order or convey in an order and
so the the grid mask with the triangle
the circle the the diamond I would say
represents this side of the spectrum the
side of the spectrum which is about yea
whimsy and sort of chance in the
selection of platonic forms and so I
think we I have that mask as part of the
series precisely because it opens up
that question as to where we can lie on
that spectrum I think another project
that is not unlike the grid mask is the
short elevation of the of the Block
Island house right where is that there's
a choice to have a circular window which
I can get comfortable with if it relates
to the on flop right so you had the sort
of telescopic aperture that is on center
with the head that kind of ease the
exact same dimension as the width of the
door and so I'm more comfortable with
that circle than I am with the circle
and you know the U and the the triangle
of the diamond in the grid mask and the
reason this is so important is because
now that we're shifting to two houses
for that project the two square houses
as of now that circle has remained and
there's no on flawed there's there's no
in my view no cause for that circle to
room
and so it's it's been a discussion in
the office as to whether that is a kind
of whimsical postmodern sort of like
free selection or whether it should be
consumed so that that opening has more
relevance to the rest of the project in
terms of the gutter it's it's not a
you're not gonna like the answer it's
it's really because we want to enable as
much sort of interaction between the
edge of the house and the landscape as
possible so along that side you know we
don't want a wall of rain to kind of
produce a boundary between the inside of
the house and the s out of the house so
those all the waters are limited to
these two points which you know doesn't
provide a kind of boundary between the
inside and the outside I want to go back
to your definitions of the most
modernism if you could expand them a
little bit because it seems that you
encapsulate your strategies to
techniques of wit and humor something
that this school has been discussing
with Dan wood and for some of us old
folks the era of post-modernism had many
other capacities and this may not be
evident in the present
sensation but maybe I can test it on you
looking back that wasn't a tear out
where the profile of history as a
broader project was expanded so its
morphologies its topologies its
iconographies expanded the modern
project and morrison was defined not
merely in terms of the 20th century but
as part of a larger enlightenment
project yeah and going back and part of
that had to do with the textual 'ti
within which a lot of those projects
became embedded in as a kind of
referential process and this of course
had many other in sensations in other
forms I'm thinking of you know Philip
Glass and and other media that partook
in some of those operations
do you share some of this these other
concerns that parallel wit or or or have
you channeled your interest through
humor and wit yeah
I'm not funny
I am yeah I hope I hope it's clear that
the when I'm using the term wit I'm not
that comfortable with it I mean I I it
might be implicit that someone in the
office won that debate that day and got
his is witty circle and Dimond and
triangle in in the mask
and I don't mean to shift the the focus
of the the question elsewhere but just
for a moment one of the things that that
does is it produces a kind of space for
discourse in the office so just
yesterday I was explaining to this
individual that you know I would present
this this grid mask and if if prompted
about it I would talk about it in these
terms that you know defining the culture
of the office requires years like
consistently stretching your comfort
zone and so I think for for me that like
having that included as part of the the
mask series is is is important so that
we're always keeping ourselves in
checked with respect to what our
arguments are with respect to form so I
I don't find a lot of humor in in in The
Witcher work I think the clock work
might be different because that's you
know three individuals who have three
different attitudes about architecture
coming together around these projects
and some of them those projects deal
with humor in a way that the widget
projects do not but I would call the
woodwork much more about the deadpan
much more about the non emotive much
more about the the kind of the mournful
and so
we haven't had occasion yet to have a
project that is really about happiness
and wit and I don't think I'm going to
seek those kinds of projects out what is
it deadpan the deadpan is a kind of way
that we think about the work that is not
let's say not revealing of of itself
there's a kind of a front beyond which
there are other layers that might be
revealed as one looks more so so the
mask house for instance I think because
of its sort of lack of information in
that elevation there's a sort of deadpan
quality to that similarly a lot of the
projects that look at flatness right
like at least the way that we try to
represent them is often through a flat
elevation or you know the visualizations
are often about like capturing the
ordering principles embedded in the
project through its elevation and so I
don't know the deadpan is also for me a
kind of reaction and maybe this is
related to my time in graduate school
where there still was that kind of
fascination with the digital project and
you know expressiveness and so maybe
we're on the other side of the spectrum
insofar as we're trying to make work
that doesn't reveal itself so explicitly
through expression don't you think there
is something that I'm not sure if it
just it's humor but in your work as
farce to me is the moments of unexpected
decision that you make which does not
immediately belong to a change
and those are the best phones and
sometimes available Dane ordinary
decisions like the railing or the
tapering of the railing at the father's
and it's it's more expressive fitness
and I think it gently they could manage
to maintain that in some of your
projects and those are the best moments
of your work I thought there the crown
molding stacking it was the better part
of it the project and I was a bit
surprised on it but they've been useful
to me that you played at your home which
I realized then you have created you've
changed the figure of a standard
off-the-shelf molding to something but I
always read that project as a stacking
of Siena morning and you've just managed
to find continuity across so I think
that aspect of your work just from an
outside audience is very exciting I'm
not sure you have to formulate it within
the history of architecture but that's
the kind of work that is and it's very
engaging and surprising so Robert I was
when you were showing the house for the
brother in mourning I was struck by
there were two different entry or
renders that you should have but one of
them was
the one access from there the other one
that was crosswise I don't think it was
particularly good leak but it seemed
more casual and in the latter of the two
the house simply looked like it was an
unfurnished but not yet moved into like
any empty house might be whereas the one
that was on access looked like it was in
a kind of no quasi-religious image
hypertonic image and I was just thinking
but you know you started the discussion
of that house with the question of how
you could create a house on behalf of
someone who was in a state of mourning
my goodness elaborate on that just by
also bringing back the discussion of
post-modernism because post-modernism I
mean there were many many different
aspects of it for architecture there
were those that are brought up but then
there was also a kind of hi-low
transformation of me that some of the
you know which varies pacheco of late
modernism was that it could become it
was hyper abstract austere didn't lend
itself to the I suppose messy
circumstances of actual life and you
don't use
flexing in contradiction the job at this
is fact anyway i everything these things
up because there's something about your
sensibility which is that it's very
beautiful I think that many of the dear
work is gorgeous at the same time it's
it is it reminds me of that that that
this kinds of commitments of architects
happen sometimes will invest the most
ordinary circumstances with a very
heightened classy spiritual nearly
religious lightning graphic quality at
which to my mind in some ways I get you
know some hesitation on that point about
the work is that it's at odds with the
accommodation of just common ordinary
life yeah and why must it always yeah
the press do you see it as always
elevating the status of ordinary that
dot image at all yeah yeah well I was an
altar boy
my Nexus I'm funny they might have some
impact yeah it's interesting like the
the question of a formality and and the
sublime I haven't thought about it as
spiritual but I think comes about
because of the sort of precision with
which we're trying to frame moments in a
project so in a case like this like for
us the project is best conveyed through
an image which conceals the mullion
behind this fireplace right the moment
you start to you move about you know
that sort of fiction of purity is
immediately broken and so that's why I
call these these these renderings
aspirational in a sense that I know that
there is a kind of ordinary aspects to
each of these projects then but there's
a kind of there's work done that it's
not so much about elevating its the
status of the spaces but it's about
conveying the idea of the project so
when I said you know this is really for
this kind of audience what I meant by
that is like how can you make a
selection of visualizations and a set of
decisions about visualizations that
convey ideas about architecture to our
discipline right and so I think the the
more kind of casual photographs don't do
that in the same way they lack that
clarity of intent intent and the
ordering principles that are embedded in
the projects but I can see how one would
imagine them to be kind of elevating of
the status of the project I hope that's
not I hope that's not the takeaway
the question may be related to 19
they're not looking in this image around
and going back to others in your
perception of this out there is a
certain classicism in a compilation that
for me go back to I'm older than there's
all sorts of things about modernism are
even more ingrained in me and I was in
my mind I keep repeating the fact that
using the great that is the default
diagram for objectivity
you know median is a great is a certain
model for whatever reason and in the
photonic sorry they have the wrong moves
you don't play with that you can spear
as a speaker at the center as a surface
that works in a certain way the cube
sinner thing and so for me the
arbitrariness and the association with
postmarked you have in relation to that
great fan who's not a judgement about it
it doesn't work for me I don't
understand it was proposed right on the
other end in this representation and
with the moldings and so on there is a
certain for a cappella where classicism
you know and anything is in there that
the normality of the life gets elevated
and I don't know if you can say that you
said about your interest for symmetry
and asymmetry and and I was wondering if
there is something about these return to
certain structure of the composition of
the image that is very pictorial and in
a sense has a history a nun reminded of
some rendering that is equal realistic
than yours confusingly realistic there
are the one that already does in which
he also studied very much that the issue
of where is the vanishing point with the
axis oh yeah the probability fermitas
deal with the organization of the mess
and the truth there is a super nation of
the Union in it in a different direction
yeah diametrically opposed yeah I think
one of the reasons that I might be
interested in these more classical
formal mechanisms I think could be
reactionary against the digital project
like there was a moment maybe about four
years ago where I kind of made a list of
what I was calling anachronistic methods
for making things that had been recently
considered passe or taboo things like
symmetry a golden section these things
that have been kind of like Passover for
new ways of thinking about for making
that rely on a parametric understanding
of space and so I think each of these
projects are kind of an experiment in
these may be anachronistic modes of
before making I was able to be in
for a year two years ago and I spent my
time there making a series of proto
architectural objects that looked at
these formal mechanisms so like things
like lab rats mat cats things that were
allowing me to experiment with with
symmetry and asymmetry in in ways that
were not maybe contemporary and so from
those tests they've started to kind of
fold into into the projects in real ways
and maybe this relates to not eras
earlier comment during the introduction
this sort of this desire to be maybe
precise to a fault like this kind of
reductivist distillation of a form or
let's say in this case threshold like
what is the minimum means by which those
goals can can come about can I ask you
for those people who do not know your
work broadly speaking they may not
recognize that you've had to suppress
the whole portfolio of work in order to
render the message that you have today
if I were to draw in some of the other
digital work which is as digital No
or no less than what you've presented
today as part of this lecture do you see
the thinking of that it's symmetries its
operations its compositions in
confluence with this message or do you
see that as do you see this work as a
repudiation of your earlier work now I
think it's it's it's been a kind of
transition I think does the work that I
think you're referencing I still think
and have the thinking of some of the
single surface buildings I'm thinking of
some of the grad school doesn't count
right it does for me yeah I mean I think
between you know once I finished my
thesis I there were some competitions
afterwards there yes right that's true
look I don't mind yeah but you have to
be clear because one way one way to
answer this is to say that I reject my
own history that's I take a more moral
position about it the other one is to
recognize that it's not a stylistic
question to begin with its operational
and therefore it may have many different
ways of being materialized and therefore
completely linear and in confluence with
you think it is always a stylistic
question and the operational questions
are only in service to stylists
indicators that are always exterior
external to and prior to any of I didn't
want to reveal that my question I want
him to I want him to be able to he's got
the platform so you can get Stan invited
whichever way you love with the question
is is is it really about a kind of
transition or is there was there a
moment where there was a realization
that the work I was making was somehow
you know at odds with the work I was
about to make trying to understand the
question we're not there in the same way
culture likes to reduce oppositional
thinking yeah the digital versus the
analog yeah the classical versus the
modern yeah many people overlook the
ways in which Alto was educated in order
to do the work that he did later but the
ways in which ozland was educated in
order to do the work that he did later
or the ways in which plecnik operated as
a very modern architect despite the
iconographies that were underlying it
I'm interested in that generation of
work and if I were to place you in that
cultural moment except a hundred years
later how do you see yourself did they
did those architects in your mind see
themselves as repudiating their early
work or they saw it as a kind of
indispensable moment of formation that
is in complete conflict with it it's a
broader question yeah I mean for me I I
think it's the it's the latter I think I
think if if I showed if I presented this
work differently in showed work from say
10 years ago
I think I would talk about it in similar
terms actually with similar themes and
concerns that just have different
different outputs actually the way that
things are made might be slightly
different the representational
techniques might also be different but I
think that there's a strand that that
actually links even some of the more
digitally oriented work to to this like
thinking about this issue of the
difference between new from the known
versus new from alien the familiar
ization essentially as opposed to this
sort of you know alien form I think the
Lord is always through the work now when
you do a railing or children your
morphologically and spatially much more
adaptive to alien form but when it comes
to our house and you extrude and that's
something that you may not have done 10
years ago but you see the the totems as
an as alien form no my dog I see them as
a very okay those are the most
interesting ones because they are
completely familiar and alien at same
time but the techniques that you adopt
are that state they slalom back and
forth between figurative ambitions of
configurative setups that actually set
you up for certain repetitions and
patterns that are innate to the medium
that you're working on yeah that's right
they've done become it's a little
frustrating to hear constant like
opposition like that it's you know it's
either you know it's kind of either
postmodern once operational or you were
digital and on your economy and I know
that I mean I find your work honestly
just like really inspiring and kind of
like the real like you're you're such a
strong voice or or I think like a
discipline that's that's that's kind of
crisis basically like that is looking
for ways of like resolving like the
incredible incredible progress that's
like happened in the past Athenians
you've been an architect at the same
time the incredible like crisis I think
when I look at this I mean the way that
I resolve is kind of transition that
you're talking about and we're moving to
me it's not about being like either
historical or modern or contemporary or
any of these dialectical things and
rather I think it's it's it's just more
complex about history but that's that's
what I see like I see like bridges even
in this image we know that the mask is
you know this kind of milled bark but
the the kind of openings the alignments
allude to other organ systems and I feel
like the way that you would resolve it
is it's kind of the way the discipline
is resolving itself now which is like
everything is up for grabs is kind of
flatness and you're kind of representing
that that moment that we're at right now
where you know it's all available but it
feels like history is quite far and in
that way history is it's not not because
in any oppositional verb but because it
really had kids of history yeah yeah
that's that's really helpful yeah I mean
I think I touched on it a little bit in
the ASA project there may be this well
said overly simplistic way but the idea
that like you might have two totally
different techniques at play is sort of
emblematic I think sort of a small scale
its suggestive of a larger attitude that
I find really compelling which is that
you know for a project you might rely on
I don't need these different techniques
but also the kind of lineages that each
of those techniques suggests and also
the kinds of value sets and yeah the
value sets that are kind of entrenched
in each of those techniques
ICBC mhm it's really intriguing and
experience for me but then there are
things I don't understand or maybe I
don't know what's the difference for you
between a mask and a screen because my
team that screen we all know LEDs mask
suddenly brings a whole world of
possibilities but I'm asking something
that negates pictures but in this house
you are negating even the access or the
entrance so almost everything after this
nothing that connects me just made the
structural connections between the house
and the master it's kind of something
that yeah I like the question a lot
because the the difference between
screen and a mask as you said yes is is
quite significant I think the mask is
all about in my mind disguise and I like
the connotations of the word mask for
reasons that have to do with like
identity like the idea that a mask is
transforming or or even substituting an
identity for for what's behind whereas a
screen I think could be argued is more
it's not less about transformation it's
more about a kind of softening or a kind
of like approximation or a low fidelity
version huh
like the mask has the potential of lying
of
actually like subverting what is behind
and it makes that a thickness its own
architecture project which is why we've
taken the liberty to to make seven new
masks that deal with those those issues
of symmetry elevational games thickness
in depth and we also talked a lot about
anta morph anthropomorphism and like
whether these and that maybe that gets
us back to the discussion about
post-modernism but that some of these
things are creatures and especially this
project which you know is is in the
woods and you know the idea that one
might come upon it like what sort of
like lifelike features might it might
might it offer and so the mask i think
starts to conjure some of those issues
like anthropomorphism identity like
creature in this you know thing is that
I think is screen being more archetypal
than mass like mask is somehow ambiguous
between something that one wears for
ritual and tradition and so forth and a
screen by comparison is sort of more in
my mind utilitarian and architectural in
that respect and so the idea that like
ritual and tradition could be stuck to
at in masks as opposed to in screen is
is of interest to me and relates
actually a lot to the book room for
artifacts because the argument being
that like an artifact is kind of a
palimpsest of all these different
influences from cultural utilitarian to
historical
and so I think then the mass is really
different than the screen and that's in
that respect and it's like much more
charged in my mind then the more
architectural utilitarian screen but I
think related to that question I mean
the mask even if you can wear it yeah
yeah yeah and it seems also that there's
a certain interest about the treatment
of the serpents of Tomas that I think
the exhibition that you're gonna have
his work in a few days there's his
obsession with the treatment of the
surface to make the mask inspired a
certain quality and identity which is
also related to the second texture in
their form of camouflage so I think
maybe if you can speak
you know the surface in relationship
communication yeah I mean I think the
question of the relationship between
surface and form in these there's a
spectrum of attitudes I think this one
is probably on one end of the spectrum
and that is like the we designed this in
such a way that they would be a kind of
relationship between this the
orientation of the marbling of the wood
and the orientation of the of the
stripes of the geometry this was
something that was designed whereas some
of the other ones where we're saying
milling one the more totemic one out of
all support site there's a there's a
sort of there's a hope that there will
be a kind of figure allottee about the
marbling that is in dialogue with the
object but you know that's upper chance
and so I think yeah in some cases
there's a sort of like ideal way that
they play out but we're not sure because
we're relying on nature to produce these
other Sur facial conditions and in a
case like this although there still are
kind of natural behaviors in the wood
that that are surprising like we lined
them all up on a 45 in order to produce
this sort of like game of 45 on 45 so
all that to say beyond that like some of
these are sort of more controlled in
that respect and of them are admittedly
kind of experimental in that respect I
just say
the regard that these pieces seem to be
just for me and I want you to correct me
if I'm wrong but they're regardless
these pieces are operating which you
show as a kind of continuation of the
the mask house seems to be very
different from the one that the house
itself is operating
of a problem understanding the
relationship between the two because you
know therein lies the biggest
contradiction for me which is to say
that in the mask house you have this
kind of processional entryway that kind
of obvious it's this moment of truth
what is how awful it is to say but at
the same time you realize that the wall
itself which is not really wall is
engendering in reality that it's
different than what is behind it and
what is in front of it so you're missing
the second layer you want another layer
behind this no the second the third
layer is is engendered whether you like
it or not I mean it's something that
there's the third difference that you
you sense while looking at it from
different directions doesn't happen
through a historical context but rather
through an optical context and for me if
I were to you know ask you if you can
contextualize your work it wouldn't be
you know in a historical perspective
just like you know most of these
questions have been focused on rather
within your own work and and you know if
you can really talk about the difference
between that project and a much more
sophisticated you know project which
which proceeds that the house I think
you're right to say that these these
aren't I wouldn't contextual I
contextual eyes these historically first
I think you're right to say that it's
about optics it's about a kind of
anamorphic game right like for us the
the kind of reveal that
this death occurs is that some of
unexpectedness is a game that were
really invested in and so like the game
of flatness and depth is something that
is sort of through that happens
throughout all of these masks and I also
say happens in the mask house mask
actually so I wouldn't talk about that
really historically you were making a
distinction between that being having a
kind of historical context and he's
having a kind of geometric or optics
context I see them as similar in terms
of like how they might be different like
I I can imagine one meeting that second
layer in order so that there's a gap so
that there's a kind of gasket between
this and something else well we didn't
do that we made these masks that were
really about just focusing on that that
first layer and for us like issues of
symmetry top and bottom being identical
the game of anamorphic projection the
importance of elevation and the reveal
as you move about it those in my mind
make these masks consistent
yeah
find out what it is
yeah and also whether you are the water
you doesn't there weren't enough
surprise
when you say surprise you mean surprise
in oh it's bill this is different than
the rendering yeah I bet that will
happen right I mean because we've
designed these to the extent that they
can be materialized in a virtual
environment so that means we've detailed
all of these projects but I think when
the new CD set gets made before
construction we will have learned
something from these visualizations that
will hopefully allow us to make
improvements actually in terms of like
the the surprise of not seeing it and is
kind of mournful just to use the mask as
an example not seeing this kind of like
mournful environment that's likely I
mean the likelihood of one happening
upon the house you know on the day that
it happens to be you know an environment
like the one that you see is very very
slim so I think we're I'm comfortable
with the idea that ultimately when this
is built the the kind of aura and
atmosphere of the house might be quite
quite different but like I said before
these are kind of aspirational right
there like ways of defining the mood of
the project to an audience audience like
you in terms of how we do them so we
work with - we've worked with two very
talented visualization artists Peter
Guthrie and Alexis Basso and we worked
with each of them at moments in their
career where they were sort of happy to
take on these on you
challenges that we would pose them you
know for instance you know like very
specific about how the fog should be in
order to produce a feel of mournfulness
like requests like can you make
pollution there's a project in China we
did where we asked them to model
pollution so this small to try to
understand like the the smog in China
and have that characterized these houses
you know for them was a kind of exciting
exciting challenge in conversations with
them were always referencing film
actually so like can you rot too and you
know what was the Leo DiCaprio movie
where he got inside the force but movie
revenant yeah so that was you know we
were looking closely at that film and of
walking Alexis through different scenes
in that film as a way to try to get at
the aura that was we thought would be
best for the mask house so it's really
like the discussions are much more like
I think discussions on a film set might
be when we're talking about the
visualizations for those projects
see this constant idea of life of you or
like genocide there's almost a pink
dress I back to what professor or Emma
said historically like you're at a place
where there's a clean slate you have
infinite opportunities
I keep maybe it's a misunderstanding but
I see constantly like ideas or these
these like scenes and I don't see the
process I don't understand it's just by
the book no I've heard that that's that
critique - where's the process how are
you arriving at these direction I
personally just feel like there's a
strong sense of ideas or finished work
but without the process that's what
yourself dude there's a there's an idea
and gold which there's an idea of
creation and creator unless the struggle
I think there's two I was kind of
wondering like how do you guys see
rendering as a design tool
[Music]
guys through the way and like yeah it's
sort of different for each project we
haven't really been consistent about
when we make these so for the mass cows
for instance there's really there were
two rounds one round that happened about
right after sd where we didn't have all
details worked out but we still wanted
to see what this started to look like
spatially and actually in the kiss the
mask house sort of a unique situation in
that the client who was a filmmaker and
now is an entrepreneur is sort of very
much involved in VR and so he he was
interested in trying to get this project
into virtual space and so there was a
moment coincident with the first round
of visualizations where we had the model
in VR and were able to come experience
and walk through it what was so funny
about that was the the VR experience was
so Lofa it was like a kind of 1988 like
Donkey Kong experience where like
everything was rendered in large green
pixels or pink pixels it was like so
that was designed to help us understand
the space right and through the space
whereas the the first round of
renderings were aimed to try to get at I
think what Roberts talking about these
sort of like aspirational views that
help unpack the relationships
the project but the reason we started
doing them in the first place was that I
didn't show any of the earlier projects
but a few houses that we had designed
the project stalled so we wanted a way
of understanding like what what is it
that we had mean and so we used
visualizations as a way to kind of make
them in a way in a kind of fantastic or
fictional sense so we did that for an
a-frame house and a sawtooth roof house
that were projects that you know for a
variety of reasons the clients weren't
able to push for it on and then we
realized that it was a really useful
tool within the process as well so since
then we've been making these kinds of
visualizations as a way to have
discussions with ourselves right and
then as well as as well as clients but I
think it's getting I think in the future
it will be much more you know readily
available for for your generation
certainly to kind of move between the
virtual which is which can be quite real
and 2d space
the mirror on the underbelly of the
house yeah the window next to the bed
yeah yeah so that came about because I
don't know if I explained this but the
house has really conceived of as seven
frames that kind of link up with the
context in seven very different ways you
know from what kind of horizontal slice
through all the trees to a vertical
slice where you get a sense for how the
tree you know the canopy and so we
wanted to maximize the range of scales
from the biggest one which is the
primary space of the house all the way
to the scale of the body it's a really
charged opening right I mean so it's
sort of a personal decision on part of
the client to to like be on board with
that but I think for him it's an
important registration of a line of
sight that he wants to keep in mind and
doesn't want to forget
I think the number of questions that you
got shows or renderings when it senses
well thank you so much everyone
[Applause]
