thank you very much so you guys are all
it this is a classic it's been history
future cities right so we just pulled
together a few different projects from
across a few different scales that
relate to this notion of how some of the
ideas you guys are dealing with I
thought that the classes as a professor
book oath was putting it together is is
pretty amazing and it's it's interesting
because a lot of them are projects we're
actually referencing kind of day in and
day out in our own work so this is about
actually realizing the future city
because as as much fun as it is to read
and and and talk and think about the
potentials of it it's actually something
we're giving the opportunity very often
to deal with sometimes even on a daily
basis whenever we talk about the role of
urbanism and architecture this is the
one image I have gone back to you for a
very very long time the captions kind of
small but it's it's a it's two hikers in
a very pristine landscape and one of
them turns Taylor and says this would be
a great place to put a new city and of
course we're sort of laughing at that
the hubris of any two individuals who
would see such a beautiful landscape and
I'd be the first thought but of course
that's also the hubris maybe that drove
some people to expand assault settlement
of the tip of an island into the city
that we all we all know today and it
really was this idea of planning for an
unknown future because when they arrived
at and had as it was then known and
started a small cluster village at the
bottom within a few years by 1811 when
the city is only thirty thousand people
they're already planning for a city of a
gridiron that's going to take
1/2 million people so if you think about
the sort of the hubris maybe or the or
the foresight it would take to literally
plan the leveling of mountains the
filling of streams the straightening of
swampy shorelines in order to do that
and the sort of results that we're
living with today very small simple
actions at the beginning can have an
incredible downstream downstream effects
people you're talking about the original
original settlers who arrived in
Manhattan and then which are you mean
the people from the Meadowlands people
that were already known before correct
correct
there were many people living on the
island they at the time we're not
planning for the city of to and athletic
people we see this sort of idea
happening again in places like st.
Petersburg so for a very long time sink
leaders Burke was actually known as
Peter sloly
you guys probably talked about that in
this class and every was absolute
convinced it was gonna go come to a very
unfortunate and of course today it's
known as one of the more beautiful
cities in Europe and arguably the world
and there's a lot of examples of that of
cities that have a certain uncertain
stages of design and aspiration and some
of them never quite make it and some of
them do and I guess the question we're
dealing with on day to day basis is why
and I think keeping a little bit of that
thought in check is it's always useful
when we think of the experiments are
happening today so it's very easy to
maintain a certain kind of schadenfreude
about an experiment like Dubai
understanding that that the same jokes
that were made about the aspirations of
the people there to create a world
metropolis were made at one time about
st. Petersburg about Mumbai India about
Shanghai about New York so I guess a
couple of things to think about in the
work that we do one is that is that
ideas do become reality and so the most
utopic aspirations that seem to have
absolutely no basis in plausibility or
achieve ability or feasibility do
actually over time begin to manifest in
ways that are both positive and negative
so we have the ideal cities of
like filler than others and certainly
while some of them were realized in in
certain concoctions the ideas of sort of
rational radial planning carry on all
the way through to the twelve in Paris
and beyond we have the sort of fantasies
of Harvey Wylie Corvette and the and the
multi multi-level city and what's
amazing is that half of his images were
destined for architectural publications
and the other half for humorous
magazines that were making fun of
article publications and yet a few years
after an image like this is drawn you
have the plans of Grand Central which
really is the manifestation of the
multi-level City in fact it's such a
skillful manipulation of section I think
many people forget that we actually show
us the Great Hall you're over thirty
feet below great so you really are
witnessing a sort of section of the city
city strata and of course there are many
examples of multi layer cities that have
been failures there also some pretty
standout successes like in Hong Kong
we're doing a combination of density in
the mix it uses a sort of multi-level
connected metropolis has actually been
arguably a huge a huge success the Green
City the Garden City of Ebenezer Howard
finds manifestations and places like
Radburn New Jersey by Olmsted um gets to
certain threads get picked up by Frank
Lloyd Wright in broadacre City and it's
kind of hard not to see the comparison
between something as prosaic as a lot of
town in the aspirations of a sort of
fanciful city of the future that Frank
Lloyd Wright came up with for actually a
woman's magazine at the time wasn't even
an architectural publication and how
prescient in some ways that was for for
better or worse or of course the
ultimate tobik statement where muses
plan moves on which achieved very very
painful manifestation in examples like
likes pruitt-igoe
so when we're thinking of the work that
we're doing is this component of time
and how things manifest over time and
obviously the work of today can't
necessarily always be judged for what
you may do in in a hundred years
whether it's Park Avenue
in DC in the other hand I think you're
gonna find that there are many
architects and designers that hide
behind this notion that time cures all
ills so more than a few architects I
think and that management got a panel
discussions with a few say oh you can't
judge the work as it is right now you
have to give it 50 or 100 years to
really see its fruition then again a lot
of cities that we think of as sort of
naturally evolved actually happened very
quickly so when you think of places like
brown stem Brooklyn much of what you see
is Brown stunt Brooklyn happened within
15 or 20 years and they needed to have
to wrap to the Civil War it was pretty
instant and then in the scheme of the
scheme of things
same thing with Georgian London again
the ultimate organic city lots of little
sort of small lanes it doesn't appear to
have any rational master plan until you
realize that it essentially was a series
of clusters that were put together by
rail families and as they went bankrupt
they effectively subdivided their own
properties so a lot of the Georgian
streets in London were again put
together and it matters five 10 15 years
and nobody would go down any of these
streets and say oh this is totally on
you know unattractive I can't believe
that they didn't have 20 years and 10
architects working on 20 different
styles of buildings to make it beautiful
similar similar logic applies to Paris
in this case is superposition on an
existing city but much of the city that
we know today is actually a lot there's
a lot younger than a lot of New York
because when we think of the West
Village and places like that you're
talking about stuff that's from before
world war ii Haussmann is redeveloping
Paris in the latter half of the 19th
century in the city we know today
manages to maintain a certain kind of
architectural unity because of that I
think the last thing to keep in mind is
this idea the cities are plenty for
people so as planners we spend a lot of
time looking obviously Noli plan and
other images like that but in the end of
the day the success of a plan like that
is really it as describing places like
the Jets of the Buffalo that it's really
describing a way that people are
occupying a city and that even if there
are systems of circulation and
connections and all nodes and networks
and all and all the sort of ideas that
permeate
planning for hundreds of years it's the
manifestation as urban space that we can
actually occupies that's most important
similarly in New York this idea of the
multi-layered infrastructural city finds
ultimate apotheosis and place Ike
Rockefeller Center where you see that
section exposed below great city the
above great city and even simulated
Corbusier knew that which is why some of
his most powerful images of his urbanism
weren't the aerial photographs but that
necessity and I love this image to draw
the coffee table the guy having Breck
you know just recently having stuff from
having breakfast or cup of coffee and in
terms of it viewing this whole Vista so
even even the sort of person who seem to
be the least concerned in terms of the
urban planning with the individual
expression of space was in fact thinking
about it in terms of how we as people
interacted and deal with it so as we
think of why we we build or expand
cities I think one of the one of the
questions we always come back to is why
would a city be here what the expander
be built who is it for and what are the
techniques that we we have to begin to
create the sort of successful aspects of
Hawaii instance cities cities that you
sort of design and hoping they happen a
lot more quickly than they would have
otherwise it naturally I'm gonna go
through about half a dozen examples
today one of the great things of an
organization like ours is I've worked on
some of these many of these but not all
of them but it is sort of testament I
think to that sort of collaborative
nature of the practice that we're
constantly aware of each other's works
you know we're moving in and out of each
other's teams and constantly getting
ideas back and forth as we're doing our
work at different scales so I'm going to
be moving from kind of very large scale
which is literally in an entire city the
size of Boston that's about two-thirds
complete in Korea down to the size of a
computer chip and some of the digital
techniques that we're using as we're
beginning to to further analyze and
understand city
today and I guess especially because
we're a smaller group if there's any
questions as we go along and really glad
they asked the questions that you did by
all means
like it's much better to chat and
discuss then actually just sort of like
could go through projects yeah I really
think that no matter what the room or
the situation so so I guess the the with
so the first one that this this this is
sort of new city in Korea the question
is really can quality of life be
considered a national project and we
know the idea of the national project
because we have cities such as Brasilia
or chunda Guard or today Masdar in Abu
Dhabi that are really conceived of by
nations or nation-states an expression
of something be it a political change be
a transformation of a national economy
for whether it really happened or not
from oil-based to sustainable
technology-based or whatever so I guess
the question that we were asking is we
started to get involved in the city is
can a national project be actually about
the quality of life of the city the sort
of nature of urban experience which is
why we all choose to live in cities
rather than lots of other alternatives
that of where we could live and more
importantly can you achieve something
like that in a mudflat that's 20 to 100
acres in a bay that is being terraformed
as you are literally even beginning to
think about the project and even more
importantly why would you go to such a
great length to create a city there so
samdo city was a city in korea that has
a very long time horizon before i ever
got started in the 1990s it starts out
as an idea for a new technology center
actually developed by LG and the idea is
very much at the time that's going to be
something like Shenzhen or others are
today really a factory town place where
technology is going to be made
workers that aren't supportive it will
live that for a lot of reasons goes
belly-up in the mid-90s one of the
biggest ones of which is the Asian
financial crisis so you have a country
that was very confident of its future
that suddenly finds itself at the mercy
of very funds forgiving
international conditions and so one of
the decisions made actually was to
double down on building the city but to
change its purpose entirely and really
as making it a gateway to the country
and then also a gateway from the country
to the to the entire region and what you
find is that within a matter of hours
flight from that may be four to six
hours you can get something like two
thirds of the world's population you can
get some of the most active and dynamic
economic centers and so the the question
is whether a country like Korea which in
some ways at the time they've been a
little bit peripheral to places like
Japan and China and others could
actually establish itself as a new
regional a new regional center at the
same time you obviously have the
beginning of the the absolute mass
industrialization of China and so
there's a very small chance that country
like Korea can really compete as China
is getting more and more advanced
technologically right moving from socks
iPhones so the simultaneous debate
what's happening at the same time is is
there another model because the model
that's being done by countries like
Korea at this time is one that I've been
followed by by many countries including
China sense is sort of growth through
industrialization but the question is to
a certain extent desert is that model a
dead end because there's always somebody
can do it cheaper than you and what he
sort of left with so focus instead
becomes about trying to create models of
urbanism that will lead to a certain
idea of the quality of life and if you
create a place that people want to live
rather than place that they have to
might it actually attract international
companies might it actually allow you to
retain some of your best and brightest
people and might it serve as a model for
the the kinds of urbanism that's
happening by default anyway in a rapidly
growing foreign country
so this was an aerial image that was I
think the result of about four years of
work in early 2000 and the city where as
it was built maybe three years ago and
so you can sort of see the main central
central park the beginning of a number
of the buildings that are around it and
that sort of curious you know like Park
Avenue photographic fury assorted
half-finished speak where you have one
part of that's incredibly debts and one
part of it but still sort of
battlefields I kind of I kind of like
showing this image because let's say a
couple of years from now that sort of
state of coming into being is not going
to be it's not gonna be visible anymore
a couple things you guys will notice
about this city right away as we look at
the master plan one is the way that it's
conceived is this conceived of a series
of actually smaller clusters so rather
than trying to superimpose one really
sort of massive overarching
organizational strategy the idea is to
begin to break it down into a series of
pieces that are more or less complete as
they as they begin to grow so you're not
waiting for the whole thing to to happen
to realize all the promise of a city
built around people that might happen in
day one the understand why that would be
right look if you can imagine building
Central Park with nobody around it with
those early photographs have there's not
really an audience to use it so what you
kind of need is to begin to do things
sequentially and it's a sort of kitchen
in that chicken neck scenario you're not
going to show up to live anywhere there
isn't a good school and there's no point
in putting in a good school if there's
nobody living there so and if even if
you could build a great Park nobody
would enjoy it if there's nobody there
so it's a sort of how do you begin to
move all the pieces forward at the same
time when there is rightfully so a
healthy degree of skepticism that
anything like this can actually happen
so one of the major strategies was to
conceive of a neighborhoods as a series
of clusters do you get a sense of the
scale of this Ridge I'm gonna say about
the size of Boston so 2,200 acres
alternate populate
about 40,000 to 50,000 people just in
this in this area so in the middle we
have something that we call the Central
Park and then coming off of it a series
of clustered neighborhoods and I'll talk
about how each one of those are arranged
then a Avenue that sort of bisects the
whole thing and other clusters that you
see sort of pinwheeling and really out
of that now the decision to put a park
in the middle of this you can imagine
was an incredibly contentious one of
course you know this the the the mayor
the government the developers come in
the first day we say okay you take the
middle of your city and we've been
absolutely empty
there should be absolutely nothing there
but a big part so right away even
imagine this is ludicrous is crazy why
would you do that and they start to go
through it we have New York and Central
Park you have Boston and Boston Common
you have Hyde Park and Kensington
Gardens in London and you can just keep
going on English garden in Munich it's
your garden in Berlin and as you go
around the great cities in the world you
discover that really at their heart is a
void very often and that void is a place
for for people to do all of the myriad
activities of urban living that can't be
easily tied into housing office and
shopping or whatever so there's museums
there's art galleries there's
playgrounds there's running tracks
there's Gardens so the idea that
actually at the very very heart of the
city you would you would put this Park
and allow it to sort of be a free space
that we could design but not really know
how it's gonna be programmed was a
really important part of the strategy of
how the city came into being was really
important also as this was actually the
first thing in the city to be built to
the point where people would come this
is about maybe an hour outside of Seoul
people would take the train out of Seoul
to go use this park because it was
approximately
and available to them at the heart of
the park are a series of meandering
courses whether it's walks or running
tracks there's also a canal that
connects all of the all of the different
parts of the park together and so the
park then begins to take on multiple
roles it's not just a green lung for the
city it's also a way of connecting the
city through water through through boats
through leisure you can as you can
stroll through the park as opposed to
just efficiently getting from point to
point it also had an important
sustainable function which is that it's
actually catching treating and absorbing
rainwater from the very very beginning
so the park is serving as an actual
sustainable energy and environmental
engine for the entire city from day one
and literally the way the park is
engineered it is actually a sponge
that's responsible for holding the gray
water for almost the entire district so
coming out of that park we began to
develop a series of districts roughly
speaking what you call the residential
neighborhoods are in yellow the
commercial neighborhoods are blue and
let's say the the the shopping
neighborhoods are in orange and then the
surf paler or under special pieces this
is a very convenient zoning diagram but
actually sort of completely irrelevant
to the truth because no neighborhood is
completely all residential any more than
no neighborhood is completely commercial
but in a way of beginning to understand
how these these different districts come
together I think it's a helpful diagram
and for us it was this idea of
incomplete proximity of you you should
have access within by walking my bike my
bus my car my subway
various different scales all of the
different functions of the 24-hour City
so I think this is a far more blustered
of diagram it's not just because it's
actually a plan but because you can read
within it the sort of varieties of grain
and scale that actually constitute the
modern city the way this was done and I
want you to kind of keep in mind this
for something work that we're doing now
is very much by creating a series of
maps of what a reasonable distance is
for people to walk and what are the
activities that you are
walk to what a reasonable distance is
for people to bike or take a bus or take
a car and so there's there's certain
kind of things that you want and need
very close and then there are other
areas that you're willing to sort of go
farther and farther and farther for
ultimately before it before thieve in
the city so as we ran the different
ideas of how we might plan the city
across we're actually constantly trying
to plot for people living or working in
different parts of the city are they
actually getting sort of mix of all the
uses that they need within within close
proximity and again because this was
done you know this point almost 15 20
years ago 15 years ago we were just
starting to actually we would do this
manually we would run these simulations
to plot out points what are the
different ways that people would work
and so the various different strategies
were comparing in terms of block size in
terms of variety of uses were sort of
always mapped against these scenarios of
whether it was a family going about the
the daily activities of the family
dropping off a kid a daycare going to
school picking them up wearing the
doctor going to a playground versus
friends which is really about
socializing restaurants places to do
shared activities museums galleries etc
versus people visiting whether it's for
business or for pleasure and if this is
just one of countless number of
scenarios you can imagine they want to
make begin to plot out for a city so the
question really was can you design a
city around the way that people might
use it rather than a Priora system of
thinking of is a grid as a circle is it
network three dimensionally we also
began with a complete not a rejection of
the typical sort of sub urban typology
you see around most cities in the world
um in America we see this here inside
the city but if you go to much of Europe
or Asia outside the historic city centre
as you see miles of these sorts of
unbroken slabs right there efficient
they're easy to house people I'm sure
you've seen them outside of Paris you've
seen them outside of Mexico City you've
seen them outside of Moscow seen them
outside of
so so one of the things we were very
invested in is this idea of
heterogeneous scale that not only came
excuses you can also mix densities and
Heights so the block structure was set
up in such a way that each of the blocks
is housing all of the different scales
are a mix of scales for various
different building types that you're
reinforcing Street walls yes but you
also have the relief of breaks in the
core air technology changes in height
and at the heart of each one of these
sort of called the residential
neighborhoods which as you start to get
into it you can see also have retail and
small office tell us another you have
the school and the school was another
thing that was built day one because if
you think about even in a place like the
US what's the number one driver for
white people who a lot of times is where
you have a school a good school but
schools are more than just places to
educate children how many of you guys go
play basketball at you know in the
playgrounds of the schools very little
you know a lot of them double small
parks there's there's communities
there's places to visit and so you can
see here in the sort of the way that the
city grew this idea of the mix of scales
the indoor/outdoor what's inside the
block versus on the street and the sort
of variety of materials that we hope
maintain the same level of visual
interest as that you see here as you
would for example in a street that
happened fairly instantly Brooklyn in
the 1880s this idea of richness depth
variety material of texture um and this
is when my favorite shots of the of the
city because this is one of those linear
canal elements that we talked about at
the very beginning and these were built
again one kilometer long at one time
many of them in advance of the
neighborhoods behind them so they needed
in a sense almost like a sort of
Potemkin village to have all of that
vitality and life for a populate a much
larger population that would only grow
over time and again we were one of the
ways you sort of kind of know you're
successful is if you guys remember the
music video Gangnam style about
two-thirds of it was was was filmed in
in in Sanko City so that was our like
like five minute claim to claim to fan
I've got everything in this images KB of
architecture but very little in the
whole city was I wish it was art I think
more likely it was a label from one of
the stores that was around around the
way what's really interesting about
about the Seoul in particular but about
much of Korea as it is to say operates
it at multiple scales so there's a lot
of this sense of discovered space that
emerges out of the remnants of the old
city and use the word remnants very
carefully because Seoul is one of the
sort of is a number of cities but let's
say one or more recent cities it was
almost completely destroyed in the war
right in the Korean War so much of that
City fabric very little that remains and
very little bit was worth built in
certain place so the idea of conceiving
of this particular urban experience as a
kind of series of smaller fountain
spaces was something that was very
immediately appropriated by a number of
people living in in Seoul we're very
happy to sort of move to something that
even if was purpose-built maintained
some of that same character and then
also by a particular class of retailer
so which is also again really if you
think about it always a challenge
because when you think about cities like
New York or Paris or any number of other
ones that you know or you know even even
even like Quinn desks are some of the
best places in Mexico cities and exam I
keep mentioning so I was there not too
long ago there's a sort of the types of
retailers that you see are not big
national chains right but those are not
the ones that those emerge because you
have lots of people and people willing
to take a risk and start their own
coffee shop or whatever when you build
something new it's very hard to get
those types of things that have been
naturally correct so normally what you
end up with is the kinds of people that
can sort of put a store in the hopes
that they build something will come
which unfortunately its national
retailers no matter where you go so the
idea that we created a space that people
found so convincing that there were that
small restaurants and shops from within
us all were willing to open their
sometimes their second location in
wasn't a very it was kind of a very
weird way a compliment to the potential
of what what the space could be you guys
if your hands are still honored at the
scale of the programming of murals and
thought at some point that's handed to a
developer in a sort of right I think
that's a really good question so number
one the art program actually here we
were a part of and art was a part of the
sequence of spaces that made up
this is this project also the idea of
the fact that you didn't just have a
continuous expanse of glass so if you
think about again a lot of recent York
architecture this idea that the first
two floors have to be unbroken Velasquez
whatever the retailer wants definitely
not here um the variety of material
textures so the fact that you got one
kind of brick over there and a different
kind of brick over there within a sort
of like a screen pattern that was
entirely us but the idea very much that
the unexpected is gonna happen whether
it's signs that have to go on to it
whether it's posters that are put up the
sort of little using that word and
precisely the reappropriation of these
services by the various people using it
his is what was not was planned for but
not how we're doing yeah great questions
so turf jumping and moving down a scale
we were approached actually by many of
the same individuals that have been
involved in the city in Korea were from
Boston so an opportunity came up to
actually do serve Boston's first new
neighborhood since since Back Bay and
ironically enough and this also sort of
speaks the sort of global flows of how
knowledge and people shift Korea after
the financial crisis reaches out to an
international consortium in conjunction
with local Korean companies so
architects globally landscape architects
globally developers banks engineers and
so on all partnered up with local
partners how many people in Boston have
ever built a new neighborhood a new city
not except the people that have been
involved in a project to do a new city
in Korea so that knowledge I capability
came back and the sort of unique
opportunity opened up and the city
actually technical complete advantage so
one of the things that we talk a lot
about is this idea of innovation and
innovation is something gets talked
about so much right now that I think
most people have a sort of idea that it
looks something like Soho or Dumbo or
Tribeca or some kind of warehouse unit
warehouse district and and Boston is an
old port city like New York of course
has plethora of these sort of cast-iron
big brick loft warehouses and so on but
what's really odd of course is that some
of the world's most innovative companies
have been created in buildings like this
this is where Steve Jobs and Wozniak
actually started Apple the first
go-around and so there is are a little
bit this question that that to a certain
extent there's a challenge as an
architect and urbanist
innovation can obviously happen in
places that we've never considered to be
innovative like the suburban side
streets of Palo Alto so when somebody
comes to you and says okay well we
really need to recapture our innovation
or losing it to San Francisco they have
far more patents than we do you know
Boston we used to be this great
technological place we said all these
companies they've all move to San
Francisco we need to be innovative how
do you do it you sort of have to be
honest and say well you know there's a
certain amount that made me as invested
in form and a certain amount that isn't
because even places like suburban Palo
Alto can become very innovative until
you started start to dig into it about
what it was that made suburban off Palo
Alto innovative so it had Stanford
University it had a couple of military
bases for a very long time people forget
about this now the engineering concerns
for a lot of the largest car
manufacturers weren't in Detroit they
were here so for a GM Toyota when they
opened up their first plan so remarkably
actually Silicon Valley on the paper is
not very dense but in reality actually
or those up in when you walk through it
when you drive through it it's not very
dense but in reality it's actually quite
dense and it's quite dense with an
ecosystem of organizations universities
companies government agencies that are
all involved considered technology and
research the sort of impromptu meetings
and occurrences that happen that
eventually led to companies like Apple
and Google and others were sort of
blatant in that dense mix so the
question really became is there a way to
kind of foster that sort of dense mix
next to in existing City so the area
we're talking about is the area all in
white over here and it's immediately
adjacent to to downtown Boston I say
immediately adjacent a walk from here to
there is about 10 minutes so for many
years this was the railyards that
serviced the port of Boston before what
many more
moved to deeper waters when those were
decommissioned you were just left with
tons and tons of parking lots
how many people here been to the ICA in
Boston so you know mixer cantilever
Museum Donetsk a video
Haymitch really worth going to attend
it's an amazing museum you guys will
remember you at the transverse all of
these parking lots so all of those used
to be massive massive train yards the
hope is over time that we're going to
turn it into a sort of little slice of
the city like this aerial watercolor
which always think is a very kind of
useless way to to show cities but sort
of I guess is necessary when you when
you're trying to get community approvals
but it is an attempt that are poking a
certain kind of of scale and an approach
I think the better story is to start
getting into why this particular piece
of land with proximity central Boston
would seem to be a place that innovation
could happen and what it was that we as
designers could do to sort of bring that
out the first thing to note is that it
is not only extraordinarily proximate to
downtown Boston but also to the South
Station and the airport so you can get
and Boston's one of the only cities I
know of in the world where the the
airports actually right in the center of
town so you can get from the site to the
airport in less than 10 minutes and
often when I go up to Boston it takes me
longer to get to LaGuardia than it does
get from LaGuardia to Boston to the
office that I'm going to which is a
pretty scary thought in terms of New
York transportation um the second thing
is that both the airport the train
station they make this a critical note
in terms of the Northeast megalopolis so
arguably one of the largest urban
conurbations in the world is all
connected by train rail and and short
plane flights to that specific point
so when you think of these proximities
though really have to begin to create a
reason for people to come and a kind of
urban density that would encourage
people to find each other find like
interests and the idea that we that we
sort of had is if you create a place
that people want to be want to live want
to work but also want to play want to do
things you can't even predict the
likelihood given the aura of a place I
mean Boston already has a lot of great
things going for it has amazing
institutions has amazing companies just
wasn't holding on to them if you create
a sort of destination where people want
to be then perhaps the rest of it will
follow suit so it's kind of a big
experiment to kind of if you build it
will they come kind of kind of question
or mystically you can think of Boston as
a super imposition of several different
networks or several different layers so
the first obviously is the fine grain
texture of the original city in the
various neighborhoods that have emerged
over time the second is a series of sort
of more singular mega blocks for pieces
whether it's City Hall the train
stations or the universities because
each university might be made up of many
small buildings if you guys think of
like for example a next-door neighbor's
like NYU the ability of the university
to act as a sort of transformative piece
to a piece of fabric around it it's
pretty amazing there's a few
organizations that are more able to
they're like a you know tree growing
within a piece of rock able to serve
very slowly over time completely
transform the physical fabric of areas
around them and then Boston unlike New
York would say New York is really
concentrate on Central Park there's an
entire network of green spaces the the
Emerald Necklace
of Homestead that stitches all of the
different neighborhoods together so one
of the first things that we that we
really did was sort of study the
hierarchy of neighborhood how people
walk how people drive buses
transportation and also the hierarchy of
corresponding green spaces that go along
with it because each of these
Green's our shirt working together and
if you think about New York City central
part works because there's a certain
scale of urbanism that happens around it
but if you go to a lot of the larger
parks in the outer boroughs they don't
work as well they give these very
fine-grain small streets than dead-end
and these very big open parks and the
sort of schism that happens between the
two different scales urbanism we find we
believe makes it a little bit less less
successful so if on the left was the
sort of program a grain of the city
before this neighborhood before the
Seaport District on the right is what
the district became or is going to
become over time so in terms of infill
there was a couple of different
strategies that we then did one obvious
one is that you extend the prevailing
grid of the historic city to those parts
they're immediately adjacent to it
there's also an emergent larger scale of
buildings that happens off of the
waterfront and you can think about that
here in New York City as well right if
you go down to the waterfront next any
packing district some of the largest
buildings in the entire city are those
that are the blocks just just inside
from the water then there's a sort of
infrastructural brain that happens so
another thing that that freed this site
up to be reinvented as a new
neighborhood was the Big Dig and the Big
Dig connected to a tunnel that went to
the airport and that tunnel and the
associated buildings that came out of it
and the port buildings are right here at
the idea to the site and so when you
bring all of those textures together and
sort of crisscross them across of each
other you have the ability to create a
neighborhood that sort of stitching with
various different conditions around it
together and in a sense comes up with a
grain that's neither one nor the other
but perhaps has a potential of being a
little bit more interesting this was a
different aerial image particularly
looking at the sort of block in the
foreground but also begins to talk about
the way that these different scales and
grains extend the various different
community neighborhoods around the city
and also back to the existing downtown
and
in the upper part of the image so why
are these networks so important I mean
architects always love to do this we
like to analyze sort of scales of grids
and why does that make it good in terms
of how how a city or neighborhood might
grow so a major part of it is really
fostering sort of connectivity so you're
not just becoming a sort of sink or a
place unto yourself but something that's
actually stitching all of the best of
the various different neighborhoods
around you neighborhoods that used to be
separated but are now being brought
together
one of the ways that we strengthen that
is also by extending the sort of green
networks again the Emerald Necklace
along the waterfront and then through
various different streets and boulevards
to specific series of green spaces each
one of which is anchored by an activity
so the main square that we see sort of
in the upper part of the picture right
right there was anchored by something we
call the district hall so this was a
building that was built actually by the
development community that were that
were putting these buildings up I was
gonna have a series of shared conference
spaces technologically support spaces
coffee shop but if you think about small
companies all the infrastructure that's
very expensive for them to develop
themselves there was a feeling that if
that could be provided and anchoring a
park the people actually went to you
you'd begin to have a sort of seeds of
an ecosystem for work
so the major thrust that of the master
plan became stitching these different
textural elements together so you begin
to lane a park and I know of one kind of
activity with a street and a node and
another kind of activity in a sequence
that stretched all the way from the
existing city through the sort of new
new extension and one of the things that
that great cities have is this emphasis
on urban experience so if you think
about to say that emerged in time cycles
like in New York if you kind of go up
Broadway which is this Street you guys
all know very well you transition from
neighborhood to neighborhood you know
the precise moments when those
transitions happen when Soho suddenly
opens up and you get to the area to
south of Union Square when you
transition again and you're suddenly
Madison Square Park when you transition
again past the Flatiron Building so each
of these sequence is sort of the marked
way of threshold and that threshold has
two functions in a wire or survey that
serves two functions it serve lets you
know that there's a change and it also
frames and connecting to that next urban
experience so you know that the
different neighborhoods are you know the
characters of the different places but
then it also seems not that they are
being separated say like a highway but
that it's a very very thin and easy
membrane to cross so the way that we
conceive of the urban experience then of
moving through the neighborhoods that we
or the parts the neighbor that we were
developing in Boston was much the same
way now here is a case where where
reality is not always as kind as the
aspirations that one has for the design
so after completing the master plan
neither ourselves nor the developers are
originally involved in the master plan
went on to do the first series of
buildings the financial crisis hit and
the sights began to flip to other
developers at a time when there was a
lot of uncertainty again as whether a
new neighborhood in Boston could could
happen so there were a lot of very
conservative decisions taken in terms of
the architecture and then a lot of the
investments in the streets
this is this is no no Boulevard this is
just a wide street
we're not taken at the beginning and
it's unfortunate but in a way it's a
little bit of a teaching moment because
nobody likes Paris for the street grid
so this idea that you can simply plan a
city and not actually have any
investment in the vertical surface and
the art in the texture of sidewalks or
all the other aspects of urban
experience that you could just really
like plan the systems but not
necessarily the spatial and urban
experience that if you don't choreograph
that all you have a great neighborhood
the answer is no so it was really very
heartening is that when this was
starting to happen there actually was a
beginning of a real outcry against that
the media the community came up against
it and so um we as architects and other
really good architects were started to
get invited back in to do to do
buildings so the project that I'm
currently working on which is this very
large block that you see in the
foreground is attempting to rectify some
of the lack of urban spatial refinement
urban space will control from the first
series of buildings and this idea of
opportunities for secondary found spaces
smaller intimate public spaces so one of
the first things we did is we actually
convinced the developers actually
hollowed out the block and create a very
large piazza in the middle of the block
and again the idea here is that by
creating these opportunities for
pedestrian rich spaces you're not only
allowing different size and they were to
be connected through this block but
you're actually in a way enhancing value
of course right that that by giving back
to the public that by creating spaces
that are really meaningful and desirable
to go to you're gonna create a
destination where people are going to
want to go which is ultimately gonna
have you know success both in terms of
the community and also in terms of the
development it's the good news overtime
is despite the early growing pains of
the master plan it has succeeded in
terms of attracting innovation not only
have there been lots of established
companies there have been hundreds of
startups that have chosen allocate here
and most recently Amazon just
announced that they're opening they're
not the headquarters but their largest
current nor offices in the Northeast are
in Boston's they're at move 4,000
employees there in addition you have
headquarters for GE and a lot of other
other companies so this notion that if
you focus on urban experience quality of
life a variety of different spaces and
mix abuses you will create the kind of
ecosystem where people will want to be
at least now is starting to bear some
suffered the next experience that is
interesting to talk about is whether a
future city can infill into an existing
city without replacing and what I mean
by that is is such an experience that
we've seen all around us so if everybody
thinks of sort of Soho in the 1970s when
this amazing group of artists curators
choreographers and writers some of the
most interesting and innovative work in
terms of design what's happening and the
Soho of today is very very different so
in some senses it's been a victim of its
own success it's been arguably turned to
a little bit of a sort of mini mall
version of itself that we all sort of
like visually but we would have to argue
that a lot of the things that we loved
about Soho at the beginning have sort of
disappeared um and that's actually had
deleterious effects the Soho itself
because there are some shopping streets
of Soho they're completely packed but
there are others that are kind of empty
because if you're not there to shop for
very expensive furniture there's less
and less reason
to go at all right it's one of the
questions that cities that are existing
deal with all the time is how do you
allow transformation to happen in a way
that doesn't true kill the goose that
laid the golden egg can neighborhoods
transform over time in a way that
doesn't necessarily lose all those
qualities of any everything like in the
first place so this is Covent Garden
which is the middle of London how many
people have been there it's get out more
sitting here listening but boring
lectures you should be getting in a
plane right now I'm going to London two
weeks yeah so the comic Garden for many
year was a little II a convent garden
that's the the origin of the name it
eventually became a wholesale district
and so this is this very large hall what
you see in the foreground was built to
house sellers of food fruit flowers of
someone it eventually became quite a
sort of desirable place to live and to
work and quite famous at the same time
also for a lot of the street activities
so you know street performers artists of
all sorts actual artists not that's the
ones that are doing this or a little
like kind of spray paint things which is
saturated of too many too many of these
places like that today acrobats you know
I mean it's when I was living in London
even even 15 years ago it was just you
never knew what you were gonna be seeing
over there the interesting thing about
it is we mentioned this at the beginning
London seems like it grows organically
but because of the land holdings of the
original series of families or estates
that owned it a lot of neighborhoods in
London can actually have a single owner
because in in the UK a lot of these
larger states were sold through ground
leases so they weren't necessarily
carved up like in New York where you
know you get a little piece and you get
a little piece they would houses the
different real families as they needed
to raise money would empower certain
come
organizations to act on their behalf and
then begin accepted by the land and rent
it out essentially to people which means
that periodically you have these sort of
once-in-a-lifetime opportunities to
rethink and reinvent the neighbourhood
holistically and of course here's the
crisis
everybody loves the neighborhood you
don't want to reinvent it you don't want
it to change but change it is right
because the more successful becomes a
certain kind of retailer moves in maybe
not a retailer that's compatible with
acrobats and artists and improper
choreographers the more touristy becomes
or more expensively becomes the harder
it is for people who live there and so
ultimately you can't freeze a
neighborhood in ember but you can also
try to look what I guess the question is
can you try to exacerbate those
qualities in the neighborhood that make
it most interesting so we were
approached here to do a master plan not
on an on a blank site but a master plan
for a new city that was effectively our
new neighborhood those effectively going
to exist within an existing already
functioning neighborhood and already you
could begin to see happening some of the
things that were happening in places
like Soho which is as it got more and
more successful we would say maybe the
retailers were higher-end and maybe
they're paying more rent but it was also
less lively and so you could sort of the
question is how do you sort of manage
that that sense of her vanity and that
sense of vitality and variety so one of
the the the first things we started to
do is look very closely at the
neighborhood not as a texture of streets
but really as a sequence of urban
experiences as moments of nodes whether
its Seven Dials or the actual flower
hall itself and then try to see if there
are ways to insert at very critical
nodes small catalytic pieces of new
architecture or urban decisions that
would take what was otherwise for
example a dead-end street and give it
something at the end of it that would be
a drop something that has a sort of
intricacy of detail craft that would be
able to enliven and
an entire street the the team began to
develop a series of strategies and had
to deal with historical grain public
space and circulatory routes and if you
think about cities it's not only about
the space of the street it's also about
the spaces of the courtyards and links
that connect them all together so the
first thing one of the first things that
the team did was in a way remap the city
not as the kind of image that you look
at like a plan but actually as a sort of
drawing of the urban experiences that
want to have walking going through
courtyards finding unexpected alleys
finding certain buildings that you can
actually get inside so think of this as
a sort of three-dimensional Noli plan a
drawing of the narrative of urban
experiences and as we zoomed in you can
begin to say okay there's a building
like the one above that you can already
get into there's a street like the one
below that's very lively is their way to
begin and connect the two are the
surgeries that we can do within the
neighborhood fabric that begin to tie
these pieces together there was a series
of steps of excavation preservation
stitching together that were undertaken
and so within the dead centers of a lot
of these blocks there was found space
the sort of gaps between buildings that
were never really public to begin with
could those be reappropriation realms
and then brought back to the public so
you begin to have a multiplicity of
different urban experiences and you are
actually creating a new public space
even while you haven't changed the
overall figure-ground of the
neighborhood virtually at all and this
is an example of a couple of those
thank there was a couple of other
projects I wanted to talk about but
maybe actually what I might do is jump
forward to just two last ones does that
sound okay we're talk about that
seniority guys already know it it's big
and very fun yeah of course Wow okay
do I take lychee to brakes on maybe and
then how'd you guys want to do it
you're either breather like like that a
sleeper or wait
look you guys any questions are Park and
then no ok so I think as we go down to
the scale now it's not necessarily well
another Cecilia always about Marie
envisioning an entire or entire city but
there are acts of architecture that
operate and that sort of in-between
master planning and they have the
potential of of transforming the city so
one of my favorite examples has nothing
to do with New York it's actually plots
of our nezzie in in Rome within 25 years
of that plots are being built the
gravity of the city shifts from around
cats on the corner to the south to what
have been the form of flower market so
in a very similar way hmm acts of
architecture like Grand Central can
create new new centers or new hubs so
when we think of a place like New York
I think instinctively we understand that
it actually has multiple centers right
there's through one cluster around Grand
Central there's another cluster turned
down the financial district we kind of
get that there's like sort of like one
around Madison Square and even within a
place like the Midtown which people call
like one big sort of downtown district
we all sort of know there's a big
difference between like 6th Avenue Park
Avenue stuff up by Central Park for
these sort of hubs and one thing we also
kind of knew is that for a very long
time there wasn't much west of 6th
Avenue x squared with a very long time
to sort of redevelop and so on so the
real question when you're dealing with a
place of Hudson Yards is not just about
one new development or one new
to the city but can you actually begin
to reorient the step the gravity of an
entire city lien shifting it westward
and it's it sort of seems weird now but
to remember there was a very long time
where people thought that the center of
gravity of New York City could never
move west and of course things like the
High Line happened in the attacking
district came into its own and now
obviously there's no I don't think we
would generally consider the West Side
to be you know inferior anyway to the
east side
but for a very long time it was
considered to be impossible to to get
anybody to want to live west of 7th
Avenue at work you know I mean north
north of the of the village or no
company would ever rent an office
building that would be you know west of
of 8th Avenue um and this is even as
recently as 10 years ago except anomaly
we're talking about with the fifties and
sixties so the idea of an emerging
district that happens certain west of
Penn Station this is a few years ago to
what might happen in the future
this is also an idea that was a flood at
one point for relocating Madison Square
Garden maybe we could make a great great
Penn Station this is Hudson Yards today
you can see the train yards and for
heard for four decades those were active
piers that eventually were no longer
used and so the rail yards gradually
expanded and if you think about it this
has to be a pretty unvalued piece of
land for the MTA and the city to think
it was more valuable as to our trains
there than to build not ten years twenty
years thirty years with the 60 70 years
what the hope is it will be in five
years maybe and so the first question is
really sort of again why better so
obviously you have the land available
what is it about that land that would
make it seem that would be appropriate
for that level of density that intensity
of use one of the things is you're very
close to Penn Station but you're also
because of the 7 train extension very
close to Grand Central so as a sort of
note of the city or as
a place where clustering and occur
you're actually able to get people that
live and work in more places within a 45
minutes one hour radius of Hudson Yards
than anywhere else even including the
area around Grand Central and if you
have friends who live in New Jersey or
places like that you know it's
incredibly hard for them to get to the
east side but now because of the seven
train because of the El train because of
the cluster of train to 34th Street it
is very easy for people to get to the
west side the second thing is again
thanks to the success of the High Line
but also just the the general
transformation of neighborhoods all
around that area Hell's Kitchen Chelsea
and so on this became a very unique
place to have a node emerge because
unlike a lot of other neighbors in the
city
think about how different Midtown is
which is just adjacent to this just east
Hell's Kitchen
Chelsea you art you have media if
finance there's very few places in a
city as large as ours or others where
within such close proximity you can have
such a diversity of different uses and I
mean uses here in terms whether it's
office or residential but the kinds of
people that that that work and visit and
go to the Chelsea Arts District are
completely different than the people
they go to hell' Herald Square and yet
they could both be in such close
proximity to where Hudson Yards will go
is a pretty amazing thing if you think
about it so here's the planet the master
plan as it emerged emerges today the
construction mostly so far is focused
east of 11th Avenue eventually when
that's finished the area west of 11th
Avenue is going to occur you can also
see the High Line curling through here
at this point is that little spur that
goes over to where the post office is
and then it comes around and then loops
and it actually comes down a grade
because it originally connected to them
so the rail yard there interesting side
note about the High Line everybody knows
that the World Trade Center site was the
other end of it right
so a big part of what the project set up
to do was to integrate the Highline into
the into the buildings so if you guys go
over they'll actually see that the the
buildings don't set back from the
Highline to actually step over it
so there's parts where the talent goes
through the middle of the building is
much like it does in the warehouses
further to the south there's also an
entire shift in massing in one of the
tallest buildings literally cracking it
open to create a kind of visual
connection between the inside of the
building and the outside it allows
people inside the building to see down
the Highline and also for people on the
Highline to actually see into the
building the idea that this is a very
transparent window it was very important
to the consumption of the massing of the
project
given that the Highline ballons one side
of it but given that the fact the Hudson
Boulevard basically comes over here and
that has to make a hard sort of turn to
the right to go west towards the river
you also begin to understand why it was
something like the vessel became so
significant because you needed a certain
kind of urbanistic gesture or a sort of
a moment that would literally reorient a
system of travel on Highline a system of
travel for the boulevard and then take
all of those forces and turn them 90
degrees if you think about great cities
around the world there are not many
successful urban interventions or in
spaces that take heart heart rights or
hard lots they AXYZ tend to go and then
they tend to stop and they tend to end
this idea of continuity or intersection
is is something that's that's happens
but you really have to figure out a way
to sort of encourage it to happen I'll
leave it to all of you as to what the
vessel is we're convenience to do that
or not but the fact that something at
that intersection had to happen is if
you think about it important aspect of
how you negotiate these sort of two
intersecting urban space
I have two good questions open vessel
yeah
is there an admission and how does it
operate with the ABA compliance
both of those are incredible questions
and I wish I knew the answers um yes I
guess I lean towards there being an
admission or do you think it's free just
your gut feeling I don't know
suffice to say that there's a price
recognition I'm sure I'll have to pay it
as well this is a view of the of the
tower and you can see the High Line kind
of disappeared below it so this idea
that you can actually create an extent
that sort of space of the highway
because whatever he loves with the High
Line up you used to lose when it got to
the rail yards because that sense of
enclosure it's also this idea of of
thinking about it as a sort of
multi-level City so the bottom level of
course is the rail yard and one of the
amazing things about this is that during
the entire time was under construction
no function of rail yard could be
compromised and no train could be
delayed by even 30 seconds due to the
passage artists though trains get
delayed all the time but not as an art
and so what what begins to happen is
that you actually are seeing this sort
of mega project that's actually
functioning in a way like a bridge
because there's no terra firma between
the two buildings for any part of that
to come down so there's more steel being
used in these towers than there are in
the entire world trade center complex
[Music]
they're across from the shut the shed
sir yeah yeah great so the shed is this
is this green guy and then the two blue
guys and the more in general are not so
coach yep exactly this is awesome you
guys are actually really like no I love
it it's like it's like what what one of
the most satisfying and I think
transformations to see in education
since at least I've been teaching is ten
years ago nobody should really care to
know what was going on inside the
buildings that were that were being done
people could rattle off with the
designers work but not like why the
buildings were built or who lived there
or who they were for or anything so to
see that people actually care about all
the aspects of these building is
actually really delightful so a close-up
of how that how that could happen
the shed obviously is a very important
part of that so awesome question and the
sort of flanking relationship of this
notion of creating again multiple levels
of activity because the if you think
about the the issue that you have with
so many contemporary projects their vast
scale means that there's always a very
small percentage of them that are
publicly accessible and you know it and
there's something that is incredibly
unforgiving a little bit dinky about a
50-story building where like you have
like with one little story at the bottom
that's like for public space this notion
of the sort of of house of how buildings
begin to manipulate space I think was
important to understand that it went
even into the massing so obviously the
most salient point about the building
this is the fact that they will need in
these two different directions and one
of the questions we get asked a lot is
why so one of one of it I think the best
diagrams to explain this is the series
of images that go serve around the
building and of course you have the
classic problem of twinning right when
you have two buildings as you move
around them there's many points where
one of the other disappears and even for
a lot as you go around when they're
pretty big
they're gonna be sort of like one
building for you know what's a 180 up to
360 degrees of the circle by creating
this this lean first of all the
independence of the two buildings as
being separate and unique is maintained
from this every vantage point and you
sort of get the classic sort of gateway
east-west view but you get as much
visual attention and dynamism no matter
where you are in the city looking at
them because the irony of course is as
they're cited right now if it was only
about the gateway effect and the only
view that would be worth having is one
from New Jersey which is an important
one but they say yeeah that a
composition of two buildings can create
and manipulate visual space as much as
it can create urban space think of
something that's very important the
tallest one will be 1,300 County stories
is a very is very nicely that takes the
operation yeah yeah they're other
they're not talking about Empire State
they're outside and then it gets them to
I mean they're not taller than the
Empire State with the spire then they
have a higher viable floor and they
double tank the observation deck will be
higher than the one they were changed
this guy yeah um one of the other things
that we set up to do was to make sure
and it is something that when you see
the buildings from far away of course
they tend to flatten into sure a profile
of what they are but I think that one of
the things and this is that sort of
sweet spot to occupies Architects that
do urbanism and the other way around
this is idea that texture is important
even in buildings where let's say the
most common materials class so I think
one of the sort of disasters before
contemporary architecture is the Crystal
City the city of nothing but sort of
flat reflective glass buildings and as
unfortunate is that from a great
distance of course you may lose some of
intricacy and details are actually
happening but I think when you go to the
site and actually see these buildings
the way that light plays on them and the
way that they seem to move and shift
before your eyes as you walk around them
I think it's a really important aspect
of us and so there's very few surfaces
in the building that are actually truly
flat there's a lot of depth overlap and
manipulation of texture around in the
past few years we've been moving into
into sort of I think rethinking some of
what we know of cities as they are today
so one of the ones recent projects that
we've done that it's been a lot of fun
is working with several organizations on
the future of the driverless car and how
that might impact cities so this was a
collaboration between us IBM and their
neighbors on the street era MIT and a
group called data and society which are
very interesting group of people I
should like I should have taken a more
interesting name so one of the things
that has always struck us is we all are
very unified in our nursing of this
treatise today so if your sidewalks for
people and the middle is for cars so
that's our conceptions of the street but
actually for most of history this was it
it was a shared experience that you know
there was people that were trying to get
somewhere there was people who were
trying to sell stuff life and
interactivity happened in the street and
it was obviously slow but it was very
lively and it was very effective and it
made for community and what really
killed that was when things that could
kill you started to take over most of
the street so what's amazing about that
is the experience but she's being next
to cars moving fast something is so
unpleasant that when the
pedestrianisation have a lot of the city
squares was first proposed people were
convinced it would fail because who
would want to sit near cars in your
traffic
of course with people I don't think
realize is number one that there's a
real desperate need for for public space
in the city as dense as ours but number
two that the there's a relationship
between the obstacles you put in the
street and the movement of traffic
around it so the reason that there were
horses running people over all the time
is because the people were there not the
other way around so similarly as more
and more of the sidewalks and streets
get reappropriation to be there so if
you can imagine the future with large
autonomous vehicles gives us one of the
best opportunities to actually rethink
the street as we've started to develop
and research it we really think that
there's sort of two models for how you
can begin to think about the future of
Java's car one is a company that is not
really popular right now but is the uber
model the other is the Ford model so in
the Ford model everybody has a car today
still as a car but it drives itself so
that's great if you're sitting in
traffic because you're coming in from
some far-flung suburb you can be typing
away in your laptop taking phone calls
or whatever but if you think about
mystically in terms of sustainability
and ecology resources in terms of equity
socially economically and otherwise it's
actually potentially very bad model
because one of the biggest of pediments
to people moving out of the city now is
the inconvenience of having to sit for
four hours of traffic if you take away
that inconvenience in some senses by
allowing everybody sort of working
whether in their own metal pod the
implications for the city could actually
be pretty bad so the other model of
course is shared ownership then you have
no reason to own a car anymore because
the cars are always available when you
need it and everything about it
economically there's a lot of reasons
where that makes sense I mean cars I
think the average car sits unused 97% of
the time right because you sitting there
overnight
sitting ready today even if you commute
with it you drive it to work or you
drive it to drop off your kids at school
and then you're you're you're out of it
again
so the the economists ran a
a simulation where they they concluded
you'd only need 20% of the cars are on
the road today to provide the same level
of quality automotive service that we
all need if everyone just use the hail
service and you see this showing up in
really remarkable ways so for example
last year was the first time ever that
la over two years ago now that la showed
it's a client car ownership and it's
it's attributed almost entirely to to
this there's more and more people that
just don't need it because you can get
it whenever you you want it so the
question is urban istic Li how can we
encourage that version of ownership
rather than the version that's all
private and I will tell you for myself
now just being Israeli for myself that
right now actually cities are more
likely to penalize ride-sharing
companies than they are to encourage
them which is really ironic right
through the whole congestion pricing
thing that happened the other day if you
drive into the city in your own car by
yourself you don't pay a dime but if the
three of us decide to share a car
together in from Williamsburg we will
pay a $2 250 per person fee so it's and
obviously the the car sharing is a
source of must much congestion but in a
lot of ways it's also I would argue the
solution to your congestion so the
question becomes if you could even begin
to reduce cars only slightly so that's I
think the other thing that's really
important to remember is that there was
time when not a great smart comments
right you didn't need everybody to have
smart phones for changes to happen
uber lyft seamless you know Instagram
were all created even when only 28% of
people had smartphones you needed enough
that an ecosystem is created and the
transformations that we see in American
society that starts from this notion of
like everything being accessible with
your thumb have been way in advance in
fact when those transformations happen
when Instagram happens whatever happens
is when the other 80%
people are like you know what I should
get get a smartphone so the same
question begins to happen is only a few
percent of people are encouraged to
start using autonomous forms of
transportation and you start to free
free up roads if ten percent of parking
goes away ten percent of street lanes
are no longer needed because you just
don't have as much traffic and ten
percent of all these cars that are
parked on either side didn't have to be
there how much land could you get back
could you turn parking lots and housing
could you create light industrial space
and maker spaces around the city could
create real pocket parks because you all
suddenly have this open space you just
didn't have before Street plazas and
also could you address one of the
fundamental of transportation in
equities which is that most people who
need public transport most live farthest
from it and so the idea that the team
has been developing is a notion of using
autonomous vehicles as a way of
extending existing transportation
networks
so if currently 29% of myristate
households are without access to transit
at all there's a pretty big number to
think about for a city that prides
itself on mass transit the first idea is
that you begin to create what's called
sort of granular networks for Thomas
vehicles so a car might be autonomous
but it picks you up and it drives around
like everybody else but what if there
were ways that you could divert a lot of
autonomous vehicles and moments or there
operating let's say most autonomously to
streets whether it's Queens Boulevard or
a certain land on the Li E or other
other spaces like this where they begin
to take advantage of the the benefits of
being autonomous that can move faster
and so on you begin to encourage number
one more time this vehicles number two
you concentrate them in places that
might be safer because I'm not just sort
of driving around regular city streets
but they're beginning to sort of start
they're moving slowly but then go places
where they can go that are not going to
impact
safe streets as those networks extend
you can begin to pull more and more
areas of the city that right now are
beyond transit into ratings access to
transit networks so you know some what
might happen is not that people will
stop these in the subway but something
that's really outer Kew Gardens Queens
or in the very border of an island or in
the very upper part of the Bronx might
be able to to hop in with a couple of
people to a relatively affordable car
option um get to mass transit and then
keep going
so as this grows over time you create a
situation where vast areas of the city
are now accessible to a form of transit
which is really these sort of shared
rides and shared shared vehicles it's
also a way of beginning to distribute
pressures of affordable housing of
office space because now there's not
necessarily a pure benefit of absolute
centrality you can have you can have
people that choose to live and work in
outlying areas of ways to think they
can't now so a lot of what we've been
doing is looking at the width of streets
and what happens if you begin to
recapture some of that area back from
from car lanes and of course being
architects having fun with imagining
what the sort of shared streets of the
future could be when you no longer have
to have a complete sort of create
protection that happens from having to
little narrow sidewalks and one Street
in the middle so this is
yeah at the same time we've also been
working on a master plan for a new
subway line in Queens
so this would be how many people here
live or from Queens see it's a number
underrepresented borough so it would
start in Long Island City if you guys
ever been in Long Island City you guys
know there's a series of rail yards
right the South where the most recent
couple of buildings are these is
actually entirely existing rail
right-of-way so you wouldn't have to
take anything yes in time and the MTA
wants it right now if they were there
the no amenda main there'd be no
condemnation
there'd be no digging so this is an
image of what one end of the line might
look like on near near Jamaica center
but again always this notion of we're
talk about a piece of infrastructure but
it has the potential to catalyze and
film growth even within areas of the
city that a lot of people in Manhattan
tend to forget so you can think of a
place like Queens or Brooklyn it's
really a collection of smaller little
villages or neighborhoods and what are
the potentials of transformation that
occur in places like that when you have
the investment in new infrastructure new
ways of working so the way that the
train line would work is it would run
basically through the hole in the
doughnut literally right pretty much the
area of Queens that has no transit
service right now it offers an
opportunity to really encourage a lot of
economic development without any
reasonings because even though you could
build there right now nobody is and I
doubt very few of you have even been to
some of these artists unless you've been
a warehouse parties in Maspeth because
there's no transport so this idea also
you can ensure encourage grow with about
displacing people is a really powerful
idea and there's very few places left in
the city that
but you can do that also there's this
issue of housing so there's all this
room to build new housing and you could
build it affordably even without subsidy
because the average rent for housing
that in that area is 2/3 of the city
average so this idea that investment in
infrastructure can also at the same time
create opportunities for economic
development and affordable housing solve
other issues under the city and things
really important there's also the issue
of resiliency I think a lot of people
living in Brooklyn will be a lot better
off right now if this line was
operational the precise moment they're
about to take the l-train off line yeah
that's what they're saying now and of
course the most amazing thing is because
this piece of a different infrastructure
exists is that you could do basically
nine miles of subway ten new stations
and you would do it for basically for
half the price of the second Avenue
subway extension and you do for 1/10 the
price per mile so this is a sort of
visioning a visioning that we're doing
last yeah it's helped the community
boards so we did that with what I would
call the vision X W so there was a very
forward minded City Councilwoman from
one of the districts along here who I
sort of developed this line the idea as
alternative after the bqx came and you
know the streetcar that's running they
want to run a brought lunch necklace
tree yeah the one that's like they're
gonna go run up all along the waterfront
exactement
so she thought it was a compliment she
didn't get anybody interested so we
started to do some of the urban analysis
which is I want to get into in a second
of why it might be a good idea that
allowed an engineering study to be done
which is how you might do the trans but
again this is I think a real real issue
with so much urban planning today
there's a lengthy 500-page report they
told you how much was gonna cost how
many
train and there was an a single mention
anywhere in a report about how you might
get affordable housing about how you
might approve any of the neighborhood's
a long line about anyway
if somebody comes up to you and says
buddy I need 2.2 billion dollars to do
something that's not usually the best
way to gather you know people to to a
cause and say that this is something
worth doing but if you can talk about
the potentially revitalize neighborhoods
potential and provide affordable housing
potential to grow you know new types of
jobs potentially creating forms of
public space and do this all out
displacing a lot of people that's
actually a pretty unique thing so where
we really came in was and it's it's
really both sort of it's the luxury and
it's that it's the beauty of the job do
you have architects and as urban
designers is to think of the vision of
what a place can be rather than than
just the sort of like fine engineering
of what takes the engineering study was
done by a firm named
the EECOM they're a very large firm that
that really knows how to do those things
I don't know the difference between one
train set or another but what the urban
potentials are is something that we all
felt was was very important so City
Councilwoman at the Queens Chamber of
Commerce came to us to ask us to do this
we did it it's been endorsed but for our
president and the City Council members
and now begins the slow torturous
process of
it's about there's this dusting
yeah
what is worse a threshold in terms of
this kind of chair mobility by the uber
model where is the threshold that you
may start to think about public
transportation because why do you have
to have travel to home share he calls
rather than buses and there yeah yeah in
fact that was one of the models because
skipped over was does it make sense in
fact to do that what we're saying I mean
I was there was an image in which there
were like vehicles around fears that
were busted or caught in one of your a
theory that maybe this one yeah there
that one on one out there I didn't know
you know you can think about why do you
have cars enough about me teleportation
in fact or maybe unique systems I think
that's actually that is a very excellent
question and it's one that that is I
think lies at the crux of a curtain fate
because what's amazing and why we
thought it was very important to do this
study is that if there's one group or
one organization that's really far
behind on autonomous vehicles it's
actually governments private companies
are investing in it and the irony is I
think inadvertently private governments
governments at all levels are doing a
lot to actually make it easier for it to
sort of follow the current model private
ownership rather than shared ownership
or even public ownership and it comes up
in all sorts of like really strange ways
which is like one of the major
objections there's actually lawyers that
are concerned that it get a shared
vehicle get in a car accident
is it the company
the manufacturer is it the person in the
vehicle whereas like there's a narrower
sort of chain of command because it's
like your autonomous vehicle even if if
something happens to it at least somehow
maybe somebody could say you're
partially to blame if you didn't take
care of the vehicle maybe he didnt
calibrate something who knows so there's
these very little really strange
questions of policy that if anything
rather than thinking proactively about
it the other thing of course is if
streets remained as high-end as they are
today then the best kind of card usage
to go down them will be the cars as they
are today right if you don't if you
don't take a sort of hand in
transforming the way that cars are done
so for example I mean it cities did this
before they built highways which
encouraged private car ownership to move
people out of out of the city so when
you do with infrastructure and how you
think about public space in the
relationship to that kind of shared
infrastructure is a hundred percent can
impact the kind of resulting model of a
single person is what about this new
train line the new it's there anything
happening at a point because that is an
incredible potential in Long Island City
yeah because you have the tunnel that
arrived there you have the Long Island
Labor
you will have two subway you have an
exchange between this new line and the
other one the cross you have the ferry
and nothing is happening in the train
station there is the most depressing
non-existing thing that you can think
is a platform without even a ticket book
with nothing right and and it is an
amazing place in terms of envisioning a
transformation of even the traffic in
Manhattan I mean to make that one a very
important not of exchange of different
mode of transportation and so there is
no plan for that I mean there's there's
some plans to build more housing the
city is a couple of parcels that they
released but I your your understanding
exactly what the thrust of this is and
this is only a few images obviously
cannot got much longer presentation
which is it has the opportunity to
completely rethink what both ends both
Jamaica and Hunts Point Long Island City
can be it's also one of the easiest ways
if you wanted a once you've ride to the
airport there's there's actually an
existing connection between this train
line of tracks and Sunnyside yards which
go to Penn Station so if you react it's
called a Montauk cut off and there's
actually a currently a competing plan to
turn that into a new High Line don't
necessarily normally I agree but I'd
love to see actually a way that the
Train use could be it could be shared on
this and I think this idea of a sort of
multimodal Center that happening in
Hunts Point would also do a lot to help
the other aspect of it which has never
succeeded as well as it could have which
is office Long Island City to really
become kind of residential suburb to
Manhattan um and because the number one
measure of its success is still its
immediate proximity to Manhattan whereas
something like this now makes you
rethink that actually when there's a
hundred eighty thousand people that
become more accessible to renowned City
it something says to yourself okay and
all the people of course it'll come in
to Jamaica and everything else now this
becomes a place that's worth getting
people to
rather people from so yeah exactly yeah
actually I rather then talk about one
Vanderbilt
I only just talk about one more thing
I'm saying that we're gonna beat end of
time I think both of those tie into an
interest of what we're doing right now
yeah this is so this is so this is also
maybe I can't come back to this but it's
a pretty young evening moment in in in
history because I guess at one time we
are doing the privilege of do I should
really say Hudson Yards which is a
everything on the very West we were also
involved in the mid tiniest rezoning
helping us City Planning City Council
and then doing one matter bill so the
sort of notion of being able to have
been as designers to have a role in
these transformations of business for
both ends before that visible is a
pretty unique opportunity I guess the
the point that we really wanted to make
here was just this notion that a lot of
this ideas of urbanism translate into
the vertical or to be individual
building as much as they do at the sort
of scale scale in the city so the idea
of the the building as as a sort of
organ within a larger whole and the role
that has within strengthening not just
an individual piece of an entire
district and I guess if there's anything
that we end up talking about a lot just
ants ourselves and I think some of you
even know that I'm having having join us
before it's this idea of the role that a
that a piece of architect review an
individual building has in really kind
of growing or transforming the
neighborhood the district around it so
in this particular case the question is
you have this opportunity to sort of
build right next to Grand Central I mean
arguably one of the greatest monuments
at least in American architecture
I've got the world uh so what is this
notion out of multi-layered City and the
way that tower can bring that
interconnectivity vertically into the
into the z-axis the second is what the
appropriate relationship spatially is
between a tower which you might call an
object building and GrandCentral which
as much as it's a big block is
fundamentally a spatial goal and so one
of the most conspicuous moves this idea
that so much of the volume in the
building and when you look at the deploy
you're up the same our construction you
can actually understand how the space is
is lifting the building up to open up
and maximize views to Grand Central
because if you guys think about most
again most cities in the world the train
station or any building like that has
given a an honorific place
there's a giant public space in front of
it there's a sort of approach a grand
central strangely enough doesn't have
that it's completely blocked in and
almost every side except for Park Avenue
south so the idea that by like carving
way the base of the building and lifting
it up we can begin to kind of give Grand
Central to sort of honorific presence
that it merits and deserves is one
aspect but of course that lift is also
performative as you guys know there ii
have a 3d side access which is the new
trains for Long Island Railroad coming
to Grand Central we're gonna push so
many people out of the station
they literally didn't know where they're
going to put them all so one of the
major aspects is that the building
itself at the bottom that underneath
that sloped cut is actually called the
great room which corresponds to the
space inside Grand Central so that what
you get is really between the Biltmore
room the Vanderbilt hall grant second
terminal hall and the great room with an
art project you get the no cluster of
these large halls that are suitable for
the arrival experience into a great
transit there that cut also then goes
along with opening up more space to walk
and including the pedestrianisation at
Vanderbilt Avenue so that the building
and by the way just to give a sense the
FA are for this building is dirty so you
guys all the way if they are as in terms
of
multiples of floor height that's how it
certainly in New York a lot of the city
is sizes buildings were calculated Hong
Kong but most of it as an F air of 10 so
we're the level of density we're talking
about here is truly truly unparalleled
but this notion that it's not just about
occupying space that that density can be
sympathetic and in fact coexist with as
a notion of creating a public realm I
think it's really really important and
part of what we actually did in terms of
scope in the form is actually
simulations of traffic loads of people
on sidewalks and how much more would be
able to be occupied both with the end of
the building now also in the streets
around building so this idea that
actually by building something and
occupying space you can actually create
a better public realm was I think a
really prime driver of the project and
then extended up into the architecture
itself so that the idea that that parts
at the top of the building will be open
to the public and whatever form that may
take whether it's events exhibitions so
not just an observation deck but
actually that there's a sort of again a
great room that occurs to top the
building it was really important what
with the design of the project and
that's our and the building should be
done in two years so you can got to kind
of get a sense of how about great the
public space is because you see the
bottom of the slope piece at the top
over there so it's the last thing is
just the use of some of the new
techniques so at the beginning you'll
see where talk about Sandow we were sort
of like hand mapping and laying out a
lot of things individually
thanks to parametric tools like
grasshopper GIS and others were now able
to actually I think dig a lot deeper
than
before and think about the urban
experience in ways that go beyond
figure-ground
with the streets amount of green space
and so on so for example can you use a
density of three one one complaints as a
proxy for quality of life can you talk
about desirability through how many
photographs are posted to Instagram a
flickr data can you begin to talk about
space not just at the ground level but
it's a continuous percentage of how much
of the sky you can see as you move up
and down within within buildings can you
begin to measure pedestrian density and
if you do that can you begin to make
those determinants of urban form so one
of the things we're doing research on
right now and I really wish you're
talking more about this project when I
can is on what we call performative
zoning so the idea that you don't
actually prescribe the shape or form of
a building but the criteria of what a
building should fulfill
so most zoning is about ensuring a
certain amount of light reach to the
street and a certain number of people
are the building could you instead of
saying that to say you have to create a
building that gives us this much light
and this kind of public space and this
many people and leave the form
completely out of it so that there could
be really inventive ways of getting to
those solutions and some of the tools
that were using want to see are things
that people already know what fused
alien analysis we're also doing things
like for example simulating how it is
that people walk around and actually
perceive retail we're able to use the
opening hours of restaurants and people
cell phone data like the number of times
they post or do a Google search for
something to get approximations of the
pedestrian density of various different
streets in a place like the financial
district this is my favorite one because
this is East Village so if you look at
when people are in the financial
district it's like middle of the
afternoon and you look at like there's
all these restaurants and bars that
don't open and all the sidewalks not
going to come
intellect 9 10 p.m. at night versus
Midtown which is completely alive during
a weekend and completely dead during
weekends can we use Google place data to
begin to identify not just streets and
corridors but actually you know it's
different ways that people experience
cities so restaurants retail and then
the last thing is when we think about
cities in terms of urban experience so
for example this is designing cities
around thermal comfort so cold hot and
can we use urban form to get more light
into spaces that are cold to block wind
from place that are cold encourage wind
places that are hot
and then we begin to study what that
means on actual sites so this is a new
extension to a Canadian city and we're
studying block size block rotation
we're able to evaluate that in terms of
various different heights and densities
as things get taller less ground
coverage where things are located
different type ologies and then finally
optimizing is it more important to
create a city that prioritizes thermal
comfort or ease of mobility and access
or ultimately obviously we're searching
for something that's and the great
questions so the data analysis yes we
have a really incredible group of people
it's called que fui but what's really
great is that they're not sort of like
off sequestered and some like floor and
some office building like 30 blocks away
they're just there they're just people
that around give EF that have been that
sort of have come together to do this
and we involved in a lot of projects so
for example the silac simulation what
banner built when you saw of a queen's
line there's all this data about how
many streetlights were available with
densities how much population it's not
like that was all coming for that day
load analysis and so on elsewhere I
think one thing that we went out is that
we don't have an urban design team so we
as an office so like similarly myself
might be working on a master plan in
Boston and also doing a small school you
know I can school building for my Geo
and like I've decide for Michael Kors
that's actually true you know doing a
study we were working on the the subway
line it means at the same time as I was
doing a residential project in Boston
and there's there are offices that focus
on you know there's an urban planning
experts and housing design experts or
whatever we think that sometimes the
most innovative ideas come through
people working on a variety of different
things and cross fertilizing their
experiences one
to another which are it means were kind
of Masters of nine but that's still a
suddent we ask the stupidest questions
in the room
sometimes those are the ones that get
the best answers
- what what other what other cities you
guys have left in your class
[Music]
the one question right
funded officials that's complicated
the initial initial study we actually
did for fun there's no much money for it
it's a catch-22
I don't normally believe and I mean I
believe in pro bono work but I believe
the architecture do lots of work for
free because we provide a valuable
service but it's a catch-22 because you
can't convince people to spend my own
study until you've proven that there's
something study
so the original visioning the very rough
draft what you see now we did over a
matter of like three or four days just
to say that it was a possibility that
led to a City Council grant to do the
study which in the typical New York City
fashion went to the department
transportation was considered an
engineering study so no architects
ourselves or anybody else were invited
to even participate just went to
railroad engineer as basically so that
after that happened you know you have
this 500 page study after six months and
so then the Queen's Chamber and city
house woman and a couple of other
concerned parties or Queens came to us
asked us today
sort of flesh that out and something
more and so they they raised my two that
independently it's very interesting
thing but you know maybe a SAG Retief
that in this day and age sometimes it's
easier to get funding for engineering
studies them for designs of public space
but that's true
that was very very important I mean one
of her we're also working on a
reimagining of the of the Port Authority
Bus Terminal and obviously I mean on the
one hand nothing will transform that
area of Manhattan warm then reimagining
what it is there and you can't do that
at all without ever standing out buses
move and again talk that up with another
thing like a train sets they have no
idea how that happens I didn't even
notice a lot of people on our team that
are working on it I'm not but we're
working with really amazing engineers
because obviously if you could find a
more efficient way to pack the buses
maybe you might carve out some more
opportunity for meaningful public space
because it's it's actually really sad if
you look at that building the percentage
of space for people versus the actual
buses by reimagining in this case we
mean presently doing a serious
construction
that's it and what is the what is the
main motivation to study I mean what
were ever very invested in New York I
mean that was also we knew we could
could come up with something very
compelling in a very quick amount of
time and we thought we we really
generally believed in what and what this
this Councilwoman was was proposing
again we knew that there wasn't like she
wouldn't get the evidence without the
help of KB fui but I mean I think a lot
a lot of the work it's very funny I
think I think is a firm that people know
a lot of battle people know very little
about us like they a lot of people know
us but not about us so I think a lot of
the work that we do goes below the radar
so a logical don't know that we were
involved in the Chinese rezoning we
didn't write it we can come up with it
but actually be the City Council's
ability or the city city plantings
ability to execute it depending a lot of
the research work and simulation work
that we did
so yeah things like that she worked very
closely with
yeah agencies yeah and we I mean I think
we don't we're always trying to situate
ourselves and that's room in between so
for example obviously we're not from a
Schengen of China but we've found that
over the past couple of years that we
may have at the same time and that's
sitting 25 projects and of a certain
size also everything is not small so
we've started working very closely with
city planning there to try to think
about like are there better ways to
think about the planning of a linear
city like that one
you know seeing I mean you can't imagine
how one might begin to bring in a habit
Covent Garden without also to think in a
larger picture I think it's that that
the active architecture doesn't stop the
confines of a box or blog or whatever
and that's also done that I mean and
keeping it as a global company offices
I see how much China
what is that
so
let's go
well we're we're different from a lot of
other offices and says that we have
offices other places but we really want
office meaning because we're you assume
like intern in a bunch of places
whatever
so a lot of larger offices are set up in
a couple of ways right so one way is
that they're set up as a sort of like
network or franchise so there's like you
know there's a office in San Francisco
San Jose Santa Clara Portland Chicago
New Delhi whatever and I mean of course
they have a common website and they
share information whatever but the
reality is you're getting each
individual group kind of like if you get
the new Dell video you see some building
that you love that they did in New York
and you call up and say hey I'd like to
do a building in New Delhi
you're the deli team they may have never
had been involved with the right thing
maybe you don't get like the drawings
and a phone call from the guys in New
York who did that fun building but
that's about it
um of course the major benefit of that
system is you're also getting local
knowledge because obviously the people
in New Delhi know BW way better than I
do for example by a deer we're a bunch
of work on the other hand they sort of
only know that and they're not isolated
organic kind of cross-fertilize the best
ideas and want like you have any other
places because they haven't been
involved um some firms try to get around
that by creating executive sector like
sector expertise so have like often like
for tall buildings that New York team is
involved in our where it is but serving
tall building experts Oreo fits
hospitality it's like the LA teams like
working up to airports it's whatever
team so you'll get New Delhi plus like a
guy from you know or a woman from the
Chicago office because she owes me about
airports but the other obvious is model
is called the mother ship model so like
there's a really high end in order to
drop us in London you call them up you'd
say I want one of those and they're
gonna make you exactly the same one that
they made
they're gonna do it London that they're
gonna do in Beijing and you know there
might be obviously differences but
you're kind of like you're calling up to
get a thing like we never won I want
that thing they make me that thing just
figure out how to get that thing here so
and again there there's also I mean that
I'm kind of sort of belittling a little
bit but I was there's there's benefits
to that too in terms of a shirt
approaches the design innovation it's
know a lot better that are good in that
kind of situation the way that we're set
up is that virtually all of this I
happens in New York but when I say that
it's really not true because the teams
are made up of people that might be
different places so if we're working on
a project for example or chenchen there
might be three people that I want an
office for you people in our New York
office to be born in the Shenzhen office
but they're all working on the project
at the same time so it's not like
Alishan all only people in Hong Kong are
working on it it's not that people here
working on it we have no idea what's
going on over there and it's not the
cost this idea of a hand off but like
somebody New York makes a beautiful
sketch that emails it to China and
hopefully
half of the mornings you know it's this
idea that like the project is always to
be developed between the people on the
ground in the place where it where it is
or familiarity with that because one of
the benefits is I think we have 43
nationalities in our office right now
so you can usually find somebody who's
from that place for as a brother and and
this idea that you then you're
constantly and that's also why we don't
have studios because I mean as an
example if like example I was like to
give if you use years ago used to be
that you know every said residential
hotels are completely different the
woman who does her tells and woman does
residential could never do the other
because they're so unique so now
everybody wants to stay in Airbnb and
places that are more like apartments and
everybody wants their residences have
all the amenities and things like that
or like if you have a project like
Pacific Park in Brooklyn so it's a
Brooklyn developer except it's not it's
actually a developed it wanted by a
bunch of people in Cleveland all the
money is coming from China and great and
they've never done a project this big
it's the actual development expertise to
do front appendix crime from China
they're building over train tracks and
the engineers really know how to do this
might be based in New York but their
best engineers are in Boston and also
connected to another firm of Germany
right most the people that are moving to
Brooklyn right now is not necessarily
from to when they're from South Carolina
Brazil France you know Boston Canada so
on the one hand like Brooklyn is like
and of course this idea of Brooklyn
that's like the ultimate of local except
you go everywhere and they like they
have the menus of Brooklyn
because a Brooklyn restaurant a minute
but I have a friend it goes around and
suppose that Instagram all the places he
see in Brooklyn style restaurants and
bars so in a sense like there's no
there's no such thing as like as local
anymore I mean it is local office you
have to know Brooklyn I have to know all
about the different neighborhoods and
the intricacies in the history of brick
architecture and cast-iron architecture
all the rest of it the other hand the
person who last week may have been in
China dealing with that developer or
that right probably understands that I
feel a bit better and the person who you
know a month ago was doing a 20-story
residential building which is very
different than new 253 residential
building Manhattan
so what you need there's no person
that's gonna have all the pieces that's
necessary to do a present like that what
you want is a team where one guy is
saying oh I did our last three believes
of Brooklyn why is she on it and she
goes because I've done the last six
residential buildings in China so I
understand what that felt like you
talking about and I'm like well why he's
on it and he's like well or less three
buildings are only 20 storeys tall that
are residential very efficient you know
I did it so everybody's bringing
something to the table you can't
necessarily described like one studio or
one set of expertise so I think that's a
long-winded way of gonna not answer a
question it sounds like a great place to
work that's for sure it's what's the
size
or to 400 to 450 so it's it's large I've
been but I think we're a lot smaller
than a lot of the other offices of our
size I think we're about the same size
hopefully as
Hertzog and Emma Ryland OMA offices like
that so it's this weird thing that
because of the three letters were sort
of held in that kind of like a corporate
epsilon up like Agent K is and Kessler's
NSO Adams you're all like four or five
times our size 3,000 people I don't know
so it's not that small but the plain
disorganized
our project is biggest the Boston
project if you look at the organically
grow the space to submit a project in
Copenhagen by a COPI architects and they
are working on a city extension or
something like that we're doing parts of
the time well that is actually how
Boston was supposed supposed to evolve
so the idea was that he would evolve
organically I think one of the hardest
questions to ask in any time you do kind
of urban design well anything your urban
planning is how you separate
architectural of public space design
from a overall conception on the plan
because it's very easy and very
convenient to sort of draw blue strips
to say light blue strips phase 1 dark
blue strip the space to you and so on
and so forth but the problem is is that
is always how do you define a certain
kind of aesthetic and spatial you need
to think I don't mean uniformity but
like but I mean not that necessarily
uniformity is bad again it's the
examples of like 400 Paris Express so I
think the the misfortune in some sense
of early phases of Boston is that the
architecture as it was built did not
live up the aspirations of what the plan
aspired to the plan worked
I mean you know the park was built early
the district hall the innovation spaces
were built though it will playgrounds
the pop-up cafes and all of that
happened it survived a major recession
which would have destroyed most master
plans in fact now it's even being
reimagined there's like about 40% of us
left and actually Adair who's here is
the factor we re re planning the plan of
fact area
again in response to certain like what's
evolved over time and I think the the
challenge that I think for example
having seen what he's been he's been
doing there he's over time he creator
rated willingness by the developers of
the city to allow there to be an
aesthetic component a formal component
that is more than just a luster tip and
I mean by that is that very often
particular in the US this is idea that
you make a plan you write it in very
generic text but in order to get a
community to approve it or a government
improve it you create these images
rendering as plans whatever that show
what it's going to look like but you
have to do it there's a reason every
loves the watercolor is because it's
it's not so prescriptive that you're
saying exactly what its gonna look like
but kind of what its gonna look like
because you kind of haven't actually
written anything that says it will look
like that and so you boil down a master
plan into a certain number of square
feet
a certain number of people a certain
amount of green space and you've done
everything your power to actually not
prescribe that it has to look or feel a
certain way and I think the Boston
master plan sort of test the limits are
approved the limits of what that will
achieve so now what's really great is
number one by are getting back involved
and then also the remaining pieces are
being slightly rewritten again by people
like like that air is that aesthetic
dimension that formal and spatial
dimension is being brought back in but
how much glass a neighborhood has
precisely how why the sidewalks are what
materiality is used how much planting
like where you have recesses or don't
have recesses where you have relief in a
cornice line or whatever actually
matters any man so I guess going up like
I know the Kobe plan
I've seen a lot of images of it but I
don't know for myself is to what degree
those images are suggestive of plausible
or possible future that may or may not
happen or what is like there's enough
authorship and integrity in the way the
plan will be executed that I'll actually
live up to them if that makes any sense
and I think they like it and I think
it's very interesting actually it's a
weekend house men in Paris because
everybody forgets actually that even the
way that Paris had sometimes boulevards
cuz I see apart his plan he mandated
where the piano nobile that had to be
how much balconies to work how many
projection or recesses you have to have
when one goes to Paris is not an
accident and so people always talk about
this idea of the organic the Paris is
not it was planned and designed to be
that way and a lot of senses the cities
that we like and love whether you know
its parts of brown or you know I mean if
you think about you know Oaxaca in
Mexico I mean which is a really amazing
and beautiful city I mean these were not
accidental they were choreographic to
come out that way
[Music]
[Music]
