I guess I'll sit down at this table is
this what everybody does thank you
Michael for the introduction and thank
you for everyone to come out on such a
cold night Michael says young architects
I'm not feeling so young anymore but I
guess architects don't really get going
until they're like 45 or 50 so I'm
headed in that direction I've titled
tonight's talk loop-de-loops which is
partly about the name of my practice but
also about that thing you do when you're
driving and you realize that you've
taken a wrong turn
it's that optimistic loop-d-loop that
circles you back around towards the
right direction
so this evening the aim is to show one
project in detail which will describe
the conceptual and intellectual project
around questions of ordinary
architecture of course this is not my
term but then venturi Scott Brown's and
others and which I see myself as part of
a lineage this work on the ordinary
began with a research project titled
domestic hats and led to a series of
exhibitions models drawings and writings
all in an effort to kind of unpack a
capital P project for my practice and
the goal is to take something that's
highly conceptual and flip it into a
real building my work often begins with
a question rather than a sketch it
relates directly to popular culture it
is graphic and it takes cues from art
practice so domestic cats is on the left
and the architecture that it becomes it
is on the right as house Gables and it's
located in Atlanta
it is a conceptual project around 87
cross laminated timber panels three
representational models which I'm going
to explain tonight 1,700 square feet of
glitter stucco 10 faux finishes and a
proposal for what I'm calling a roof
plan ideology which is a suggestion of
how the discipline might shift into a
new spatial paradigm which is
potentially rejecting the free plan and
the wrong plan of the past as Michael
mentioned Maul is the name of the
practice that stands for mass
architectural loop-de-loops the acronym
of course is a 20th century Americanism
which is in wide circulation Americans
love their shorthand and this is what
Moll looks like sitting in a sea of
known acronyms outside of our discipline
ranging from governmental agencies and
digital technology to best social media
practices oh em gee and this is Moll
sitting in front of in a sea of
architectural practices that also use
acronyms so Foster and partners or David
Chipperfield architects who are my
former employers so mall uses short form
as a way of allowing the long form name
to change from month to month or as our
architectural interests start to shift
for each project mall is interested in
an intellectual project not a formal
project which is why a lot of our
architecture tends to look differently
from project to project there's no kind
of formulaic formal
driver Moll can also mean miniature
angles and little lines or maximum
arches with limited liability and we can
always add the see when we're wanting to
feel a little more professional so
before I introduce that body of work
around ordinary architecture I'd like to
situate that work amongst a Dupree my
previous work and so much of maules
ethos places an emphasis on misbehaving
in architecture and hopefully this will
be apparent in the next few slides and
so this is a cross-section of work that
are either failed competition entries
gallery installations publications
temporary experiments in the public
realm and I would say these are kind of
our best practices as a kind of top 10
so in their particular order number one
flood a gallery on Hollywood Boulevard
so this is a project where I ask guests
at the installation to slip on these
plastic boot covers and wade into a
gallery just off of the star walk where
the the whole gallery was flooded with
like I don't know maybe four inches of
water so the problem was that the the
boots were kind of leaking but also the
installation as a whole was leaking
because it was like one I bought one
single sheet of rubber but there must
have been a hole somewhere and we
couldn't find it so this was a very fast
exhibition and installation and we
pumped all the water out to Hollywood
Boulevard that night number two flag for
drones and synchronization
Mises house longa and house house
Esther's so this is a research project
it's very faint down here
research project where I'm thinking
about the Bauhaus Centennial which is
this year I'm thinking about Mises use
of brick and particularly these two
houses in Krefeld Germany there are two
different clients and the houses are
sitting on two different properties and
the thing that's kind of they're not
twins but the thing that's holding them
together are these massive picture
windows so there's four drones
two are scanning the two back rear
elevations which are like the famous
elevations and they're in
synchronization and they're scanning the
brick coursing all the way down to the
bottom of the house and then there's two
other drones taking a video of the two
drones doing the work and I'm arguing
that Mises materiality and brick is faux
is fake because when you look at the
drawings of this house there's a lot of
steel embedded in the wall sections in
order to get these like massive picture
windows
and so what the two drones are doing is
making a mesh a digital mesh and so we
bring that back to the studio and
started to think about what to do with
this imprecise mesh and so I began to
question though maybe the role of
rendering and architectural
representation at the moment and I was
interested in producing potentially bad
renderings that were kind of harkening
back to when materials our bitmaps were
mapped on to surfaces and where you
would see the repetition of the seam and
the tile ink and so if these are the
three ingredients a bad mesh a bad
bitmap and a bad bump map these are the
things that were working with to produce
a series of renderings of these rear
facades but starting to interject new
materiality and so we're exchanging
mises brick for millennial pink brick
maybe a woodgrain pattern OSB board but
we're also altering those materials
colors and so the image of grout gets
mapped on as a bump map and so it also
gets mapped on misalign to the original
mesh and so it becomes confusing what is
the brick and this is kind of turning
into a new
study on materiality where I'm making
new tiles out of ceramics still in
process
number three make a public space that is
strange this is the installation on the
Rose Kennedy Greenway in downtown Boston
these are not actors these are just
people that got married and wanted to
get a photograph and then you have some
people kind of climbing on the back so
this is a project about asking the
question can it architecture be drawing
be a drawing and so all of the the view
of this installation is all contrived
from a top floor of an adjoining parking
garage and this is what things happen
when you make things in the public realm
they get photographed and reinterpreted
on things like Instagram this is the
sunset view basically there's 11 trees
and there's 11 objects and the 11
objects were downloaded from Google 3ds
where Sketchup warehouse where we're
taking minimalist art sculptures things
from like Carl Andre and Donald Judd and
we're skewing them into this perfect
kind of axonometric view and this is the
back side of the installation I'm using
ordinary materials like vinyl siding but
they're being mapped on to the objects
in various directions so if you're
sitting in your car on the off-ramp to
the i-93 this is the view that you get
while you're waiting to drive around
we're using efz which is a synthetic
stucco and synthetic turf and all of
these things are dealing with the
drawing in terms of hatch patterns and
yeah the the hatching of the actual
vining final messiah t siding on the
material so basically this is a plan
view of the project this is a
perspective which kind of looks like an
axon
and then this is a true axon of the
project and it's called another axon
number four install an olfactory project
in the mechanical room of the Istanbul
modern Museum and this was done with a
partner called Christian stainer
and we teamed up and did a series of
public art installations proposals
across the u.s. right after the
recession and used some of our work on
olfaction inside the Istanbul modern for
the design biennial so this was a space
that we were given maybe like 15 feet in
a gallery and what we did was we worked
with perfumer christophe la DeMille and
he created two scents that were pumped
into the HVAC system of the museum so
anytime you're given a small space on a
wall you kind of have the opportunity to
push back against the curators we almost
got kicked out of the vinyl but some
board member thought the idea sounded
funny and supported us through towards
installation number five rent a green
screen to convince clients of micro
enterprise projects in North Miami so
this is when we were living in LA and
the the cost of renting at green screens
pretty cheap and so we made these
homemade videos which were proposing
these kind of micro spaces to be built
on two houses in a neighborhood north of
Miami called opa-locka
and so our proposal was to kind of
upstart enterprise like recording
studios hair salons and bicycle repairs
that were both attached to the side yard
but also kind of infected the plan of
the house number six throw a picnic for
architecture so this is a project where
I'm interested in asking the question
about how architecture might stack how
might we get away from extruded office
towers into things that are chopped and
cut in
and so looking at a series of sandwiches
for this kind of work this is a grilled
cheese sandwich and this image was shot
by Adam to tour who's a food
photographer in Boston and he had all
these plates and platters and was ready
to organize the architecture in his
studio this is a BLT and just last
summer we again were interested in
turning this body of work which has
really been written about and exhibited
in several shows into something that can
become real and so this is a speculative
office tower called office stack a
couple more three more number seven
exhibit work in new halls in parking
lots of major art institutions so this
is just outside of the mocha Geffen in
Los Angeles we're a group of curators
called
on the road project delay comprised of
four curators asked young emerging
architects in LA to exhibit work just
outside of this gallery now this was
strategically time there was a big
architecture show happening on the
inside with people like Frank Gehry and
thom mayne and mill Denari and we strive
it kind of like showed up and rolled out
the work kind of the day of the opening
and this is the crew that was involved
Laurel brought in on the front row and
brought over there number eight
created discourse around architecture of
the dirty south via via guidebook so
this is a body of work I did with
students at Georgia Tech in Atlanta
where we were looking at the analogy in
the rap industry between East Coast
intellectuals and West
makers and barn the term from goody mob
an outcast which is the Dirty South and
so we're we're not asking who the
architects of the Dirty South are we're
asking what is the architecture of the
Dirty South clearly this is a project on
Portman so half of the book is a part
manual architectural manual a part of
the book is a series of interviews and
so we got to speak to people like Denise
Scott Brown and John Portman before he
died last year and one student had an
interview with big Cujo and Timo the
original members of Goodie Mob and so
you can get it on Amazon I think there's
a few copies left in the world and you
have to read there they say in this
interview why that lanta got the
Olympics in 1996 and I'll let you look
that up number nine question how
architectural models are displayed this
was a big project in my second year of
teaching at Harvard where I was asked to
be the faculty editor of a publication
called platform which is a year-long
kind of annual it's kind of like a
yearbook for the school but I was
interested in turning that editorial
opportunity that came with a pretty
large budget into a project and so here
I'm questioning how might we make a
demonstration project for faculty and
students which is about color and so I
arranged and designed 16 still lives
with two student editors and myself and
again we asked food photographer Adam
detour to come in and work with us on
creating these photographs the second
reference here beside the still life is
Barbra castings work from the 1980s
where she was using colored gels and
throwing colored
to kind of still-life creations in her
studio and so if I had this picture of
this project is a project all the
students work about the grid it's kind
of a little dull but with blues and
Red's thrown into the theme we can start
to maybe make a projection of how color
might work its way into the
architectural project so this is the
book and it's been printed in Mandarin
at Tong G University Press so we're very
excited about that
okay the very last one and I'll move
straight into the work number ten throw
a pool party in LA but with no water so
two years ago I was asked to be the
guest editor of a magazine called art
papers it's a contemporary art magazine
out of Atlanta that's been going since
the 70s I kinda had full editorial
control except the executive editor said
it needed to be about Los Angeles and
architecture and design so I
commissioned 35 contributors writers
architects theorists and critics to look
at this how the swimming pool and other
watery spaces have affected Los Angeles
is design culture and so these as a few
spreads from the interior design got
April crimen graphic designer out of Los
Angeles who is kind of fundamental to
pushing the digital in graphic design
and then this is the cover
Laurel Broughton it like all in my
presentation today Laura this is laurels
contribution which is the series of
drawings which she calls pull doles I
always say wrong full doodles
holes and somehow
April grime and selected it to become
the front and back cover material okay
you just take a break okay to describe
house gables I want to place emphasis on
three models tonight
the first model being the massing model
the second is a dollhouse model and the
third is the one-to-one model so
ordinary architecture is often
overlooked it's a throwaway it's the
stuff that's immediately accessible but
usually tossed aside and I ask questions
what is the ordinary and why is it
relevant now and how might we flip the
ordinary into a representational project
so I'm kind of turn terming these
Ordinaries the contractors stock pile so
it's in this case all things pertaining
to the roof and the lingo goes like this
eaves ridges valleys rake soffits Gables
hips and dormers maybe one of the
literary references might be Hawthorne's
house of Seven Gables but the hashtag is
domestic cats and if we consider the
contractor as a geometers for a moment
then it's possible to think of these
piles of two by sixes and wood frame
construction as the project of planer
inclination and maybe this is kind of
the American version of the contemporary
Cathedral in the contractor stockpile
there's endless variations of the
domestic roof pitch with slopes like
three to twelve seven to twelve and nine
to twelve this is a really
straightforward basic catalog of roofs
Heights shed-dormer gay
mansard butterfly and they're so
commonplace that we kind of overlook
their spatial possibility when we think
about what they can do for the interior
current modes of construction from the
contractor can't promote building vented
roofs which is on the left
yet the unvented roof allows us to have
a visual connection of what's otherwise
deemed attic geometry ok this part's
kind of painful but I'm gonna go through
it anyways so the next eight slides I
just want to demonstrate the obsession
over the roof and these kind of close
reading of the now forms and this is
like my version of our attempt at formal
analysis and and I'm less concerned
about the two by six tectonic but now
I'm trying to read these forms as
exciting massing models and volumes and
and so in Figure one it demonstrates how
a gable roof is covered by a hip roof in
Figure two and two intersected Gables
with offset and misaligned shed roofs
figure three chamfered triple hips with
asymmetrical extruded Gables figure four
there's an asymmetrical triple gable
with a shed roof lodged in between and
all of these roof forms are also
intersected with two perpendicular
stacked Gables but then there's this
singular dormer over on the side or is
that 2 dormers instead of one dormer
or did I miss count the first roof as a
gable instead of a second dormer so it
kind of starts to get a little confusing
as to what's primary and what's
secondary figure five stack stretched in
clipped gables otherwise known as the
gable stack you're going to do the next
one
number six piggybacked hip dormer nested
onto to bully and Gables intersecting
gable scaled doubled rotated and then
stacked and then lastly front-facing
gable with a Camelback hip plus a
rotated gable and a mini gable bump in
the back y'all are so serious the
research began by taking a fairly random
sampling of about fifty houses in
Atlanta and so we're cutting across
eight different neighborhoods in the
city and we noticed a few tendencies
about the collection firstly that the
roof geometries in more affluent
neighborhoods places like Virginia
Highlands were more convoluted elaborate
and complex while the lower
socioeconomic neighborhoods such as Old
Fourth Ward appeared to have more humble
roof lines rendered in all white the
ordinary construction method is less
present and abstraction points us
towards another potential construction
method which I'll introduce shortly
object 21 is located in Buckhead this is
one of the most expensive cities in the
neighborhoods in the city and you can
see it's like a mashup of eight
different roof types which is required
to kind of cover the floor plan of a
6,000 square foot villa and now in the
extreme opposite end of the spectrum
number object 41 is located in cabbage
town and it's a simple hip covering a
shotgun style
and so this is the work from the young
architects forum emerging voices award
in 2014 and I was asked to make a solo
exhibition in a 10,000 square foot
gallery space and I just got a call
saying I won this award and I was like
well I didn't apply and I think what
does that mean and then they gave me
this face so it was really a motivation
to go big and produce a lot of work and
so you know sometimes you just put
things together but basically these are
16 large massing models measuring 3 foot
by 5 foot by 3 foot in height and then
one mega massing model which is 12 foot
by 20 foot by 6 foot in height and so in
the exhibition we're really concerned
with the massing model in its
potentiality for architecture these are
some of the kind of lessons absorbed and
learned from making these 16 objects we
start to use distortion and rotation
implement in criminal scaling the
intention is here to make massing models
that are something we know but the
project has a new image for the house
which is dominated obviously by these
roof types questions like what happens
when an a-frame
no longer produces a snug fit to
adjoining Gables or when a hip roof no
longer sits symmetrical to the primary
volume
and so these are all 16 in top view
there we produce two types of axons one
axon is looking at their roof as a
single kind of razzle dazzle surface and
the other are all the vectors required
to cut the foam model in this floor axis
wire cutter
so trying to rethink the role of the
massing model in architectural
representation as we know massing models
are usually small they're usually the
result of like an iterative process by
the architect they represent the schema
the diagram or proto architecture
they're lacking detail and often made
out of a singular material massing
models distinguish differences in a
volumetric study let's make it slightly
thinner no a little longer or better yet
let's make it fatter so these models
were created as kind of an awkward size
so we scaled them up but without any
more detail they didn't fit in the car
that we were trying to transport them in
they don't fit on a client's office room
table they're intentionally inflated
they merely represent themselves no
longer the representational stand-in for
something else so then we took domestic
cats out of the gallery and back into
the city and drop them off in front of
the original houses this kind of yard
art and worked with a photographer
Katelyn Peterson who had a large format
camera
and so this one kind of makes a lot of
sense for me because you know just as
the plywood is being sheathed and you
know the wood framing is becoming a
massing model in the contractor
stockpile example domestic cat shows up
on the front porch and meets it's kind
of matching the over skilled model so
this second so if the larger conceptual
project can be loosely thought of
working through three models in the
first model was concerned with
representation this second model what
we're calling the dollhouse model is
also concerned with representation but
presents alternate alternative motives
the two things I'm bringing in now are
materials and the possibility for a new
spatial paradigm which is the thing that
I set up in the beginning kind of trying
to reject the free plan and the wrong
plan house Gables and the dollhouse
model we're trying to work through the
roof plan so it seems to me that this is
a ideology that could start to
reorganize space and start to drive the
plan logic and we can see in the plan of
the first floor plan you can't see how
the roof might be affecting anything but
in the second plan the underbelly the
roof is projected onto the space and
ridges and valleys start to make
divisions and so the roof starts to
consume the plan while roof rooms i
discretize and dominate the plant plan
logic and in section some of the roof
rooms are actually hung from the larger
roof form so in this set of images we're
working at the scale of the dollhouse
model but now through digital drawings
and we're trying to spatialize what's
connecting to the roof and what's not
behaving
the roof the interior interior materials
are mapped on to each room but without
an overall logic they're only carefully
determined on a kind of room by room
basis and so everything you see in the
dollhouse which is represented in Baltic
birch plywood in reality our large
sheets of cross laminated timber panels
but we kind of purposely didn't cut up
the dollhouse into the panels of the CLT
instead we cut one theme and opened it
up with hinges just as a dollhouse with
kind of behave at the 1 to 12 scale
these materials are graphic
they represent pop and they're not what
they seem they're almost like a series
of stickers and of course the project's
sited in Atlanta and the American South
with a with an interest in undertaking
an old tradition of faux finishing for
southerners there's a history of not
being able to afford precious materials
and with the subsequent desire of faking
it so on the left is the southern
institute of faux finishing it's a real
place in Brandon Mississippi I have not
been there maybe somebody here has and
on the right shows an example of what
the ambition is so we have a porcelain
bathtub but it's decked out in kind of a
faux marble painting these is the
drawings that were sent to the city for
planning permission and to get a
building permit but they look kind of
straightforward but they're trying to
create a 55 foot long exterior faux
finish which I'll explain in a second
the the two references here are Mary
courses paintings from the late 60s
which were the white light paintings
where she's
with the glass beads that are in the
reflective markers on roadways and so I
start working with a team to try to
figure out how to make a facade with
glitter in it and these are kind of some
of the tools and so we made a series of
mock-ups which are kind of hard to
photograph but then this is the actual
thing on house Gables already built on
the left is just at dusk without a flash
and on the right is with a flash and so
everything is kind of sparkling
and so before getting this built I tried
to describe this process that we had to
come up with in the studio of producing
these fake white bricks with with a
dashed finish of glitter stucco and the
contract subcontractors said well we've
already done that it's on an Arby's just
down the road here's the example and so
I was a little disheartened that the
white feet freight bricks was already a
thing in the south but what we did have
was I guess the glitter part so it's a
product it's a sticker in here it's
being installed on-site so they put this
sticker on and they trowel on the very
last layer which is like I don't know
something like a eighth of an inch layer
and then they blow in with a hopper the
glass beads so the glass beads are
coming from somebody that sells to the
Department of Transportation so it's the
same materiality going on the road
here's some of the faux finishes on the
interior several drawings the idea is
that I'm using a series of vinyl ceramic
tiles terrazzo but they're not I
wouldn't call them real materials
they're trying to be other things so
that the Trotters not kind of poured in
place and made like it would be in
Europe it actually comes in a thin tile
that laid in the bathroom bedroom area
there's kind of three materials coming
together in three rooms and all of those
are an effort to look like marble and so
I'm trying to play out like three
different versions of fake marble at one
corner this is the upstairs plan and
then this is the faux finishes completed
and installed so really again the faux
has a certain geometry to it it's
different from
and it's applied kind of like a sticker
sometimes to colors and to materiality
czar meeting at a seam there are
different heights within the house its
kind of acting like a wainscoting in the
bathrooms they become sectionals of
downstairs Gray's on the bottom and
Pink's on top and upstairs it flips this
is the kitchen obviously this is the
terrazzo that also becomes the
countertops and a larger aggregate
so we're about to move into the last
model for you okay on time but I thought
I would say something about the site
this is the site plan I think is the
house obviously the light is 24 feet
wide so we had a setback with the
variance and so we could build refit off
the property line which is an 18 foot
wide house which is the same size of
like a single wide trailer our mobile
home and Alabama scene here if if the
next neighbor build will we'd be six
feet away the house is located in a
neighborhood that adjoins this
development called the Beltline and so
literally the access public access point
is just at the back of the house and so
this is a path that connects 45 in town
neighborhoods stitching the kind of city
together and so the New York Times calls
it a glorified sidewalk but really what
it's doing is getting people to walk in
a city or people usually don't walk and
it's kind of transforming the city so
when I when went to start the project
and all of the work on domestic cats for
house gables it's a pair of three Gables
I'm sorry
six gables paired up and but the thing
that we're doing is we're going above
the typical contractor pitches so most
of the angles are 14 to 12 17 to 12 and
19 to 12 and then this is the third
model which would call the one-to-one
model and so this is an instant
animation of the construction sequence
these are all 87 panels
being assembled together by that 40-ton
crane on that other property and so that
was installed in 14 days with a
four-person crew and it what's
interesting to me is the way in which
the real construction is most definitely
trying to be real and serious but it
starts to remind me of the scaled model
being assembled in studio or an office
and if you kind of squint your eyes they
you know you can kind of see pieces that
are cut out of a laser cutter they look
like foam core chip board being folded
up into the larger massing so there are
four engineers on the project Hanif
Carra of London akt
there was a group out of New Hampshire
called Benson wood there was somebody
running the numbers called fire tower
who specializes in mass timber
engineering and then we had an engineer
in Atlanta who was designing the
concrete box that the CLT box set on top
of these are the kind of drawing set 87
drawings one for each panel that
described to the Installer where the
panel goes and also the engineer has
locked the name of the screw and it's
angle for installation so the screws are
like a 9 to 15 inches long and the whole
thing gets screwed together with a set
of screws so the Installer did not have
a computer on-site he's just looking at
these drawings and and going by them
yeah mix of that the wood the materials
coming from Koh and Austria and so these
are you know big 50-foot by 9-foot
planks of CLT being milled obviously and
then they go into this container and
then this container goes across the
Atlantic Ocean and shows up at the Port
of Savannah and then gets transferred in
onto these eleven Hot Shot trailers that
are small enough are big enough to carry
some like eleven panels at a time but
small enough to fit on the site and so
there's a coordination process of what
panels come when somehow related to the
order of sequence and these I just
wanted to show this image because it's
kind of many one of many many different
angles and cuts so this is the there
were just piles and piles of CLT
arriving the installers like stop the
trucks we have no more space like you
can't stuff the truck so it was just a
kind of logistics nightmare but it all
worked out somehow this is the crane
be look okay there's the Installer Terry
ducat this is the second CLT house built
in the US the first one was in Seattle
and the architect is named Susan Jones
and so when working on this project she
said that I should try to convince her
super to come to Atlanta and put the
second house together
and so this is kind of the most heroic
moment that's like one of the biggest
pieces the materials 3-ply CLT for the
exterior and interior walls it's five
ply for the roof panels and it's seven
ply for the floor panels and this is all
finished product right so anytime
there's a transfer from the shipping
container to the hotshot trailer to the
exact installation whatever happens to
the panel is like that's the final
interior finish and so it's painting up
now and that's the Atlanta skyline and
notably John all of John Portman's
towers which have all the super atriums
this images enter so you can't see this
image essentially because the second
table they're like look straight up it's
kind of in direct line with the
neighbors gable and I think things like
this happen when working on the ordinary
there's going to be coincidences like
this yeah so I would say this is the
one-to-one model this one image right
after a shot asked a photographer to
come in and shoot this ELT in its raw
state we had about four hours of light
before the contractor needed to start
weatherproofing and putting in the
windows and so you can see like all the
graphics on the floor those are other
hardware and connections that all get
covered up by the faux finishes that you
saw in the final shots architectural
photography is really important to me
this is oh yeah officer tog Rafi I guess
it's important this is a me standing on
a roof with the photographer Timothy
harshly out of Little Rock Arkansas
where he's lit the whole exterior of the
house right at dusk and got these light
kind of dramatic images maybe it's more
like Southern gothic here or maybe it's
dirty south architecture I don't know
and so this this one kind of says the
whole story to me because it looks in my
eyes like that one of the domestic cats
like built one to one and sitting kind
of strangely
the kind of neighborhood context yeah
and John Portman this is a photographer
from London called called narrow and she
really captured maybe potentially like
the dollhouse thinking into the kind of
scale figures and arrangement of
furniture within the interior and the so
there's two spaces that are really white
in the house and one is this kind of
patio space on the second floor
obviously the house is white but also
this garage which is not really a garage
I kind of think of it as like a gallery
it's so it's super white and glossy and
has some Dan Flavin light fixtures from
Home Depot for about $22 yeah I'll just
leave you with these last two images of
house gables and this is the point on
the exterior where the gable makes a
strong profile on the north north side
thank you so much
questions sound good
I wonder about the scanning project
do you choose it because of its
materiality or is it something that you
like
what makes that project hmm this is all
recorded any when everything's recorded
because then you can't really say what
you'll so I applied for a series of
grants uh at the school I teach at and
they all got declined like three of them
and so I said well I'm just gonna use
Mies as the material and then I got it
so I think something to do with like
modernism's heavy hold on the East Coast
in some way and maybe I'll clump New
York into that as well and so also my
in-laws live in Krefeld Germany so I was
trying to get over to Europe for the
summer but um no I mean Mies you know
obviously there's a heavy it's just
heavy and so I was trying to trying to
be scholarly and academic and kind of
look at nice but then I was also trying
to instantly kind of throw it into maybe
a more contemporary discussion on
rendering which was it so reverent to
his plan or his elevation or whatever
where do ya what do you think
it was a very interesting experiment I
thought it might be
meditate then I think your reasons never
got it to oh but just to be serious for
a minute I think something is happening
on the subconscious where you know Mesa
is using this big picture windows and
they're still inside and then there's
what I'm saying faux brick what the same
time I'm doing the house and you know
now CLT can do the structural gymnastics
and we can punch big picture windows
wherever we want inside the panels and
we're also doing faux brick so I think
although it's two different design
projects that I want to like pull out of
it there's definitely a conversation
between the house in Atlanta right no
flat roof but a big picture windows
so could you elaborate a little bit more
what constitutes in your mind the moment
of resolution and that may be the
perfect question for you because it may
be the exact wrong question because it
produces the notion that there is
resolution in the first place but given
that you start with meets extraordinary
emphasis on syntax and the ways in which
whether steel or brick come together the
ways that your project comes together is
that once dissonant as well as highly
resolved but according to different
criteria if you could just elaborate on
what constitutes the friction that makes
you resist certain types of resolution
and what he wants to do the motivation
for the kinds of dissonance is that you
work yeah I mean particularly just right
at the detail of the roof like there's
trying to be no gutters there's trying
to be no in what's it called in wall
downspouts and so everyone was having a
lot of anxiety you know you're building
this complicated roof a very thick wood
you know it's gonna leak like you don't
have your detailing the exterior kind of
figured out and so I mean maybe it was
naive but the image of the domestic hat
and the the phone model was just the
what I continued to aim for but it's not
the way in which I think Swiss
architecture is made where maybe they
have the detail figured out already for
a long time like just putting two
surfaces together and as the young
architect trying to work through it and
find like naively a way to do it but
without referring straight to that like
perfect
detail so what we did here was just take
like a two and a half three inch drip
edge which is you know more of a
commercial application and got somebody
to you know kind of make the perimeter
with that metal work and then we're also
using like things like TPO in there as
one of the layers which is just a you
know plastic membrane that's also used
on like Home Depot roof or like big-box
stores so it's kind of I'm not answering
your question it there because I'm
getting like into but if your project
were to be syntactic or compositional
you would speak to it from a completely
different perspective as if you and I
don't care about leaks anyway right or
as if we care about these maybe we don't
but you do care about composition that
it's evidence and so I had imagined that
you would speak about the the closeup of
the brick that is cross at that moment
yeah it's a very self-conscious moment
otherwise you wouldn't have done that
and then so I guess I thought you were
going to talk about that moment um yeah
I mean there's there's a managing a lot
like trying to keep the massing model in
its pure form trying not to be Swift's
trying to let bricks run into corners
and not getting a big huff about it
trying to map on materials that are like
you know 3/16 of an inch and not make it
look cheap on the inside but it kind of
looks cheap yes so there's a there's a
wrestling with what's primary or what
means clearly because the CLT is so
heavy it's kind of winning
I mean it takes over formerly it takes
over kind of in its presence and then
the faux finishes and things are like
this secondary project that are trying
to push back I think on that the larger
heaviness there's an amazingly strange
tension in the final in the final
building and you call it a one-to-one
model my name it's a yeah absolutely
accurate and it's not that's not done in
in any slight way the decisions that
have been made at the level of detail at
the level of materiality I think about
it like this this is probably the most
structurally expressive building I've
seen in that the largest amount of
surface area is actually the real
structure but you'd never read it that
way you never see it that way you
experience it in an abstract state of
its of its massive model and then the
materials that you're bringing and
packing like they they do something so
that you begin to see the ordinary in a
very strange manner and it heightens
that wants attention to what is ordinary
and I I just see it as kind of like a
fantastic and
explosion of what what we assumed to be
the order you seen abstraction to to
reposition the building flows doesn't
even from that back driveway doesn't
even look like it's such a city you
can't tell how many floors there are
from the window so it could be three
there could be tuning before yeah
but ball and the infected oh well first
of I'm super excited like the come
tonight because I've been dying to see
all the photos of the house because my
house is just
but in thinking about the materials
what kind of within this issue of it
being the one-to-one model it it strikes
me about the materials is the way that
they're always sort of miss registered
against the house itself which i think
is it's almost a kind of an interesting
direct translation back to the dollhouse
rate where that where when you're
working with miniatures like development
you can never get velvet to scale for
the sofa it's always full scale open so
there's always a kind of missed
registration of of certain materials to
other materials at the but the way that
it in there's a way that it could end up
being a complete mess but I think what
seems really amazing is that it actually
ends up it's very elegant they do
eternity when you walk in it is kind of
a little overwhelming there's a lot
there's a lot of things going on I felt
a little Frank Lloyd Wright
yeah me what I was mentioning is you
know you know you're lucky to have the
High Line here and you know Atlanta is
trying to do a different version but
it's like just on the ground and it's
just a sidewalk but it's you know
seriously you don't walk in Atlanta when
it's a hundred and five degrees in
ninety percent humidity and people are
kind of getting over and walking now and
it's yeah there's problems with the
extreme of like okay gentrification it's
changing things drastically but what
what's super exciting about Atlanta is I
think it's one of the one cities where
segregation doesn't really happen there
you know everyone's mixing and it just
feels really alive and exciting and it
has to do with that the Beltline
a question from the domestic hats and
the capable house and kind of the
starting inspiration of the 2x6 framing
and like the blue framing of the houses
and I just think it's really interesting
than the final assembly - of the
construction method and the assembly
it's very it's departed greatly from the
kind of original inspiration of how you
yeah do come raining in this type of
logic so I just kind of curious about
thoughts on that coming back to it and
doing the assembly because is it just
kind of the formal language that you get
from all the different types of room or
is there something about that
construction method because that makes
it ordinary because it's so reproducible
raised yes it's a customer yeah no
that's a good question when when you see
all the images that showed in two of two
by fours and two by sixes and they're
doing the pitches that we all know
there's this member across the bottom
and so I wanted to take that away and so
one way to think about this is that the
two by sixes are no longer studs they're
just turned and flattened and glued
together right because it's the same
it's the same plank of wood but they're
just cross laminated and glued together
I mean it's a bit of a stretch but the
you know the wood the way we use wood to
build in the u.s. is like you know
what's always gonna win and so there's a
attempt to maybe start to turn to this
panel thing that's also made out of wood
so a lot of companies are coming online
in the US I think one in Dothan Alabama
and there's there's many yeah there's a
lot in Canada but here it's kind of my
favorite moment of the house because the
roof is kind of acting like a folded
plate and that room has like a perfect
gable pitch or what kind of looks
perfect and that room is being held from
the roof above so I don't know it just
gets exciting structurally yeah I mean I
guess cuz you know I'm not inventing
anything with faux I mean everything
that we live in right now is fake so if
I was saying Mies was doing bricks that
were fake he wasn't using them
structurally well that's how we build
everything now so that's kind of it's
the ubiquitous situation I mean all of
our houses have like vinyl plastics wood
and them break or a fake stone I haven't
been studying Roman
um no I've just given that the word fake
it is you know very tiny in this day nay
yet I'm also trying to determine whether
you actually mean to say fake because
more often than not the majority of
tectonic systems that we've come to
study in architecture are not a
monolithic right well let these
structures are the exception to the rule
the majority of the things we've seen
are composite systems yep and you're
absolutely right the the BC and brick
structure is a composite it is working
with steel and brick and nonetheless the
brick is called to do certain duties
that that say a rubber ring would not
have to do but then again the Roman
brick is always it's never revealed it's
always kind of substrate to the stone in
some way or another and it contains the
concrete for instance so I'm basically
trying to figure out is in your mind is
the Pantheon a concrete building is it a
brick building or is it a stone building
energetic composite well I guess and
that the men were tea with me Simba and
and your immediate and as a consequence
given and abundant this is just
beautiful
I'm stunned by its beauty actually but I
also wonder so what happens when you
have to for some other reason to let you
buy for house and do you know why AIDS
does that change the rules of your game
or does that how does that become
present in the in the attention to
surface that you so aptly and lovingly
show yeah because yeah I don't know what
I would do with the 2x4 house because
you have dry you know you've got all the
layers again yeah does that bother you
yeah what do you do that's interesting
and feel like there's not play this
isn't it interesting to you that the
balloon framing was flat for streaming
games its veracity as a result of the
plywood you you this easier
yeah right and so here you have a great
surface you love surface right yeah
right being against love surface
graphically graphically oh you know you
know you don't want it to do structural
work that's the problem
are you willing to rotate your a 4x8
because they will still perform for you
would you do that yeah but then you have
to come up with a pattern exactly video
giving me the pattern of how to cut this
up you know like I didn't design well I
mean I was involved so let me ask you
this
and you're you're a great person to
critique absorb or analyze the
predicaments
Frank Gehry is sort of addressed Oh
Frank when he has a kind of figurative
project how the sort of the surface of
metal comes to confrontation for the
world when he's perfected the
relationship between metal and figure
that the windows either come in or pop
out ya know do you do not find that know
the extension and interest to your
project in any form yes definitely but I
shouldn't have a conversation those
people should have a conversation with
you because you and Monica started on
the 4x8 on the tate on the CNC table and
we're trying to cut sheets and figure
out how to make the sheet disappear
right and in the application of the
built work and so isn't this exciting to
you that now this the CNC machine isn't
for about eight but it's now like fifty
feet long and 9 feet and totally this is
your thing yeah but but she does help
too and she doesn't in a different way
I'm simply probing is that like if the
three of us do CLT how do we do them
different yeah and what a theoretical or
he have actual priorities do we drink to
them that makes those who do these
structures different and I'm basically
I'm trying to figure out given your your
fascination with surface yeah what are
the border that who's your audience not
this audience everything who's your
 your historical audience yeah that
you are cultivating in response to in
dialogue with and so yeah not the single
surface people not guys and gals that's
ya know this is very note to roam about
where did you push you anywhere yeah you
know this is very helpful in the dare to
like think about it I'll take on the
surface but I gotta work on work on
[Music]
go back to the tuba
yeah I guess you just sieve it and you
see that yeah you build your own yeah
you just add more sandwich layers and
you've strengthened it and it but it
needs to be monolith it needs to the
seams have to disappear and it needs to
look you need to read the material first
as a monolithic thing I think and to try
to kill the seam on the exterior are you
saying for the interior that sounds
exciting given given that you don't play
the presence of seams we do see some
seams here but you downplay the seams on
the interior why were you not willing to
obliterate all seams on the exterior in
other words don't I mean it's still a
surface the stucco yeah but it's but the
grout line yeah why are you willing to
just eliminate all all referentiality in
the way that this succeeds to on the
interior and of course because of the
way in which this Rasul operates it it
subverts our horizon line
you know refuses the constancy of that
human yeah and so so maybe I'm not
trying to eliminate something on the
outside that I'm trying to eliminate the
constancy of the breakage referent
reference point but rather work with
these other devices you have which
distort perception without having to
lean as a crutch on from the very
traditional materiality that you so
dislike yeah I think because the houses
it's a rectangle so there's not much it
was really flat it's just the sheer
cutting of the domestic hat that it's so
flat that I felt like it needed
something besides say like the Paul
Smith pink wall and on Melrose like it
needed to be something else so I didn't
explain it but two of the facades are
the fake brick and two are scaled we did
a amount of money so the two are scaled
up larger brick which are just the
expansion joints you would probably that
was probably a little disappointing to
you I didn't show it
I like expansions I do but I want you to
like them too because you may gain it at
every four and eight feet or you may
gain it that every 35 yeah I'm saying it
eventually it's there it's gonna be
other question is how do you sort of
internalize it into your thinking which
you're so eloquently
in other terms anyway but I'm just
trying to figure out Altima the--whether
took brick it seems like you if the
brick operation is so important to the
exterior it could have been an operation
you would have played also on the
interior through other means I mean keep
saying the sticker it's just like it's
really when you see the two corners meet
yeah I mean you can't really can I do
men on yes now you're gonna see all the
bad stuff see that downspout I mean that
was a bit of a loss there but um so yes
right at the corner you know you just
you see it all like this is the two
surfaces yeah it doesn't turn and there
it there's almost no thickness it's like
sixteenth of an inch and they're just
dying out at the corner and so it feels
like a graphic instead of a material so
I guess that's the what I would stake
the claim on my photograph the models in
front of the other houses have you
photographed the dollhouse modeling look
front of this that's a good idea or in
it not yes in front of that wall to the
bottom yeah there's a drum shot
yeah so what's interesting to me is that
when you know someone sees the house
from the front they kind of notice that
it looks like roofs that they have on
their house but just slightly off right
so because of the way that gable was
rotated it kind of clips off the front
house image and so yeah it's super in
it's super important for me that the
gable is something that everyone knows
and can recognize but then I've kind of
thrown it off slightly so it's you know
obviously the whole lecture I'm trying
to talk about abstraction and miss
reading and misbehaving and all those
things I mean as soon as you say you're
trying to misbehave
you're not misbehaving so it's there's
kind of a problem there are the soon as
you say it's Ordinary it's not ordinary
extraordinary place in your terms so
yeah there's there's always a slight
confusion and miss reading of what's
really being manipulated here by the
architect you tell me why is there a
doubt about the fact where there isn't
I don't this there's a pickup see that
pecan tree that's a pecan pecan tree
right there and it's just depositing
brown pecans and it's just it made like
a it looks like coffee had just been
poured down the back the other ones
we went in and added a like an
additional little drip edge and it's
kind of I don't know what you just could
manage it better there's something I
don't know it's about the volume that's
coming down on that one before yeah or
it's the pecans yeah they're think it's
a down the middle so then you end up
looking right at the down spouts
intensely which is actually somebody
told me I should have done a little
geometry I didn't even know you could do
that so
[Music]
Oh again it's like recorded I can't
really know so y'all know the walking
dead and he said he didn't talk to me
the whole time but then I was out there
with like Tim heartily the photographer
he said we're really happy about our new
view and congratulations it's beautiful
like that guys happy the other guy was a
little bit of a fight with so so this is
a self-funded I took out a construction
loan yeah so it took on all the risk I
mean there's yeah there's no client
because I think it would be really
difficult to push things both
materiality structure 87 panels from
Austria nobody's calling me wanting us
the second CLT house in the country
especially because I'd never built one
before so yeah it's kind of like using
Portman as like mentor in some way in
trying to copy or at a very small scale
you know can can a typology be born out
of something that doesn't have a client
where I'm taking on all the risk because
I would argue that the super atrium in
Atlanta was born out of him taking on
all the risk without a client as a
developer architect model
you
[Applause]
