thanks Michael um it's a it's really an
honor to be here and so thanks for the
imitation you try and thanks for having
me here to talk a little bit about my
book which just came out when I was
writing the book the the process was a
painful one frankly and as I was doing
it I made a promise to myself that I was
not going to do any book events and I've
said no and they've come along except
for when Michael emailed me to come here
and speak about the book I said yes just
because I think there's really any
excuse to get past the security and get
into the Cooper Union especially TV
architecture program which I've never
actually been in the building before so
it's um this is a kind of one-off but it
really is probably the only time out
that I'll talk specifically about the
book and um and there's a there's a kind
of symmetry of me doing it here because
this place even though I didn't go here
has always been a kind of special one
for me as a as someone who's invested in
teaching and pedagogy and architecture
so this is the cover of the book the
kind of set of meandering arrows and and
I think the the cover makes sense to the
extent that the book and makes sense I
think only through a kind of explanation
of exactly what I was thinking as I
wrote it so I'm going to spend about 20
minutes talking about the book and going
through it and then I will talk a little
bit about how I think it might influence
or my practice with my partner on any
mark and first office and also vice
versa which is to say how it influences
the book but also probably more
importantly how my collaboration
madonna's has has been influenced or it
has influenced those the book itself the
book generally speaking is about a
question about the questions of
attention and in the world but
specifically how my own thoughts about
attention might be directed to
architecture the easiest way to kind of
introduce it is just to read this which
is the preface I'm going to read a
couple of things because this is to talk
about the books of so bear with me
when I was younger people often explain
my meandering descriptions of the world
by saying I had attention deficit
disorder it's unclear for professional
ever diagnosed me with a D D different
parents said different things but the
end of UT surrounding my by diagnosis
sparked in me a lifelong interest in the
subject of attention why should I pay
attention I asked what is attention why
is it so important as a kid I was being
cheeky but slowly as those around me
struggle to define attention in a way I
found satisfactory I started to develop
my own ideas about what kinds of things
deserve attention and what kinds of
attention those things deserved
once I started teaching architecture and
talking with colleagues and students I
began to articulate these differences
and silently at first to question why
only certain kinds of things and certain
kinds of attention were rewarded when
reviewing architectural work it took
years of conversations with many of the
people mentioned in the acknowledgments
before I could assemble enough ideas to
fill a book on the subject now I have
four chapters of texts on four kinds of
attention and more than a hundred images
to illustrate with the kinds of things
that provoke them might look like but
even now I still have a good definition
for attention itself of course I've read
and unpacks various textbook definitions
of the word both on the internet and in
most of the dictionaries in the UC
Berkeley library system they're all
super interesting so precise and focused
nothing like the ongoing haze I
experience whenever I forced myself to
quote pay attention maybe some will see
this as an admission of failure dismiss
my ideas and claimed this book and my
interest in attention has been a
gigantic waste of time but I don't see
it that way historian of state of
historian of science trained asked and
whose work addresses both attention and
interest writes attention sorts out the
world to attend is to distinguish
diversion from the humdrum signal from
noise foreground from background without
attention our synthesis would be useless
we would we would look without seeing
here without listening touch without
feeling all experience would be as
planned as pablum without accent or
interest by distinguishing the urgent
the signal and the foreground by
expecting our senses to see to listen
and feel - and slips into an easy
association between
tension and interest like other
descriptions of attention I find this
one frustrating in his penis and the
fast polkas path that draws between the
first word in the last and the
efficiency in clarity with which it
juxtaposes and then isolates its terms
in the confident way it dismisses the
terms that judges is negative perhaps my
problem defining the tension is just a
lack of interest in the brevity and
focus that interest seems to demand in
other words attentions connection to
interest brings with it the expectation
of clarity and immediacy but what if we
were careful to uncouple attention from
interests would this remove the
expectation that attention requires us
to sort distinguish and discriminate
between things might we get rid of the
negative connotations of things that are
not interesting what if we deliberately
tried to look without seeing listen
without hearing touch without feeling
what if we forced ourselves to turn from
the interests of the urgent the signal
and the foreground and deliberately
attend to the board and McClung from
confusion of noise the comfort of
background it's worth a shot the
highlights of mine through a lecture
they're not actually highlighted in the
book but they are they provide the kind
of larger structure and so the sort of
subtitle of criticism of criticism with
no logical conclusions is then followed
by a table of contents attention being
the preface which I just read and then
four chapters that basically lay out the
sort of general arguments of the book
the first one is on interesting and the
way in which I think it is connected
specifically to our potential criticism
which is to say that the specific and
precise ways in which we marshal
audiences and architecture to kind of
focus in on one category of things
boring this then the second chapter
confusing and then comfort as the last
index of references um
the first chapter interesting sort of
lays out interesting and makes and tries
to make a kind of precise a fairly
precise connection between interests and
criticism the connection isn't mine
actually there's a woman named Sian 9
who's a whose English professor at
Stanford who writes about aesthetics and
she has written extensively on a history
of interest and interesting and is the
person who specifically affects
interests to the problems of criticism
and the way in which they work
as I kind of as a kind of tactics with
language to sort of isolate out certain
things in the interest of focusing on
others and so it basically lays out this
argument in some cases sort of
regurgitates hers and then connects it
to the specific ways in which her more
general argument is connected
architecture and then it also lays out
what's a specific ways in which interest
works both as a kind of weak category of
something which is to say interest is
usually a kind of precursor to other
stronger ways in which react to things
so interest is a sort of spontaneous
reaction towards something and then
because we could be interested in
something for sort of good reasons and
bad reasons
every time we sort of take interest in a
car accident for example it's not that
our interest in it is necessarily a good
thing we can be just as interested in
bad things and so tries to mine the
specific aspects of interest and connect
them to these other terms and the other
terms are as I mentioned comforting
boring and confusing and the book starts
with this a kind of basic semiotic
square laying out interest in a kind of
four part and a sort of four quadrant
system as being the quadrant that is
both discernible and different which is
to say we tend to find things tend to
interest us that we are different which
is to say they stand out in the crowd
and they are discernible which means
that we know with some work that we can
come to understand them so it might not
be that we can understand them initially
but that we believe that we can the
opposite of this would be boring and so
boring things are familiar with just say
they say they are the same but they're
ambiguous and so we can't come to
understand them or they just exhaust in
the attempt to so the opposite of
interest being both sort of ambiguous
and similar and then in the opposing
quadrant confusion is both an ambiguous
and different thing so thins the things
that confuse us are things that stand
out but they aren't things that we can
sort of get our minds around or that we
know that we can come to understand and
so this is why for instance I'm not
interested in advanced calculus I can't
actually understand its concepts and so
I tend to be confused by it and so I
sort of resist attention towards it and
then opposite of that is both a highly
discerned
within the same thing as where we find
comfort and initially when I was making
the blog comfort was normal but I found
that problematic for a series of reasons
and I think comfort is specifically an
interesting where to talk about with
respect to architecture precisely
because we tend to avoid using it when
we work when were describing what it is
that we're doing is if it's a bad thing
throughout the book there are a series
of images and other drawings that are
related to some of these categories
I call them Cook's construction
documents simply because that's the sort
of practices term for the umbrella term
for the dot the drawings that we make
after the buildings have been done my
post construction documents are a little
bit different than most most of them are
renderings this is a Peter mark Lee
building and the the images run in sort
of parallel to the book they're never
called out specifically or placed in
relationship to specific categories
they're more to set a sort of general
mood and kind of look of the book that I
think you might associate with some of
the terms but they're never actually
pointed out as being boring confusing or
or comforting or even interesting
precisely because I think of the terms
is being productive only when they are
sort of weak enough to kind of rub up
against each other and I want the images
to sort of be somewhere in a kind of
cloudy middle I kind of forced ambiguity
in the images as well so yeah a bility
and some of them might become familiar
and then the building's themselves
obviously I think are important but also
the way in which they're rendered it
becomes important with the way in which
colors are used and so it's Michael said
we are interested in color and I
practice but we're interested in a kind
of sort of low saturation way in which
we can produce images where things begin
to get a little bit fuzzy and these are
just to give you a sense of some of the
other drawings of building which is the
collaboration between well Victor
Lundy's US Tax Court and then Peters
Eleanor and Ellsworth Kelly's Matthew
marks gallery most of them are probably
obvious in terms of the way in which
well the ones that I've selected and
then in addition to that there's an
index which actually lays out the
architectural drawings so all of these
were done by myself
without image rights and basically
cobbled from the Internet itself and so
the sort of proliferation of images in
architecture and the kind of low res
fast moving JPEG we didn't do the thing
that sort of copied or somehow traced to
produce these images and these are just
some of the others but about half the
images of a book are buildings that
maybe many of you recognize and then
other ones are just things that I've
encountered at different points in my
life or the different people have sent
me as I was putting together a book this
is a rant for a parking garage in
Watertown Massachusetts you're early to
graduate school a gas station designed
by my father a building in Berkeley
California now these are included
because there is a subject of highly
subjective component to the book it's in
some cases meant to sort of blur the
distinctions between objectivity and
subjectivity and so it in some ways the
book is a kind of architectural
autobiography and then other things like
this ice Birds Mount Everest dolmens
which I'll talk extensively about later
and then buildings that look like
dolmens this being wait a minute is a
seaside pavilion which I believe has now
been torn down I also try to connect
these things at different points the
terms themselves to set of formal
categories related to what interesting
architecture might be what boring
architecture might be what comforting
architecture might be what confusing
architecture might be but these are only
contingent to the extent to which I
think I think they help frame the other
parts of the book and so just to give
you a kind of flavor for this with I'll
just read the interesting one and so you
can understand what I mean so
interesting architecture establishes
discernible part-to-whole relationships
through the composition of new and
differentiated parts the areas of
tension are typically clear and the
methods we use to discern and describe
them are known or knowable and its total
composition the whole appears different
from other similar arrangements and
while there may be some degree of
novelty its origins or process or quote
logic is traceable interesting
architecture never appears arbitrary and
is often described as a rigorous this is
the type of work that lends itself to
close reading and I'll talk a little bit
about that later in their lecture and
then boring comforting fusing
architecture
that tend to exist in other forms of
kind of deliberate ambiguity that stand
in opposition to interest why I wrote
this book and then I'll quickly go
through the chapters I will admit it's a
completely absurd premise at a certain
level and even to say not interesting is
specifically to put attention on the
thing in which you're interested in but
I would I will sort of easily dismiss
this kind of ironic which is what a lot
of people have sometimes tried to sort
of pigeonhole me as and I would resist
that and say that that kind of labeling
sort of plays specifically into the kind
of some of the traps that I think
interesting architecture tends to are
those that would focus on interesting
architecture tend to sort of marginalize
or even discriminate against those that
would sort of try to turn your attention
to other places and so there's a
specific attempt in the book this sort
of enlarged the kind of what I would
describe as a social capacity of
architecture that's not to say it's
trying to address the specific social
problem through a project I think that
both sort of mineralize 'as the the
scale of the world's problems and also I
think limits the scope would the sort of
power of architecture to do many things
I I mean specifically just to sort of
terms and the different ways in which we
talk about architecture and the
different things we might talk about
when we talk about architecture so
that's basically the sort of the aim of
the book so I'll quickly go through the
chapters each of the chapters sort of
starts with an image of an historical
reference then impacts it one of my own
projects when the boring chapter Denise
Scott Brown it starts with a quote about
Los Angeles is just where I'm from and I
think is this a particularly interesting
quote and then attaches it to the
photographs of every che and then
Katherine Opie who's a contemporary
photographer working in LA now and her
and me Scott Brown's quotas it's the
about Los Angeles it's the same even
open-ended system with multiple
possibilities for the definition and
redefinition of focus depending on where
you're at
sometimes the yellows shine the
brightest sometimes the blues and so
that kind of even open-endedness is I
would say sort of quality of boring
things and then there's here's a series
of lists of other things in this case
this is a my own ring
in the book of a building that was
photographed by adversity son los
angeles apartments as some of the
content is also directly located some of
the image references and then it sort of
settles on Katherine Opie's freeway
series which is a series of photographs
if she did in the 90s basically like
this these photographs were quite small
and they were displayed like this in a
gallery which is to say not in a kind of
linear arrangement but they kind of span
the gallery and sometimes would break
into sort of grids or columns and they
were sort of intentionally fudged the
almost sort of nostalgic looking almost
like a kind of blurry image you would
see in a rear view window and so in
certain ways they weren't necessarily
progressive or nostalgic they existed in
a kind of fuzzy sort of I would say kind
of fuzzy style but also fuzzy in their
reference and sort of whether they were
looking forward or looking backwards
like actually quite literally and then
she titles all her things all her series
of photographs untitled one on title two
one title three but doesn't it didn't
arrange them in the gallery that way and
then also showed those with a series of
other series of photographs so there's
be like four untitled threes in this in
this thing so there's automatically a
kind of network of other things outside
of just the photographs themselves that
kind of open didn't in Nisour the sort
of desire to sort of intentionally blur
things was a precedent for the first
project that I talked about in the book
which was a gallery installation I did
at CyArk in 2013 and then you can see a
full image of basically the gallery here
a series of kind of what I call
pedestals with basically kind of blank
white disks on a white carpet and boring
in the way in which it might work I tell
the story of the installation
photography so once I installed the work
and had the the gallery opening and
there's sort of a series of kind of well
a lot of sort of like blank expressions
frankly and sort of uncomfortable
exchanges while people tried to
congratulate me on specific parts of the
project but perhaps most interestingly
that was my conversations with the
installation photographer so saya
hires Joshua white to photograph this
gallery and he's probably photographed
the gallery twenty-five times at least
and I had no say and what he actually
photographed and he went in he sort of
takes his
stablishing shot and you can see this
and when he sent me the sort of low res
JPEG sub we can kind of scroll through
and see that this lineage of thinking
first he takes a series of establishing
shots and then such as a photograph
these things trying to find differences
in them even though they're all exactly
the same from different angles sort of
clustering shots and then he starts
taking photographs of things like this
which is just a blank wall with free
outlets on it noticing that some of the
atlas look newer than others and that I
clearly place some of them there and
then he started taking photographs of
something like this now I did not put a
fake video camera in the gallery but
then as the installation photographers
Jobs what a document was actually in the
show he is sort of questioning the
things that are actually part of the
show in the exhibit in an architecture
exhibit because a an architect to place
things like this in a in a gallery it's
clearly not art but he documented a
series of things that weren't initially
part of the show but eventually became
part of its documentation and that's
only through his sort of the contractual
limits of his well let's say his
contract which was to take 50
photographs and so when you're forced
with the basically an empty room how do
you satisfy that and he just ends up in
a kind of weird me and or questioning
whether certain things count or certain
things don't
um also in each of the chapters there's
a series of notes at the end and these
don't focus that these aren't like
conclusions but they are sort of ideas
in each chapter you adopts a different
structure for the notes that is similar
to the sort of theme of the chapter so
the boring notes taking hues from
Katherine Opie's photographs they lay
themselves out sort of meandering from a
kind of single list into sort of fatless
into sort of two and three and then at
certain points they sort of fall out of
order or they run through each other so
boring is associated with nothing but
too much of anything gets boring where
nothing actually also participates in a
list and the W of width also is a sort
of numbering list these things all begin
to kind of blur together and then the
number 38 for personal reasons is
repeated three times I would also say I
just couldn't someone that the the
publisher send me this because this is
supposed to be double-oh-seven and I
just couldn't put ss7 in the book
let's change it to percent and then
there's obviously the opportunity for
readers of a book to fill in their own
sort of limits of boredom I'll also just
sort of flick through some of the images
this is Andrews Aguas Korean church
again these these images aren't
necessarily meant to be associated with
any of the particular categories they
can at different moments be organized in
different ways and and in this for this
lecture I organized this particular
chunk of them is a kind of series of
architectural heroes so Zago Lina Bo
Bardi the sail house by Johnston mark
Lee Moss is one of mosses house which i
think is included for obvious reasons
and then the third chapter on confusing
uses the Cornell box as its kind of
point of origin the Cornell box was a
rendering test produced in the early 80s
at Cornell the kit tests radiosity any
of this is a little bit of what Michaels
talking about when I was asked to teach
a representation course for some reason
understanding the specific algorithms of
rendering became a kind of moment of
sort of point of fascination for me and
the quenelle box sets up a kind of
classic historic art historical method
of sort of compare and contrast but it
presents you presented with two almost
identical images and forces you to look
much closer at two things that look
alike but are actually in fact produced
in very very different ways one of them
through photography and then the other
one through a rendering algorithm called
radiosity which is basically the
algorithm that blurs light together so
it's intentionally meant to produce sort
of fuzzy things and so things like v-ray
rely a lot on radiosity whereas ray
tracing is the kind of high-gloss
specular reflections that are very
interesting radiosity produces a kind of
dull glow and then I use this to sort of
set up a chapter which adopts the sort
of margin notes which begin to kind of
extend into the into the chapter itself
and so much like the Cornell box
represented with two things that at
least initially look alike but are
actually constructed in a different in a
different way confusing the chapter
presents two texts that are basically
represented side by side one in a kind
of order of three columns in one and two
and that's the only way in which you
know that they're running sort of in
parallel to each other and so as you
move through the chapter this the sort
of two is one text and then the one that
are divided up into thirds or another
but in certain cases they kind of blend
between each other and then it unpacks
medium and the kind of productive ways
in which a kind of medium confusion
would work confusing identities at work
and then presents a ability or product
that we did the math Center where we
were asked to produce a painting in an
art gallery as architects would so
there's a kind of disciplinary confusion
and the story of that I also play out
just briefly about this project we were
asked to do a painting in the gallery
that also required us to use white paint
and so the way in which we decided to
produce the image which was up at a
mountain we just went all the pain
stores in Los Angeles and ask them for
their base white paint so it was Sherwin
Williams base white Bayer base white
home depot base white lows base white
and then painted payments about paint
swatches together and then there's
obviously the image of the paint the
colors themselves are quite a bit
distinct from each other and so a sort
of kind of fuzzy image begins to emerge
and then just the question of how one
produces a painting as an architect in
the gallery and things like spec sheets
and the different sort of text that
architects typically write when it comes
to producing architecture and these are
some of the some of the images the
person you actually exq the painting is
here Ryan work it's just sort of like
slouching down and then this just gives
you a sense for how the notes are sort
of play out the the the numbers also
sort of run like in there where they
show up in the text but not necessarily
between text so one two and three
doesn't work through that through each
one of the individual texts but just
sort of its own geographic location
inside the book they sort of layout that
way and in here here's the clearest way
you can see the two different texts or
two three
and then here's some of the images the
border building by Turkish video soils
gallery riga and series of different
buildings so the last chapter is comfort
and in this chapter the painting by
Titian as explained by JMW Turner lays
out a sort of framework for how we might
think of comfort specifically in the way
in which architecture tends to sort of
sit in the background of things and so
in this painting the kind of sort of
high contrast figures about the
landscape and the human figure isn't
supported by a much sort of lower
saturation series of sort of browns and
blacks that tend to be the architecture
and so this is the kind of model for
architecture as the is the way in which
the I begin to unpack the issues of
comfort in architecture and then use a
series of models that we've built for
the ah-so architecture tree Analia to go
where the models are basically the sort
of elevations of these blank buildings
to sort of propped up against each other
and so this is a those models there and
there's a couple different images well
we were particularly interested in when
these buildings is the different ways in
which they sort of break in and then
sort of cover up with paint this sort of
sort of suppression of formal
articulation in these buildings and then
using paints to create kind of large
graphics graphics that tend to sort of
tend to negate these things but also
comfort as a kind of relief which is to
say these things we might find a kind of
relief in these things both as a kind of
Oh relief but also just as our sort of
relief from the kind of over saturation
of a sort of let's say most buildings in
a city and so these things sit almost
comfortably in the background and
provide a kind of relief for us as we
walk by them this sort of sloppy details
again are sort of deliberately so and
they're also highly calibrated and there
actually individually fabricated so in
these models the sort of wedges that
hold the panels together actually custom
fabricated and so this is it is a chest
a sort of bad detail that isn't that
isn't that it sort of lazy in its
execution there's a kind of deliberate
attempt to make these things poorly with
a kind of high tolerance architecture
and so if shims and other things like
that are sort of the set asides to sort
of produce something where we make
ourselves more conscious of things like
tolerance and some of these projects and
then the notes for this chapter are laid
out and this has been the form of a kind
of informal outline and really just a
series of sort of quotes that I think
almost in the kind of schema
consciousness to sort of work themselves
through basic with sort of different
people from both the discipline
architecture and art and then other
quotes from sort of books that I think
are related to all of the terms that
surround architecture empathy
so Jason gains disco balls for somebody
I just categorize them in this lecture
as the sort of mirrored things initially
coding back Patrick did churches of
lalibela and then also a series of sort
of natural objects a moon the Sun and
then other things that kind of look like
the moon and some round stuff
and then there is a kind of intentional
decision not to produce a conclusion but
the interesting thing about comfort is
that it is the thing as defined by
others as a kind of category of things
that deliberately makes ambiguous sort
of subjects an object so comforting is
the sort of interface between a kind of
person and a thing to the extent that we
can't feel it so it really is an absence
of something and then it tries to attach
that absence to a certain kind of an
aesthetics which is to say it's sort of
not visible and also sort of we can't
really feel it which i think is
important as a kind of produces a
certain symmetry or closure and some of
the things I laid out in the in the
attention preface where there's a sort
of what happens if we sort of look
without seeing touch without feeling and
I think comfort is a is a kind of weird
category of things and the thing is the
ways in which we do well the our lack of
terminology to actually describe it is
probably because it is something that we
can't necessarily feel
a book is at least for me is a kind of
way to make explicit certain casual
references that we don't often times get
to do as architects and so the different
ways in which in a book you can
acknowledge people both through the say
things like acknowledgments Brian is he
or she helped me a lot a lot of editing
and the sort of probably understands the
book more than I do Michael Young
obviously is one of the few friends I
shared the book with and so being able
to lay this out is a kind of well it's a
kind of nice relief in a way from the
way in which architecture tends to be
sort of put out into the world to
actually lay clear who your references
are and the different different ways in
which you can do it in a book I think
was something that was quite nice to do
just in terms of things like the
copyright page obviously quotes and and
buildings by people you admire but also
things like choosing the font that was
used in the first edition to learning
from Las Vegas so there are more sort of
subtle ways in which you can reference
things I think is quite nice so this is
the final sort of messed up semiotic
square and I use this as a kind of
transition image because after having
sat through 28 minutes and me talking
about a book that's specifically about
boring you like this there's a kind of
open question about how some of these
things might influence a design practice
and I guess what I'd like to do is talk
about a series of projects that I've
been working on with honor and my
partner related to these things really
there's a way to talk about how the book
and our work both influenced each other
and so I'm not going to explicitly
explicitly like use terms I'm not gonna
talk about how these things are boring
and comforting or interesting although I
might use some of those terms I'll
probably like we all do habitually use
the word interesting a lot even though
I'm trying to avoid using that word but
I show that just as a way to show these
just as a way to show how we worked and
how this way of thinking we try to force
this way of thinking into some of the
things that we do so Dolan's are
something that Anna found a few years
ago and two wonders to sort of describe
it a going as a dolmen is essentially a
stack of rocks and they exist all over
the world so one of the things that are
would have amazing about them is
the extent to which all every
civilization or a lot of them through
history all over the world had the kind
of primitive desire to stack big things
on top of other big things and there are
because of this lots of different types
of ways in which people stacked stones
dolmens being only one of them so
Stonehenge for instance is not a dolmen
although the categorization of stone
stacking is like a lot of the things we
talked about a little bit fuzzy and
loose but generally speaking a dolmen
has smaller capstone or smaller legs and
then a larger capstone stack on top of
it and so these are some sort of famous
images of dolmens they're also they tend
to be quite small which is to say we
don't actually know how to inhabit them
in the ways in which we inhabit the
things that sort of probably occupy us
in the contemporary world or in our
lives they're a little bit too small to
be buildings and a little bit too big to
be furniture people speculate that
they're tombs because they find bones in
them but they can't date the bones to
the construction of the of the temples
so they are quite blank which is to say
we have to invent reasons or them and so
they exist as things that we sort of
project our own desires on and so you
can see a lot of these photographs just
have kind of people kind of
uncomfortably standing next to them
operating is both stale food scale
figures but also as a kind of
performance of awkwardness and this this
this intentional awkwardness is
obviously something that we find to be
quite interesting in them also because
of this well let's say dolmens they
exist all over the world and they also
show up in representations through
various disciplines but surprisingly not
things like architecture so they kind of
there are architects that have studied
them but for the most part I see artists
renditions of them and so in this case
an artist basically greatly exaggerated
a dolmen so that they can begin to
occupy it as one would occupy
architecture Robert Smithson posing for
what looks like an album photograph as a
kind of there's a kind of cool relaxed
posture both to the dome in itself and
then also his casual lean against it
Kaspar dangered Friedrich and other art
to obviously take an inspiration from
them archeologists have studied them and
drawn their various drawings in
different ways of drawing them much like
the kind of developed certainly throwing
different ways to sort of protect and
preserve them produce things like this
sort of buildings around or sort of
structures around Dolman so people don't
knock them over because sometimes they
do get knocked over but because there is
no specific drawing there's nothing that
precedes it in the architectural sense
of Dolman to put them back together is a
kind of impromptu them was ad-hoc
exercise and sort of rearranging stones
that initially were just kind of any way
they could sort of pop these things up
and so there isn't a set of construction
documents for them and there obviously
are people who have made models of
dolmens so this idea of models and
dolmens and the ways in which we've
tried to kind of force its intersection
into architecture in our own work has
tried to make comparisons between
something like this so base on Domino
which is famously analyzed by like
luckier Eisenman and others versus a
kind of informal analysis of a Dolman so
where's the nice long Domino because it
was produced through architecture is
sort of set up in preconditioned to
accept it and that the sort of formal
analysis tools of architecture so we can
begin to unpack and analyze it in
different ways whereas dolmens don't so
easily fit into a kind of disciplinary
specific way of rendering them of
drawing them etc and so when you try to
produce let's say a series of drawings
that begin to describe a process of
constructing them you're ultimately will
fail and you end up with just a kind of
even much more open-ended set of
drawings of just different Goleman's
that you can categorize in very simple
ways like ones that have three legs and
ones that have two and so just in making
these drawings and sort of trying to
make the comparisons we slowly have
begun to try to push these into our own
work first by just making models of them
and so beginning to kind of
architectural eyes them these being a
series of early study models of just the
sort of abstractions of dolmens and
ultimately a series of proposals for how
one might take scale and sort of expand
these abstract representations of
dolmens and something like the moment
ps1 copy
a few years ago we were finally from the
ps1 and our proposal was a dolmen this
is this is it that really sort of
everybody everyone knows this this
courtyard and so our domain tries to
let's say casually aligned with this
existence but in certain places displays
its kind of ambivalence so it it spans
over a wall it doesn't line itself up
with the concrete wall that's adjacent
to it
we couldn't sort of poori and sort of
transport large rocks so that our
Goleman is built out of wood and well
this is a kind of speculation with a
group of friends who are also here on
how we might build this thing and it
also means much like a dolmen it means
for water reasons so it has to drain but
the drain sort of slowly drains to one
side but it's not steel in any way so as
it's drains it also leaks much like a
Dolman probably would when it came to
rendering it and borrowing techniques of
rendering from architecture the
different ways in which we produced
rustic ation and the renderings started
with basically dots and those dots being
a sort of 1 million nail so this thing
is a kind of overly fastened fastened
almost sort of decaying thing and so and
this is the scale model you can see here
with a laser cutter the kind of erosion
that happens towards the end the color
is achieved by two different
glow-in-the-dark paints there are two
primary there's sort of two main brands
of glow-in-the-dark paint and so the
sort of wash is produced with two of
them so the idea would be that it would
sort of accept energy during the day and
then kind of produce a dull glow at
night and you can see here that sort of
eroded or rusticated corners and the
dolmen
these are images that people are so
excited looks like you all they lost
their heads but these are either to say
the the folks at MoMA ps1 were we didn't
win let's just say it that way but the
idea here was that we would because
they're dolmens because they are let's
say they they can and have been
represented across disciplines we would
invite people into the show by also
putting the show out in the world
through a series of different ways in
which what we would hope that the
project would kind of circulate because
I find mobius one to be a very
intimidating place to visit myself and I
was being asked to build something there
but also museums generally speaking
sometimes don't do such a good job in
outreach and so we wanted to produce an
app that would sort of exist in the
world and that people could sort of
access via their their iPhones and stuff
like that so you can't give us any more
on the phone but it's archived on our by
our website at fault net so I'm just
going to give a quick demonstration
hashtag Dolman this is not a it's not
it's not CAD software these things
aren't meant to be sort of exported out
or 3d printed it simply just meant
well we'll get back to that in a second
first so what this allows people to do
is basically create their own Dolman and
so you can just basically a sort of
simple stacking of things and then when
you're ready
you can start over again and there's a
kind of randomization and so not all
this they soon stand up and you can
increase the sizes of them you can also
just sort of rapid-fire you can try to
fill dolmens all the condiments my
friend Andrew Bacon is here and he like
I think he's the person who's played
this game the most and he like sent me
like three dolmen stacked on top of each
other that's a kind of mastery of the
doorman software this idea perhaps just
as sort of a side we've done for a
series of other things so this was the
sort of blocks of blah blah which were
the storage and that kind of bad detail
model and so again this was an Oslo we
we actually weren't like that it wasn't
in the budget for us even to good off
slow so the idea that everybody could
sort of access this thing was a question
but we wanted to make an app that would
allow people to kind of experience the
show you can kind of look at the
elevation Plano fleet and then the other
one just because why not this is maybe
the sort of fun part of this lecture is
this thing City render which allowed us
to you both paint or asphalt or stucco a
series of rain-delay instantiated things
so this is a project that I'm not going
to talk about about sort of exporting
Los Angeles so Los Angeles for us is
basically stucco paint in asphalt so
this is a kind of abstraction of that
now I have to open up my my lecture it
knows all work they don't work on Chrome
for some reason but they will work on
other on all that the browser's sorry
for some reason unity decidedly crash it
i severed a couple more
the title of this slide not interesting
Cooper Union is no reflection on the way
in which I can feel about this
institution thank you boys in high
regard um okay back to where we were so
we didn't we did lose um and I that's a
with a sense of almost relief building
something that that big would have been
quite a struggle but we did build some
smaller ones and explore some of the
same similar ideas this was something we
did for a group show where we produced a
kind of plywood Dolman in this case
using screws and set of nails to produce
the kind of texture and then also
borrowing from some of our earlier work
we wanted to produce a kind of very low
saturation brown to render this in and
no amount of no paint that we could buy
basically looking on the color spectrum
would produce the subtlety to Eve that
we wanted so this is a pink all black
bean soup and we just bought it at two
different Sherwin Williams stores and
then painted them together and you can
see obviously this is not a doctored
image I mean it just produces they both
have the same finish everything and just
the discrepancies in the mixing machine
produces a kind of contrast that is kind
of disturbing when you think about like
the degree to which there to care with
which we spec things like paint colors
and then looking at the kind of
impossible thinness of plywood and the
kind of bad section drawings that it
produces and making this here are some
detail shots
it's almost built like a very nice
basswood model just in terms of the way
in which we just sort of care with which
we join the pieces apply weight together
and then the screw head type so that's
five different drive types each one of
them aligns to a different set of things
so there's a square drive type fill up
standard star forget the fifth one but
these are some of the drawings that we
that we made of those you can't see so
well you can see if climate here the
different the different screw heads
this is it installed it was part of a
larger group show with belt that led G
made this sort of large pink blanket I
like to show these two images one
because I feel like this is the way in
which most people experience our work
let's just say their backs are turned
towards it almost has a kind of backdrop
for drinking beer or checking out this
much more interesting thing and then
also from the back the kind of thinness
and this this this was something that
was an inspiration to us in the next
project which was a small studio for art
in Virginia so in this case at a certain
point I mean dolmens are a kind of
source of fascination for us but when we
were asked to design very quickly a
fairly modest structure in Virginia it's
just kind of the stuff we were working
with and so when asked to come up with a
proposal the the instinct for us was
just to take some of the other models we
were working with and just sort of put
them uncomfortably close to the building
itself and the clients went for it
to a certain extent and so this is a
kind of progression as the building goes
from a sort of series of a dolmen model
into something that's I'd say more
recognizable as a building these are
just some some renderings of the
building itself you know the the
drawings this is the plan this is the
part of the original building that was
in the scope of the project so it was
sort of divided up turn it into storage
and then a kind of art and display
making space and then certain things
that were in the other sort of more
casual dolmens or the earlier Dolman
start to show up as sort of specific
elements in this thing so instead of the
sort of Leaning capstone this becomes a
sloped roof things like flash and other
things are exposed as a kind of reveal
that's too large so in a second the
client likes to say a small forest was
destroyed in the making of this project
it was it was seriously engineered
because this is this cantilever despite
how shallow it is it's quite heavy and
so it had to be tied packed and so it
actually got quite a bit sort of bulky
here are some of the images of it under
construction you can see here the sort
of lean of the
and then the revealing parrot bit on the
other side sort of funny aspect of this
project is when we showed up for a site
visit the the expansion joints in the
concrete there's an extra line so if you
look in that plan you can see that the
line is sort of intentionally all
centers of the expansion joints but we
went and showed up there's an extra line
and we went back and looked at the
drawings this thing which we thought
said centred on existing barn door was
somehow actually built as one of the
expansion which in the Congress appeals
to us and when it happened I was quite
upset I was like this just makes a great
story and then here's some of the
pictures the pictures of the finished
thing so the copper flashing and the
specific flashing reveals as wood siding
transitions from vertical to horizontal
things like this were just moments when
talking to the contractor when he told
us that we had half flashing there we
asked him if you could just expose it a
little bit more than you typically would
and then drawing those details became
interesting for us simply because we
felt like those sort of gaps of things
like that that we had celebrated an
earlier more speculative projects would
be a way for us to kind of insert them
into into something like this without
compromising the integrity of the
building but somehow staying true to
some of our are kind of an aesthetic
ideals and then sort of shot in a forest
and you can see here the sort of open
pair of it and sort of party in the back
look the building this is sort of two
different kinds of landscape so this is
this is what happened when the artist
moved in this is sort of the circle
outside in the weeds so sort of filled
it up sort of it's kind of Messier on
the inside than it ever would have been
on the outside okay I just want to
finish with with just talking about this
at a certain point just in let's say the
way in which we work dolmens is a as a
kind of source of inspiration slowly in
itself becomes sort of diluted in the
work that we're doing with it begins to
take on other references and I think
this is one of the things that's
important to me in the book where
there's a kind of expectation when we
present or talk about architecture that
we construct linear narratives to
explain them and oftentimes things sort
of come at us from the side and I think
it's a more
me like let's say a more approachable
anonymous way to discuss architecture
and so with the dolmen project one of
the things that's happened is different
people have sent us different things
that they think are reference or that we
have found and so this thing's obviously
like that the planet of Barcelona
pavilion possibly obvious Carl Andre
drawing and then things like battleship
and our interests in games are also sort
of implicated in this and so through
this you have battleship at an interest
in apps and sort of building things out
of boxes we were asked by Airbnb to
design an app they ultimately didn't go
for with the project but the idea would
be that we would sort of stack
programmatic sort of infrastructural
units into a grid at different sizes and
then this being the sort of abstraction
and this being the sort of plan and that
would produce a certain kind of Adu that
people might use and so these are a
series of early speculations which are
both reference the dolmen work let's say
but are also beginning to look like
other things some of the sections and
again you can see sort of residences
between this and the earlier stuff
similar rendering and then this was a
phone core model that sort of it played
out the different ways in which we were
thought about thought the game might
works and so you sort of arranged these
things in a grid each one of them being
a different infrastructural core than
you stack a capstone on top that was a
rendering that they didn't like it
somebody else actually they selected
another architect and maybe some of you
in there that are gonna build one but we
are moving forward with this idea with a
small backyard house in Virginia and
this is the house this is the University
of Virginia and this is a large actually
fairly historic home that was occupied
by a famous mathematics professor and
the client wants to rent this out and
then live in a more modest structure in
the backyard this is the largest sort of
undeveloped property near the University
of Virginia and so he he wants a kind of
low profile structure in the backyard
and this for this case we tried to
produce a more a more refined plan with
this idea that there are no walls
necessarily just a series of sort of
infrastructural cores that are connected
through doors and so it's a fairly
straightforward plan sort of walking
from the front to the back and then each
of these things
functions is a different kind of use the
beds are Murphy beds so they themselves
are their own they have their own kind
of density closets bathrooms etc and the
sections are kind of oddly Dolman like
this is a skylight you can see the sort
of tilted you just lastly that we're
trying to convince the client to make
this out of stucco which is a hard sell
in Virginia where like Jeffersonian red
brick is basically just what they build
stuff out of there especially that's
close to but stucco is its own kind of
common material and the different ways
in which it's finished with different
dashing and sort of application of
things like pebbles and sandy and also
produces drastically different textures
these are the ideas is that this thing
would be sort of rendered in in stucco
render being the the English term for
stucco and so there's the renderings of
this and the kind of bad texture mapping
is also a mathematical actual way in
which it when we finished literally
rendered in stucco and I'm going to
Princeton tomorrow to talk about the low
resolution exhibition and this is
actually the house that's in that
exhibition and that's it thanks for
I'm happy to take any questions if
anyone has fun
curious what you would say about this
Center so first of all thank you for the
lecturers always great
it's interesting how entertaining
something that's trying to not be
entertaining actually can be what it's
done as well as she did it I know that's
not like that kind of compliment but
it's meant I'm gonna describe something
and I wonder what you think about when I
sometimes show your work to other
architectural colleagues of mine
sometimes students and usually the first
thing the first response they have is I
don't know what's here I don't know what
I'm looking what what what is this and
then when you start to point to certain
things I can start to say alright so you
see the way in which this is rendered
out to look like it's rusticated stone
those are those are dots those dots are
actually nail heads so that the
renderings have a very particular
relationship both at the level of what
it's attempting to elude tunis
materiality that's not its materiality
but then also a kind of completely blunt
literalness with what it's actually
communicating as as a notational element
what I always find to happen is that
more and more you point at different
aspects subtle things happening right
beneath this
in your work the more and more
interested people get in it and I think
that's also part of what you've done
with your lecturers are able to direct
our attention to very specific things
and in that direction of attention the
product begins to reveal its argument it
begins to reveal those ideas in a
fascinating way so part of why I'm
bringing this up is I know a place into
your hand in terms of the part of the
issues of the book but hey how do you
feel about that how do you feel about
the fact that an initial glance or
initial approach that which becomes
interesting is going to actually be out
of many people's field of attention and
in are you okay with it and is it just
then for those of you who have the time
and or the peaked desire to understand
what these other things maybe I mean
like yeah I think largely that's the
point one I would say the lot of this
work originates in a minute on a model
of exhibitions and installations which
is when when I started when I graduated
from I graduate from architecture school
in 2007-2008 happened and to be a young
architect in that in that environment
was but it's just the work that I
thought I would say I don't want must be
generationally but it's the it's the
it's just the sort of world that I was
cast into both as I started to teach
because I needed a job and then that was
just the place those were the sort of
sites of the work that I was doing and
so it gives you there's an expectation
when one enters into a gallery that
there would be something of interest in
that gallery and something in value and
so just playing into that as the context
with which the work already operated
inside of so without that it wouldn't be
I would say it's like the CyArk gallery
exhibition people expected a certain
kind of exuberance in that space and
when presented with nothing they work
very hard to fill it in both out of just
sort of their own no expectations and
then also as a sort of generosity
towards me and two things happen one
like yes I could point out different
things that happen to them and it would
make
aware of those things but was far more
interesting to me was that other things
that people pointed out thinking that I
knew that about that and had no idea
that that had been done like sort of
weird things about sort of coloured
fleck paints and in the ground
positioning of certain outlets obviously
other things that people were tuned to
based on their expectations and
conversations about those things were
far more valuable and fascinating to me
and so I think a lot of the earlier
stuff that I was doing relied on that
the context of an institution to do that
kind of work um now working in or trying
to work sort of doing buildings and
actually having a real and sincere
interest in been practicing architecture
the way to sort the way to decisions for
me frankly to stay interested is to turn
my attention to those other things that
are just part of the kind of everyday
aspects of running a practice of things
like spec sheets notes construction
documents and my own ability to turn
those things into a conceptual project
just because that's the way in which I
think has become a big part of what we
do and so to talk about pain is simply
just to point out the fact that spec
sees can't actually be extremely
interesting and to read them there's a
certain kind of attention that you have
to sort of a switch on in your brain
precisely because that's just what you
end up doing and zoning could all these
things are just in trying to get myself
interested in them and in educate people
that work with us and in our office and
we have a very small office to find
those things both they are important
everybody recognizes that there's some
value to actually studying what those
things actually are and then lastly just
the clients don't care about how you
rotate this group heads largely and so
the issues with flash and stuff like
that and those are those are sort of end
up being I think into a set of a series
of interesting conversations you can
have the clients so that you can point
them out to a different kind of audience
and so there is a sort of game of both
presenting that work here and talking
about the sort of flashy and reveal and
then convincing the client there's some
other value to it and I just like that I
just like the idea that things can
operate in sort of separate realms and
have value and warden
way and so I think that's that's sort of
the way in which I think about all of
this sort of deliberate through we kind
of fuzzy pointing out different things
is ultimately they they sort of work in
parallel worlds and they have different
kinds of value to different people and I
think that's just sort of forcing people
to that has been the sort of where we're
thinking about that now but really all
the stuff requires sort of institutions
and expectations inside those
institutions as a point of origin and
it's we've had to figure out other ways
to work it in as weak as we've tried to
develop a practice dolmens yeah we did
[Music]
and now the question is you can fear the
coments in your programs there with the
dummy no some dumb enough as seen by
Peter Som and I don't even need Peter
Eisenman but we can say Amazon domina I
think pure itself is better then as
interpreted
the Descent ways now the question is
that they couldn't be more opposite
right things the dome and accepting
having a support blood relative it's not
flat they materially didn't informality
the chance all these things that make
the doorman at all men another dominant
house which is rationally conceived
supposed to industrialize we built it's
at red cetera with no connection to the
land those little things under there and
we know they've obviously hated the land
anyway so here you have some that's
really deeply connected to the land it's
actually part of this man these were big
rocks that somehow somebody found
somewhere
see dimensional structure as I can see
you fascination with the doorman the
question is that you check the doorman
this is a question a little bit puzzled
by this which is he presented you all
September the difference right and then
obviously I want to apply the torment as
a formal system right and then the
elements family can be any is fine you
know what you typically forget the funny
part of it is the thing you're being
pretty serious and they're all this
funny thing so the program can do funny
things and games - funny things and you
know minecraft can - funny thing
Jennifer and all the other things for
example there's the only game I know by
the way but the question is what puzzles
me is that you go back to meets after
all these acrobatics of the doorman and
they become completely rationally
rigorous form no matter what forms you
make of their compositions actually in a
very traditional wrinkles generally
their missions evident right and
actually end up with the person
in which of course a love but I'm saying
so what's left at the doorman now this
is an amazing thing that we were preset
things and they're thin and what your
lip is is plywood representation or
whatever with nothing behind like in the
stage says I'm by the way love early and
do their lot but is that what it is is
an eclaim inlay and the doorman which is
this very powerful archaeological object
actually anthropological object are you
suggesting that charts won't talk about
these things right now and the fire and
all these things oriental for logical
concept of place and started with our
you know strong enough stone Kitsch but
doesn't matter was these things these
kind of structures and and there are
seven even dress in opposition to tell
me now and then you make your own table
compared to door many things and end up
with means
I'm saying so who needs it don't you
know could go back to worries
you've started opposing that [ __ ] back
I know that me sound Icarus year or kind
of considered opposites but it's a
simple so what do you say to that
I mean first about the LA thing well
that was like I actually think there's
something to it I mean the there's a
bank that Frank Gehry did in the early
80s in the valley
it's a at the time it was a work that
was called the World Bank Center and now
I think it's like a Wells Fargo and it
has a kind of Western Front on one side
of it which is actually the back side of
it so you've been the parking lot so in
what faces the street is a kind of
perspectival section literally like
inscribed with the with the mauryans
administration in the bill into the
building but the front make that the
sort of front which is the back has that
kind of bad sort of thin plywood sort of
like the kind of veneer well right no I
think Frank so this is just to say like
this is a kind of example of a famous
architect adopting certain things that
are that are all over the place in Los
Angeles and so I acknowledge the kind of
superficiality at least as an aesthetic
and some of the projects and it's
something that's come up before and I
think is an astute observation because I
think it's true with respect to this
sort of trying to get from Korb to meet
through dolmens well i mean i kind of
like to tell the story that basically
maybe this story i would tell in the
future is that it's exactly that that
was intentional that there is a kind of
connection through dolmens from Korb to
nice but honestly I think this is a this
is work that's developed over three or
four years longer than that actually
and at a certain point that
architectural references come back into
it as kind of it's reassuring in a way
which is to say we didn't like you can
you can work with these things that
resists clarity and develop a whole
series of tools to which you try to
render them and kind of obfuscate and
make ambiguous things that should be
clear and a certain point they kind of
resolve themselves back into something
else that's quite clear after sort of
three or four years of work I mean
actually convenes of the project is over
send me off to square then this semi up
informal thing whatever diagram and you
know you've talked a lot about fussy and
I'll give you eight G's and all these
things and but of which you could find
as looking at it from an architecture
perspective in East German so here's a
connecting an event architecture but
there's this father or the genus
evocative party took this object in so
many levels much of Italy materiality
the chance the time erosions the
whatever you know the animals hiding
under of people or where it is peeled
oranges in there but the thing is that
in a way or there which is the richness
of this
that you focused on man I think that's a
great gesture over seven goes in going
Ellis you put enough positions to tell
me not many in so it's like you're sold
out in a way you know I'm saying I'm not
saying I definitely saw I think don't
know I'm not talking cheap but in a way
like nothing it's wrong I mean I think
doubt is uh it's sort of it's it's kind
of where you reveal like it's exactly
the sort of what I'm trying to instill
in all of these things in a way which is
to say there's no ideal there's no sort
of perfect model for anything and then
all of that and the way in which you
reveal that is through a certain kind of
skepticism and doubt that I have and
that I would say anybody even different
people who have an alike all the way
back to Poirot like when he basically
shows that the orders are essentially
invented as a series of proportions and
they were highly subjective that only
arises out of a certain kind of doubt
about anything being ideal and I don't
know if the Romans did that to the
Domino I mean I think it's also a kind
of clever wordplay but there's a sort of
phonetic similarity to them that I that
we also like but that all of it is meant
to sort of it at the very least kind of
register and sort of bit of doubt and
sort of models that we hold up as ideal
in architecture and just see how it
happens when we disable eyes them with
weird things
I'm gonna try to elaborate a little bit
where the other left off some of it has
comments some of it is questions but
there's uh there's a moment in the
process where you dropped the stones and
they they stack I think there's an
expert in one of these rows here that in
that you understand that you're
interested in the kind of machining
process that is not so much interested
in composition as it is in an operation
and I may have this wrong but it's it
captures somehow you know what happens
in the roughness of the stone in a kind
of a compositional sense that you're
never able to and then when you start
building them that kind of order gets
instilled in there and one of the so
that's what just a common then one
realizes that within your arm sense of
composition you don't you don't allow
flush this actually there are moments
like this that push out particularly
when we it's not only that you have a
parent with a roof behind it but the
parent that pops out and it forces the
condition of a soffit furnaces which
produces that kind of thickness and
depth where there's only thinness but I
also didn't see moments and maybe I
didn't see it
it's there where you do the opposite
where a volume sticks out of that
parapet forcing the other you know
disastrous potentially disaster
of the ledger and and knowing that there
seems to be many things that you're
interested in or at least many scales in
which you're interested one seems to be
the the kind of the raw composition or
the anti composition the other one is
the detail as you get deep with it
deeply invested in the kind of
configurative aspects of these things
that are either done automatically by
drilling industry or they're done by
nice because what do you do in that
moment that advances some central profit
um knowing that that's where it's gonna
leak oh and right here yeah yeah yeah
this is the sort of idea for a scholar
there's no on matter project that's not
this it's also nothing else it doesn't
work but yeah I mean if it leaks in a
way in which my my thought was that
you're early
you would allow it not to be a skylight
there's many of them they become gutters
it's the same thing so we originally
wanted to on that side so when the
parapet comes down that one project and
turns into a gutter it's the only plate
like we actually wanted that wall to
stick out and sit under that gutter in
this I mean I know right right the
original we originally wanted a ledge
there you want it yeah so we're good
sit out and then the gutter would sit on
top of it and in front of it so it would
be revealed what I think I mean it
there's a couple different reasons one
it just appeals to us exactly what you
just described that there's no that
there's a kind of
there's no there's no desire there's no
middle scale which is to say there's no
desire to suppress those kinds of
details so a minimum like at certain
points people have criticized us of
being it sort of minimalist and it's
exactly not what we're doing precisely
because those things with reveals and
and that in the different ways in which
the kind of common everyday materials
are expressed or interesting to us and
so there is a sort of large-scale move
and then a desire to begin to sort of
aggregate the smaller scale stuff on top
of it to move away from the discourse of
minimalism they're not does the
downspout yeah it does for sure because
of because in minimalism you would work
that embed it to hide it but all those
things would but you'd want to do you
want them to go away and I think they
know but it's pop could our baby be
launched into the resume which is
another these dolmens are not regulates
at all and they're not for something
else and you had it in one of your
analytical drawings where it went
you know down them through the canopy in
the back down and it was it seems to
come from a different discursive space
where you don't see that I mean I can
see that it probably does it's not the
way in which we've described them so
it's the way in which we frame those
kinds of I wouldn't say ready me but off
the shelf is certainly something that
we're interested in sort of directing
attention to without because those are
precisely the sort of moments that we
want people to have what we don't it's
they're not meant to be theatrical
they're not meant to be these things
that you that you can't sort of place it
there's no scale to them it doesn't it
doesn't try to reside in that
conversation and so the sort of off the
shelf I mean these aren't by the way
these aren't off the shelf gutters so
but but then some of the other projects
we we have some of that stuff but we
want to show those things I think
there's precisely related to a kind of
desire to deal with crude things things
that have high tolerances you go to Home
Depot and work with off-the-shelf
projects you're talking with you're
talking about a kind of three inch plus
or minus and all of the tolerances that
you're dealing with with things like
molding gutters and all this other stuff
if we want to be able to play in those
spaces I mean I think that stuff is I
don't have the project here but we did
this project with a with a Duchamp but
double do shop-door the original diagram
for that is just basically two
intersecting walls with a door with
doors that open and closed seamlessly
well the second you started to get into
the dimensions of lumber and then also
just molding which is yet to cover you
immediately produce a kind of hiccup in
the plan that so that that would start
offices are gonna appear cruciform
things actually like that right and then
it's offset it's offset enough that when
you put in a small house on either side
of the wall you're gaining over a foot
into each space whether the rooms are 10
feet by 10 feet a foot either way take
something that wants to be evenly
applied and gives it hierarchy and those
types of things where they are very sort
of their architectural consequences that
extend into the programming of something
like a house I think are valuable and if
we were not trying to be conscious of
those kind of the sort of dimensions of
off-the-shelf products we never would
have made that discovery and so
I'm sorry because you're getting into
all these detailing I keep on looking at
this picture frankly what I see is a big
figure of gesture then you find the way
to make it happen that they kind of worn
anything against you know having their
you know I was a typical American town
front and then you see a [ __ ] hook in
the back or where it is but it's a big
figure a gesture that you want it there
it's certainly another dollar men but
it's not supporting anything I mean it's
a sheer thing soap now clearly it's not
the overview of the operation and it's
already made so what is that the warning
thing I don't know anything there's a
campy like I mean I would my answer to
the fact that it's not a dolmen is yes
it's not adorned but there are certain
lessons learn from them and the and
those things show up it so there's the
work that we do in our office and in our
teaching and then at a certain point
someone asks you to design something and
there are just the things that are on
your desk and that up that are already
in play and so when we did this we were
also working on this right a kind of
thin reveal of something that looks
massive from one side but as you move
around it it becomes thin and there is a
sort of when we when we and this you can
see from the front there's a there's
something about that that we like both
in the way which it received here and
then in the angle in which you would
approach that don't so that is acts that
that the the Virginia project is a
guesthouse that has this thing attached
to it the view from the kitchen of the
main house looks at that broad face
which is which is washed that color and
in almost any sort of foliage
it almost completely goes away as one
looks at it through a forest on on the
sort of blank side and so it's almost
because what they wanted was an
invisible box and then these are just
things that that that what we were
already working with played into what
the clients are actually interested in
and so then as we moved around and we
wanted to reveal about thinness
precisely because of the effects that we
that we had well the qualities that we
liked that's this is pretty I mean it
seems to me in comparison there oh when
you see that video but nothing volume
like in the early days and this seems
pretty I mean yeah for me I would argue
this seems quite bulky and then when you
move around it there's a sort of moment
where you're aware of the thinness and
that was something that we were well
it's dinner I mean I think for sure we
were interested in the sort of optical
effects of some of the sort of when we
were asked to mate when we wanted to
make a dolmen Inn in New York or when we
when we proposed to make one and
something about this sort of massiveness
of that thing never being revealed in
the way if it had been built seemed like
a missed opportunity and so when we made
the other one we could make it with less
material and we work precisely
interested in something that appeared
from one direction to be by massive and
another if given the opportunity would
you have preferred that parapet to be
like that thin plywood edge of the other
projects no I prefer as it is because
it's a mirror reflection of the
technologies of a 2x6 because it's the
dimensions of the of the thing in which
it's constructed out of I would not
there's nothing went to a presentation
of another architect this morning of
very eloquent as eloquent as yourself
and he said he was not interested in in
forms per se but but rather in solving
society's problems and and the questions
that you have to discover in order to be
able to effectively respond to those
issues and then as he flipped through
the book that he was launching I
realized my god what a wonderful amazing
authorship and this guy is really good
but somehow despite all of the different
questions that were being posed by
society by all of the different scales
at which they were he was being forced
to operate all he could do was worse
dolmens that's all he did I have to ant
and then begin my day with dolmens
you're showing Donuts - certainly I
swear to god I'm not kidding the worst
part of my day
so I'm you know since he got the
Pritzker he has been able to do more
work so I've been able to see the work
now built so and this is a Tavares work
and somehow he manages to do monoliths
and dolmens in some fashion or another
and there's a but a deep-seeded way in
which he's been able to evade all of the
things that you are actually claiming or
interesting excuse me and other this
about the ready-mades and you haven't
said the ready-mades i am i'm the one
who said that but he I guess I would ask
you than the corollary question that he
asked himself what is the question and
that drives your your fantasy
or is it is it precisely in the quadrat
that resides somewhere between the
boredom and the interesting I mean I
think there's something at stake with
questions of form and I would and I
would just answer I would I would sort
of respond to just my response would be
to this that the extent to which the
architecture can actually address
problems outside of architecture is I
would say has to be few issues of formal
aesthetics and that's the world that I
work in I believe that that's the case I
just don't think that it came totally I
think you could participate and it's and
it's I would say it's assuring that
people who can make the claims that that
have similar references to the work that
we do and then they they launch it sort
of larger issues but I I'm I am invested
in the degree to which architecture can
participate and sort of in heaven can be
part of the conversation a sort of
larger societal and even political or
cultural questions but I don't I reject
the idea that we can with one project
actually address those issues directly
and so and so I know I know you know but
I would say that that the sort of that
there is a that there is a sort of place
for questions of formal aesthetics and
it can be attached those things I look
for those types of connections and
that's what I that's what I think I
teach at Berkeley and I have to it's
just a sort of matter of survival
honestly there and and also in now one
that I actually truly believe that those
things can be linked and you had to but
we have to be very careful about the
ways in which we do it and that is what
I that is what I think about what I
think about architecture and especially
the way in which I talk to my students
because they are precisely interested in
those issues
I have a question that lecture all know
what you just said about things that
matter maybe comes into it and it was
when you were showing a two-dimensional
work the the images and my question was
sometimes I think you refer to them as
images and sometimes you refer to them
as paintings and so I was wondering what
they were so were they paintings or were
they renderings because you would refer
to them as things that seemed boring as
a rendering like nothing's going on here
and yet they were quite beautiful as
paintings I I probably I would call them
out of habit renderings but I think
probably more honest would be to call
them images which is to say they exist
somewhere in the kind of in this in the
sort of blurry spectrum between
photographs and renderings and that
those two things and the thing that I
think is interesting about the Cornell
box is it works to bring those two
things together so photorealistic
rendering is a kind of funny term for me
precisely because we use photos to make
renderings and vice versa
like we don't there's they don't exist
so cleanly in both worlds and those
images are meant there lot of them are
from they start with photographs and
they try to recompose certain elements
to produce images and so if I call them
renderings thousand where I ought to
have it I would probably more correctly
call them images and is some kind of
blurry space between photographs and
renderings and I am interested in sort
of muddy in those waters oh yeah
No Oh
until recently I you know I didn't even
I wouldn't had enough' didn't live in
enough and in a place that had enough
room to collect anything and so the only
thing that is collecting is the stuff
that I left in Boston when I left there
fifteen years ago and that self storage
unit I've collected that yeah
first office there is my partner Ana's
we couldn't figure out what to call
ourselves and we're sort of skeptical at
the fact that we would call ourselves
anything and Inanna was talking to her
mother and her friend to his dinner but
I was asking whether we're gonna call
ourselves and she was like why don't
know it's probably just gonna be our
first office I don't really think it's
gonna be like the office and she said
well you should just call it that that
is definite restore and that was it yeah
it's probably the best thing it's the
reason why I think we stay together is
because we were both attached to the
names we slowly started working
separately but no one wants to give up
the website first off net just
comforting it's confusing boring and go
back anyway I can I can do both if you
want to I'm trying to figure out if you
are interested in fitting somewhere
within this quadrant or maybe your
placement within
is ambiguous or you're interested in the
dissolution of the diagram itself and so
that's part a of my question and Part B
is you also define what is interesting
through an idea of close reading and it
seems to me that the undertone of the
way you described it was it was a
projection towards close reading and yet
would your work because interesting
through maybe not those reading but at
least close attention attention so I
think attention is a much more expansive
term and close reading applies a certain
kind of textual component of
understanding the work and so you have
to sort of source out and trace through
its lineages and sort of reconstruct the
kind of logic to the thing to understand
it and close attention I think is much
more sort of dispersed just generally
speaking in terms of where I locate
myself in this
I think what's there's a sort of dashed
line around it and like I sort of think
of myself as moving around in it I'm
just not if I am NOT interested in sort
of what happens at the periphery like
the interest eventually turns into
something like excitement actually
talked about this in the book I'm
interested in these things to the extent
to which they sort of are closely
aligned with each other and they tend to
be fairly weak like interest leads to
excitement confusing to lead to sort of
chaos and nonsense boredom I say this in
the book that leads to death that's a
bit extreme and comfortless leads to a
certain kind of laziness that I'm not in
that I'm not interested in um that
there's a boundary around them and that
these things sort of rub up against each
other and somewhere around the center is
what I think of is the most intense
point and I just try to operate in that
for the realm where they're sort of
things that circle around all of it
it says people getting a little bit
anxious anyway thanks for coming
[Applause]
[Music]
