I prepared far too much way too much so
I'll be fast for some of this so we'll
see what happens with that
I'm going to do something that haven't
done in other lectures I see a lot of
stuff that I've shown but I'm trying to
leave another disability in this
receivers but we start with this image
it's loaded with objects and you're
saturating the tongue and so that's what
this is really the first slider lecture
and this is also put into these little
squares that I think there's two layers
[Music]
this is a put out up here I knew I did
not really
[Music]
[Applause]
I'm going crazy and
[Music]
this is another good it is to be good
study not disagree is much easier
doesn't have to this is a short because
[Music]
obviously you know to sail with no on
the sailboat and read is it's actually a
static thing
so the sails all the ropes and
everything tied down the correct angle
it doesn't move is a modern example look
at the v8 and the sails absolutely
static this is an engine with no moving
parts powerful engine but nothing moved
wind is the fuel and the engine is made
of nothing but proportion
with this very wrap this summer or an
airplane looking down at the ocean and
this is a big matter on what
so this is a fix or created by something
movement in Brazil but what is moving
slowly move us moving like it and see
so these are reminders these reminders
to me that there are no fix even though
in here practice memory and there's not
a metaphor for anything
it's just the way last before this
talking about if you take any form
[Music]
that's because the moldo made out of
space in sheets and I think I said okay
did you guys do the reading oh it's here
it's - - hey but there's a description
of how we ended up all those the pointer
one thing here is what happens when you
past and something which is flexible and
more responsive horses focused on it
responds geometrically the report to be
close by is classic this is a wealthy
build Tokyo by kenseth know one of the
co-inventors other one with coal even
[Music]
he's castigated is dressing Nick he's so
now you see the wall had any of you
absolutely readable this son left is the
mole not yet closed
so this reinforces feel and one side and
then standard more cosmic oversized
logic swings evil noise there's almost
nothing in this standard wall warmer
sinks live did let's say the same side
walls and this funky quarter-inch
plywood and steel but it's a lot of
materiality a lot of muscle here would
be for you to do folds it's only for
work and the only real structure the
rest of these just under two times less
anomaly cost cost these materials by the
way post about a dollar a square meter
so they're sent to decree construction
cost and also everything else trillion
is done in black sheets average located
at the builders in strand we also retain
what in the world to do is right off the
global Britain place
[Music]
when he passed an agreeable fabric the
first thing that happens is called a
hairball this has to be mortal Soviet
men and swiss complete exs [ __ ] water
permeability but the cheek EOTech stuff
that we use are engineered so we get an
almost cleaver walking to this very
little commitment for you
we're almost clear water duty that's
excess mix water because it actually was
a builder and you're getting a cement
rich cakes need right at the service
packs and that goes in some couple
centimeters so first bag here's a graph
showing this time that's the company two
black line cylinder this test results
cylinders into the cylinders thunderbolt
impermeable so you can see it as
cylinders about constantly tender
sending these vessels miss petunia mold
injure you don't get that pinky
screaming highway we need larger
sections because good it doesn't even
look like next time
this is standard Collinwood
he's battered two-brains
30 30 foot columns of anyone here's a
little video Zeke's in love Jerky's but
I was happy to see us here goes is no
joint between the autumn of the column
and basic you don't need these have to
hold it and long enough to get about
citizens of hockey and in Stevens up by
the pre-stressing the you believe the
kind of do it is but that's how it works
and I built those former in my check
over 13 unique columns and he spares
this is a drawing I received from Google
to to architects in Korea for building
build on these filled up walls and
company both passed on the ground and
put it up into place and they wanted to
see me crease the saw including oh this
is sketches 7 sketches we made some
models time photographs of arrows this
clutter desolate plaster and a maxi made
several postal code it I to get warmer
deployment in this case under the fabric
are these busts pipes
so we put these in actives remembrance
those little tasks horizontally lifted
[Music]
so when you cast in a back role is an
entirely new nutrition possible unhappy
is you can always back it out of the
flat leaving prostatic and structural
and architectural warm work research
came out of a sculptural practice
cultural so these are the images
sculptures being made these things are
more rare than than now less object and
something happened your action
explicitly action this I mean this
motion and energy which is prison much
like it's right for the open t-slot
because this is not metaphor it's a real
actually to please as paths
and you know the etymological origin of
the word Bacchus a pink death jointly to
do advocacy not only can you see the
zig-zag stitch you see the little clumps
of cement basement walls
this is poverty cosmic knowledge it's
incredibly since it's not the brutal
master and now it's Amelie could mean
something quite gentle and sensual the
instruction details who use former self
ornamented in this action that sentence
is alive and it records its closures as
the strings putting that little
structure this person could be you is
providing the engine business in to make
this empty routine or static structure
and working as a static structure but it
requires an energy included nibbler
constant flow of energy into the system
for high amount energy flow stops no
energy going into the system anymore and
yet the structure still holding so let's
begin
puts that modesty so there's a living
energy running through static structures
which doesn't move it doesn't consume
any energy me this is a beautiful
mystery and I don't know that I have
installed but displays least to my way
of thinking that the things which we
think has got together in fact very much
alive in a different way this is neat
from small to mistreat you parabola
tightening parabola basically so this is
the the stone is confronted and that's
the shape of falling water and what we
have here course is a series of new to
form division at the time which show us
that this flaw was in York and if we
keep the same shape of forming the
cereal cause we created what we expect
in this case that's the hanging chain
above today that we need to learn
tension structure if you take best
bending
[Music]
take that and you let the seal but you
be find that the angle of that lon Nick
along a vertical horizontal and vertical
component exactly matches the rivers
here and horse out exactly matches the
course so but I have my special classes
in this classroom as a business in this
classroom my starter question I felt
that the secret so we would like to be
able to make the very efficient theme
that follows with any me like all balls
kind of structures months of any
community shortened Spanish question
statement throughout so here's to
exactly what I think about angular she
magnet anguish a bigger variable section
or you can just take that rectangle and
especially like Russia down
there's a hot dog for detail and that's
the same back especially visible this
aporia graphically test factory in
Canada over the years and these are just
trying to step out at coal field already
coming up any moment
try this try that so here's a baby buggy
to have them to see without them and you
see we're saving a material immobile
longitudinal section we're also very
good transfer section the feed president
River concreted congressional star
concrete out of the tensions of the
Republic Steel you say the notion we
need to say this is like there was a
Shroud of Turin is that a 12 meters long
and be redeemed shake follow curb
let's test in this piece pattern so
again notionally
this is the amount of concrete be much
safer now understand this is if you know
what the most limiting rectangular beam
as maximum depth anywhere expand so you
could have smashed a moment ago among
Hispanics taking this beam is more
efficient therefore less robust
that's your always remember of increased
robustness recipe
so this is search for efficiency and
here's a novel loaded mortar this crack
a tomorrow and this being like that of
background I showed you there's only one
line of engineering for stable member
can do doing this is still doing my
design design deeply moving done that
classy lady
there's no spirits in the speak when we
want a lot of attention beautiful ocean
elliptic test the crack pattern from the
screen of the steel body to say
essentially the same pepper now doesn't
even pick them up let that be their
business and it turns out he's an arch
they reversed large where the
compression blocks of this water the
straight line and attention pod is it
occurred you imagine the skin right
supported they're together
I pull it like this that doesn't
detention this week we have so we need
to broke it and failed as it we put it
back together again in starch so they
didn't mean an arch this is the
beginning of my more sophisticated
spreadsheets lessons where does the
great thing you know he said he really
is in could in but does it how does it
be massage active in our business so in
the mold making operations but a
structural so we're taking these flat
sheets and seeing the different kinds of
shapes we need'd implements and at the
same time is a serious about a
know-it-all
the series of engineering research in
vibration diversity on the world to see
what the material will intercept and you
know what this was sustainable
discussion sincere and cement paste to
really master materials not only is very
much renders that without to be part of
this great a lot fuel we mix it but the
chemical reactions amazing so I wasn't
super value and the whole world it's the
most used material in world next to
water so the urgency of reducing the
amount of cement is quite readable this
is one way to go about it that is
another way to do this and see if it's
gonna crack like that
but every way that country is cracked
it's not written right how can wearing
compression who has attracted this so
press up we just take away material
everybody right well this is a being
very good good mole and just squeezed
together along with more or less same
distances are actually going you know
but so says this if you that's what we
shouldn't do it because maybe trust when
you take a portion you can get wouldn't
trust this trustees with an older
complex but user based in the hole
you have impact those classic apparent
you all the space community distress and
as a past Nate this book we're doing the
research basically how would I be able
where got the novels and we do a
full-scale group concept and we go and
then some level the shape of these
presses can be also still in my sheets
user address design incorporates crazy
margin blue and people structure did you
connect them together in the middle
entity to get the middle you end up with
bending moment curve so these pre-cut
pieces go together good pop and he was
being asked to do seats and that's it
but another of the bet that means
commuters you have to be able to receive
this diagonal because
and that's another story
okay so this book Vendrell plus three
years over hold on
the only thing missing is the tractor at
how many novels we need what based
chapter so this you know connections
destruction details example under the
disc recession so the powder form and it
goes back at least I mean I read in Rome
[Music]
so in the end of 1990 1800 goofball
James Waller pink shell vault and have a
scandalous very first inside all this
James wall was happening
Jesus James method it was and did well
they did help me get me buddy built in
wallaby like I don't know how many
hundreds of thousands here in the space
below exactly is some extraordinary
leaders very beautiful but notice a
really ugly side I had holy fears and
screen also used in in the world very
low periods of farm expenses and labor
so the material so these are reverse
reverse will shake things
Dragon Balls because the earth bill and
obvious you George Manus is a roof over
the world hoping he was excessively all
over the world in the mid-sixties
speedster and for typology how they did
pipelines of the water and put a magnet
for the foundations filled with so that
standard operating procedure that is the
lightest easily humans baton and then
mark the fall out these unit space
Martin load sanctum one is in motion as
fallen the other static it's exactly the
same but transpose did it experience
who's gotta be part of the others God
these digging life casts
[Music]
my that is my greatness
Ilia missed you have these doing this
life vests because he wants very much
not to design anything but a surprise
so he wants to this is like this this is
from his gravity studies he wants to
know the decision of Christ's body with
the body so he can make a proper
Lucifer's so just this workers develops
this produces Gabonese christine.stone
of death of gravity this is an in
tradition this this crucifix is in the
tradition of the detection of Christ as
a man as opposed to the depiction of the
crisis so it's tested across my abc he
did both kind of disappears are
available indestructible
some of them gravity cabbies and famous
chain endured this exactly
so here's a little experiment where we
stack up some bags and after they
hardened we took them apart and
undressed stuff just ground and put it
back together like a mortgage labels so
that you heard so you had a notionally
kind of makes me perfectly then you can
almost back in the other way the aspect
of this is it's exactly the same thing
but you reverse the gravity something
different happens at the mode of the
opposite of the poetic charged objects
that's quite different
you can still feel them being squeezed
the other pressure in the legal action
and the energy transpose produce mass
pressures in architecture in the machine
modernist fusion either speaks to the
illusion of effortless or illustrated
the newbies imagine selling some
aerobics back where the car goes Bureau
those are the two moments away of charge
and machine modern structures at these
these are tragic
you get City Park well saying it's a
different moment so god these
architectures like pain and redemption
and beauty the suffering and no I will
suffering can be having pasta has
subscribers like just meeting editors my
reading objection into power
so here we go
painting thing you did beautify it with
a layer of last pot early for this
public cotton stick turn it over and use
it as a mold and he passed under the
ball shells but the problem with this
shape is this is the single curvature
[Music]
variable which means his thin shell it's
under tougher throw this way this axis
great straight line anywhere along this
table so we wanted to double curvature
to make accomplished though and here's
some models over 110 models you see what
happens with a flat feet so this is
tested in gonna disown the points before
and it's boring or we call visit the
first level that is the full bubble
forms between the two ovals along the
principal monthly pension stretch and
the fabric
buckles this way like
and there's something to do with the
structure fabric it all has to do with
competition that's what Commons calls
this running shoe industry before
pulling this trigger the compression
force because I don't know so this one
that's the principle of intention to
dress as when you make a mold and then
make a shell back on your fabric you can
see that often
all of these this is never really not a
congressional mom from these supports
where the really compression forces are
highest and would in shale would be most
something luckily we have the
coordination see who's look to me like
above resistance formed by the bubbly
some functional every engineer I've ever
asked to weigh in on a ski semester so
that has happened because no it remains
[Music]
[Music]
electronic so we're going to use the
proper in the country if you induce the
prestress is flat sheet with mode it
hanging it beautifies now here a
funicular arch that has built curvature
coordination is distinction and
this is a design for all three Richard
act like a meeting in the sense that it
believes there's no thrust by further
supports as a very efficient and she
stretches or your depression second
division so we watch the compression
arch of funicular shelf but we want to
tie it back to seven
so that's of England and creat a species
that's the rig the piece of fabric is
put across it and full bubble is drawn
the middle of this fabric identified
turned over this okay first of money can
be better one good one that's how using
using reverse in 2010 my lover's will
say help this beast Patrick hole I
pulled up
then liquid last five years that little
extra string and mold that I see now
it's and then we stand in a full bottle
pull up those from the middle the middle
low voice but this full part of the
fabric you only know that point at the
end is that same want this added
distress itself from support to support
contribute those bits will be turning
over and here's the moment and you see
the full buckles reading well principal
out of the tension stress ruining this
moment so that's our deeper corrugations
impression Chappell
now finish up and because it's a flat
sheet shape we be reinforcing this very
easily and it also sets up production
product is produced all the mold is also
so we wanted it received roll roof it
also invites you so the flat sheet now
he makes that skin look for anybody in
the world without handed me back but it
also again simplifies discretion that
your mind because of all these other
materials are coming lectures will swim
the same even beg
thank you smoke
[Music]
but we can feel the thing pulling its
cuts across the city so it's alive so I
need them there already but I also don't
need anybody that's s is this big
electrical I've never even been to
Mexico I was so this is my girl cover my
cover version of trying to I did not
build and looking at expression sight
imagining it being on the state so I
should possible not knowing how played
with Patrick and spraying it in the air
of reduce models but this didn't see my
[Music]
but every other one antenna off will you
ever made it work so soon
[Music]
now the shapes that these things take
our canonical shaking no images no right
I knew it I even know it so I had to
draw it we grabbed what the hell that
was
and it's a very good section going this
is a six-pack you go like this it's
quite and then those curves are tension
box that's what it's pretty slack I knew
that we're both up and hiding this and
when one of his paper you can feel the
force so here's my slack but here long
long these guys almost opinions force
housing mavericks people forces that's
that's basically this something like
this populated first time it is for this
is another spray that you get to mix
right for these are drawings now that
I've made the manatee business people
what okay what would an architecture to
eat what kind of architecture like that
either
so this person this lecture there are
some drawings I made Hotel every opera
hot oil paintings projected him on the
lightning saber and
Louie boxes like people unhappy puppets
in the Aqua and then built space around
their attorney defense mode this is not
fabric and also vehicle some stitch
using then non-pressurized non energized
memories go past black attached so
that's something else that's what people
do will be that's a close up of Comedy
Circus you seated but you could also
guide they're able to draw with the
wrinkles so usually a piece of fabric I
don't have a photograph of the fabric
the basic fold this way and control will
ask me to line up maybe draw with them
we make them nobody wanted ago but then
at the same time they produce their on
the exclusionary wind so here's a model
of a flat a flat flat - five half drops
the most moments
fabric goes over and he sees a lot of
extra fabric unzip a dress out of plane
you'd be drinking what what if you mixed
are stating the curve drawn it's an
infinite number of solutions please
after the extra back infinite number
busy to go with emergence
so that gets back as we jihad and model
it's great posture look over and now we
have a mole this is the most Haileybury
this is bridge off
absolutely but the push pins are now
just applied with disks I'm going to
make enrollment because it better than
lying inside there's a wonder one test
about work you know CSI pike
sophisticated it smooths out that's the
castings you know that's a laudable it's
like this is Rick Kennedy happy
structure when you make a push pop open
in his luggage if you compress the
fabric along one axis to see if you
press it in two directions that got that
will spontaneously branch watch watch
there's a volume your wife a botanist on
any state or instruction if you make a
special frame you can guide that natural
popular pattern and achievement one in
this case is full of action column so
it's basically two two of these
face-to-face action hurt the card the
match may be different she ate something
beside to see but in this case we want
to match up this goes back to the
thinking about the arches of the Falls
that are driving the diagonal how do you
how do you see those war division forces
that
how important it's unclear to me whether
that cloth that's a photograph of the
former just showed the Benjamin Palmer
and this is a drawing which basically
reduces that is extruded warm you up you
don't have to take the former call the
former going to be the wall into the
wall and the whole team to be pilaster
here's the branching columnist receptor
frontal deceiving a series of arches and
here's the model over why she called
where instead of having the two side
[Music]
wall wall - and of course
Babbitt makes its own relation this is
the scheme for using the same wall and
just knocking out this so here's a
column bulging out the wall inside
that's where whole series of compression
arches that are cast ravines
that's a mattock whoa it gives you us
billions these are from these modern
standard ballrooms there's a pack those
which would push back covers this right
into the wall
[Music]
we have standard wall form and the
fabric formula and which is quite
ordinary way the nanyo Janette defeated
outside look how beautiful four months
out of the year we arrived Mogens and
there's nowhere so we walk the horse
floor this is a drawing em blow this go
inside
it's been long and six months of the
year
[Music]
this is a map of the dullness the
omissions of informal public
transportation horrible it's not
mysterious in his know maverick systems
is that this is attempt to make a map
data system from so funny chaos but it's
quite minute us instead wall and Turkey
nothing is all
[Music]
[Music]
little works I mean doesn't work is
affixed in fact the distances so between
the fourth floor in Istanbul something
heavy kind of really admirable beautiful
this is the drawing this collage very
powerful this is not some pieces many
cities collage so you fragment unknowing
whole really and I think the the
dictionary tells us means a gathering
brutally music after we will read to
parley sculpt that thing so anything is
already gathering some other things
which itself Academy so this is a
painting that I came to the house so
that's a kind of liberation kind of
here's a photograph reoriented and now
black that you discover within the
photographic reality even thick which
was not by this kind of renunciation it
was included in the original you plug
into the little eyes so these are
methods these are methods that are
reformed on target practice and I
visited absolutely time
we're playing with a technical word as
well so this is a larger photo collages
be blocked out and this is a
drug-assisted
and I'll show you how train his worlds
we didn't see photographs in them
see kids how many strong Express with
blocks
so he's three
it's two culture log that 100 mega
collage printed up a piece of paper and
then kind of like blacking it out and
kind of like over the painting grow and
discover these other worlds and other
things other galleries that are
encouraged so you didn't choose this is
the fascinating way Drummond did he did
to choose the genetics cultural a
physical form of genetics that be wished
see c'mon what happens if we hit
she jellyfish a lot of jellyfish and of
course I mean this is happening but now
somebody might say it's happening
already
but the so nipping shoes which direction
you wish to explore and then the
hallucinating part is the part you find
[Music]
these things emerge division exactly the
way you see things in clouds in this era
this is a capacity that we have as human
beings because he named Leonardo tells
his advice remember his exactly this
advice is their doors being walled in
this unit many wonders so this is this
is demented and he had a good collage to
start with keep growing it get a good
chassis and it's completely done so you
can relax and relaxation is a
prerequisite
this is a highly recommended
research phonetic right so these are
things which sell for it got it you get
into this listing the boundary
conditions that you choose the form of
genetics of the thing been based up old
and in this health warming you find the
final date the final homes found but the
same time the researcher finds other
things this way
the fact that these faggot-ass things
look like bodies it's a normal person
this is to say it's normal incidence
your body and anyone else's body the
body every living thing is making
related movement and scale of this so it
creates a certain classic and the quiz
it is the code incidence when you use
multiple copy to get very similar orders
it's the same kind of mechanics at work
and then the other way of doing the
fabric which is a non-pressurized but
this light is all this and I put it to
you with textiles a quintessential human
all of our artificers its textiles which
are the most close and my argument for
this is that event and when you were
born you came at me and what was the
first name in a few white dog with text
and the number of hours you spent in
your life of less you would like to do
this competition more hours than most
but the number of hours is going to be
likely your body's not touching
expertise as a human life itself rather
this this and textile world have both
voices
innately in there so it have way of
speaking an architectural language and
special artificial language which is
innately human and maybe alive in
certain ways complex
I want to do with it I don't know they
put I think move drawings of magic
architectures I don't know what would
America be like this is a this is a
machine this is we shoot stuff is all
this you finish is big machines busted
their solution artists before that is
all bodies bodies and vegetables and
compression aren't you that's the whole
goal this year this is the end of the
lecture but I could go on
this is more
