thank you so much
can I have a seat here at the back okay
great so it's really a pleasure to be
here and to share our work with you so
the way I would say architecture is
really complicated as a discipline and I
would say the forces and the challenges
are only greater and that our
partnership is really a collaboration
and we have a small studio we have eight
people in total in our whole studio and
in a way Howard and I work together so
in a way I have two images one is a view
of the qe2 and Howard came to Canada
from England and when he was about two
years old I heard it was a really bad
crossing and everyone got sick and I was
born in Kingston Jamaica so I came to
Canada when I was about 7 years old and
in a way I'd never seen snow in my
entire life and so in a way both of us
have very different backgrounds and
we've kind of worked together for quite
some time in a way both of us were 9
years old when Expo 67 came to Canada
and in a way this kind of amazing
World's Fair with monorail is going
through geodesic domes of buildings that
looked like Lego and the kind of way
that that representative in effect of
modernity to the rest of the world about
Canada was actually a really interesting
thing and to be a sort of kid sort of
experiencing that and both of us were
there at different times we didn't know
each other and so in a way we live and
work in Toronto and what I like about
this image as you can see the Mies van
der Rohe Towers there's about four of
them in the foreground there's an Edward
Durell stone tower in the back there's a
kind of IM Pei stainless steel clad
Tower but it's actually emerging out of
this kind of gritty foreground so this
kind of industrial kind of tough
foreground
Toronto is an interesting place to live
is a term called allophone and Canada's
founded on this idea that English and
French are the two founding cultures but
the word allophone means neither English
or French is your first language and so
that the kind of description of
diversity is really that there are more
allophones living in Toronto than
Anglophones are francophone so the city
is evolving and changing the city was
laid out by British surveyors and we
have these system of back alleys this is
a photo taken by the kind of official
photographer of Toronto from the 1850 so
you can see this kind of system of
leftover career alleys they would have
had horse stables kind of all the kind
of service things and then this is a
laneway now in Toronto a contemporary
language and in a way one of the things
we've done is map these lane ways and we
realized there were a 120 kilometers of
these Lane ways in the city and then
with my students at U of T we looked at
eye lanes ed lanes T lanes and tried to
classify the types and look at the
frequency and then we kind of remap the
city not thinking about the primary big
avenues and boulevards but looking at
the lane ways as this enormous potential
and looking at them as a form of
densification we found this derelict law
in a back alley with abandoned
Volkswagen vans and Mustang a Chevy
Impala and saw it as a kind of huge
potential and actually built a house in
this Lane way really showing in effect
that you can build a village in the
middle of a city you can take something
that someone else will throw away and
actually turn it into something really
positive and so this is a view from the
inside looking out and then a view from
the outside looking in and this kind of
idea that that architecture can actually
end make it make a difference by seeing
something thrown away and turn it into
something positive in a way our studio
focuses on built work so we don't do
competitions we don't do RFPs we really
just do buildings
and we just typically get a phone call
this is a contemporary gallery called a
corking gallery in an area called a
distillery district so there's a certain
work we take on that really relates to a
belief system so we really believe
adaptive reuse is really very much part
of what architects have to be addressing
and we worked a lot with artists so this
is actually a art foundation in Hong
Kong where the art piece is actually the
floor it's actually a Scottish artist
Jim Lambie it's all metallic tape and so
our response was actually to make a
ceiling that was perfectly plain and and
actually without anything on it so that
you could actually read the floor which
was the art we've done tons of sacred
spaces this is actually a Taoist temple
in suburban Toronto but we've done
chapels for Catholic nuns synagogues and
and other nondenominational spaces
mm-hmm we're always linking our
buildings with water
we're always blurring the boundaries
between what is inside and outside and
we've actually designed spaces for the
public realm this is a pedestrian bridge
that we did in a public park that we
designed and we loved this kind of idea
of seasonal transformation so we
designed a kind of skating Canal
pedestrians walk over skaters go under
it's a reflecting pool and then it's
also inline skating and then we think
about light a lot light is kind of one
of the drivers of the way that we shape
space it's free so you don't pay for
natural light and that in a way it's a
kind of key element in all of our work
the kind of way that we try to amplify
the harsh winter light and then try to
protect ourselves from summer light it's
kind of part of the way we think about
architecture oh this is actually in
effect a dining hall we did for a summer
camp but we created a light monitor so
the whole piece going down the middle is
actually two by fours there's actually a
greenhouse glazing up above that the
ventilates and provides natural light
but with this light monitor
into the space it actually allows you to
tell the time of day to understand in
effect the kind of the sort of way that
light can help to shape your human
experience we live in Toronto at 43
degrees latitude which is a seasonal
climatic zone and we're always trying to
harness light as a force to help us
recalibrate our understanding of place
and context and as architects we like to
kind of paint with light and use light
as a way to kind of understand a where
you are in the world what the seasons
are to speak about seasons we really
think winter is an amazing thing maybe
it's because I came from a place without
winter and so we're always trying to
kind of capture our projects in the
season of winter summer the kind of the
whole range of a variety and I think
it's really different when you have live
in an equatorial climate versus a more
northerly or southerly climate and right
now we're doing work in Hawaii which is
like this amazing place but it is kind
of close to the equator and so this kind
of you don't get this kind of variety of
seasons that I think we're really used
to so we think about our buildings not
only in verdant summer days but also in
winter and we think about them from the
inside out as well as the outside in
this project is in an existing apple
orchard and then we love using winter
water all the year round so we're always
thinking about the way that water
abstracts nature and connects us to
nature in really powerful ways and that
we're always interlocking sky and ravine
water and sky and we love the way that
winter water is able to register these
subtle shifts of temperature and
transforms different states of being
from steam to miss to ice and so we
really try to embed and interlock these
conditions also for us section is so
important at the 2014 Biennale were
asked by the University of Venice to
draw sections at this huge scale of
several of our projects and it was
actually a really
exercise they were like these enormous
sectional drawings and in two of these
drawings so we just did some studies
this is a synagogue on one side and then
a very small studio the synagogue is
this sort of shaped ceiling but it's
actually asymmetrical because it's about
how the light is brought into the
project and illuminates the space at
different times of the year and so so
the idea of how we can use light as a
force as something we think about so the
small studio looks like this where the
the thickness of the walls are all
different and the way that the coffers
actually shaped the light is really key
and then in the synagogue here's a kind
of view or you can see a skylight and
then a clerestory
tied together and that inside what
you're getting are these lines of of
light as opposed to shadow so as
Canadians we actually asked them to turn
the clabber upside down and they thought
we were kind of crazy but we wanted this
kind of illumination of the kind of
clabber and to treat them as light as
opposed to shadow we also loved
materiality and the kind of issue of
making and shaping things is really key
so this is Howard flame cutting as some
cork and steel we do tons of full-size
mock-ups we actually really try to test
and understand the kind of material
experience in our work and then scale is
so fundamental and so we are really
interested in the scale of landscape the
scale of architecture the scale of
building and the scale of furniture so
this is a chair in cardboard that we
designed we work with a manufacturer
named Ian camper we actually who
manufacture and distribute it so these
are actually molded vacuum-form plywood
that become the molds for the chair and
this is a metal version of the chair and
then a Firefly lamp that we all
designed so here's a view of the
woodland purposes it's a mental version
and a wooden version of the same chair
and then we love kind of experimenting
with how to put things together so this
was a sketch of something we designed
where we took a mason jar like a
standard kind of off-the-shelf jar we
started with pieces of mylar inside and
kind of use these to create these
ready-made pieces to create a new thing
and here's the kind of view of it which
was a prototype that we designed for a
project and then we developed that into
a scientific glass so this is actually a
corning glass that you buy from a
catalog combined with organic cast resin
pieces and then a stain a bronze mesh
down below so things that are kind of
very sort of high and low kind of
together and then we embedded a
phosphorescent powder in these cast
organic pieces and so when you turn the
light off it actually glows almost like
fireflies in the jar things you do at
your cottage and the summer and kind of
always trying to somehow embed a kind of
wonder and delight in the work that we
do so there's kind of a interesting
interest in kind of how to put things
together and what they actually mean and
also we love things like door handles so
Alvar Aalto described the door handle as
the handshake of a building and that
it's the first thing that greets you you
touch it it's very physical and we've
worked a lot in 3d printing so this is
actually a a series you saw the drawing
and then you're actually seeing it at
the far end a clay version a wood
version 3d plastic versions that are
really cheap and then the final ones are
actually 3d printed bronze and it's a
pretty great time to be an architecture
student to be an architect because all
of these technologies are actually under
your control you don't need to kind of
like we work with tons of fabricators as
well but the fact that you could
actually do this from your computer you
send it to push a button and then we
actually end up with you know about a
week later and a UPS
and we see what's inside so in a way
this kind of ability to control the
actual outcome as the architect is a
pretty interesting thing when we do a
lot of 3d printing and plastic and this
is a light that we designed that was
inspired by the Inuit whale bones in in
the Far Arctic it's very hard to have
materials to carve with and so they use
everything and whale bones are a kind of
resource so we were really inspired by
these intimate sculptures and what
you're seeing are all the component
pieces that are all 3d printed and then
the light is actually inside and and
glows through the 3d print and then we
actually used it within one of our
projects in a conference room in Hong
Kong so the kind of idea of being able
to experiment at different scales and as
an architect to sq be in control of the
kind of these other this other scale of
intervention for us is really important
so what I wanted to do is just share two
projects with you and but share their
site because for us site is so
fundamental and so important to all of
our work so site scale materiality light
water they're all kind of playing
together and are all important in
different ways in different projects
Toronto is on the north shore of Lake
Ontario after the last last ice age
there was a kind of huge like a mile of
ice and as the ice is receding you
actually scrape and shape the land and
so this kind of post-glacial landscape
is what we live with and so these green
spines are actually the dawn River and
the Humber River art which are the two
valleys and the city is actually in
between the two and that in a way these
river valleys are pretty special in 1954
there was a kind of the perfect storm it
was called Hurricane Hazel Toronto
doesn't have many hurricane
kind of not what happens there and so
there was this kind of like really
catastrophic and you know disastrous
event but what it did is it made us
appreciate that these were the ravine
systems that we have and before that
they had all kinds of factories and
nasty things in them because it was
cheap land and then in a way we start to
appreciate what these ravines were
here's a lone cross country skier in one
of these ravines and in a way one of the
key writers a guy named Robert Fulford
described Toronto ravines as the chief
characteristic of our local terrain and
he called it our topographic signature
and then Larry Richards who was the Dean
of the architecture school called it's
an toronto as san francisco turned
upside down so as opposed to thinking
it's all about the topography it looks
flat and it's almost this negative
topography in the middle of a large
metropolis so here you're actually
seeing this view of the subway encased
in concrete there's a roadway down at
the bottom which is at the bottom of the
ravine and you're seeing in effect the
skyline of the city and understanding in
a way this negative topography I don't
know if you know of Adam a Goya and
really great filmmaker but this is a
film you did call Chloe I think Neum
Lisa and Julianne Moore but here's a
clip like I still from Chloe where the
ravine is actually almost a character in
his film like you're seeing a double
reflection and this kind of image of
being in the city in this modern house
but really being in nature is kind of
the play there so in a way one of our
first projects was actually in the
ravine so imagine your first project has
no windows no doors the only mechanical
system is a pump and there's a ton and a
half of rusting steel and in a way I
would say that kind of what it taught us
was to think about the zone between
architecture and landscape that that in
a way the interesting thing isn't one or
the other but the kind of interlocking
and the interweaving between them so we
were thinking about retaining walls and
grade beams and using real materials and
it made us also
callate about the role of time and
weathering and that in a way maybe if
you designed a good ruin it could turn
out to be a good building so this is a
photo of the same project taken 25 years
after it was built and in a way it was
closer to how we imagined it with nature
taking over and maybe not being so
pristine and and the kind of roll of you
know moss and kind of like the
weathering is actually a force that you
can actually think about as a positive
part of the way you see architecture on
the same property for the same client
this kind of small pavilion and in
Canada our landscape is so huge second
largest landmass in the entire world but
our buildings no matter how big we think
they are are tiny and footprint so
you're always having to make something
small have a kind of bigger reach than
it actually is and so it's really
extending water and bridges and ways
that a small building can actually have
a bigger impact even though it has a
tiny footprint and this kind of and this
is I think something that we think about
a lot as Canadians in the same this is
the same project but we're always also
thinking about how to create a new
foreground to a found condition this
kind of ravine landscape is ubiquitous
but how do we reframe our understanding
of it by creating this foreground to a
background that we actually already know
so this kind of foreground background
condition is ongoing and we think about
it all the time on the same property for
the same client in effect we're using
the leaf pattern of the black locust so
the Carolinian forest which starts in
north and south carolina actually ends
in these Toronto ravines and so the
black locust is one of the kind of
amazing trees and so we took the leaf
pattern of the black locust and we did
water jet cutting to create the exterior
filigree of the building so we're always
experimenting and testing ideas at many
scales and we've been lucky to work with
really great clients where you can
actually work for like you know 20 years
on
same site and no one thing is so huge
but each one is an experiment the tip
the ties to the next so the two built
projects I'm gonna share which is what I
think were was of interest to you guys
was a residence for a group of Catholic
nuns and in Toronto and a project called
the integral house and in a way the two
of them are both ravine projects they
actually are on the same ravine and you
can see one from the other um the
Catholic nuns actually went to see the
integral house and actually loved it and
it helps shape their thinking about what
kind of home they wanted so that's kind
of what I thought we would just so in a
way I've just tried to give you a just a
short introduction to give you a sense
of some of the things we think about as
a way to understand these two projects
so if that makes sense
and then if there's time I have two
projects that are unbuilt and just a
series of experiments with those so so
so first of all sisters of st. Joseph of
Toronto they arrived in the 1850s
religious women who focused on health
care and education and much of Education
for women in Toronto is really shaped by
them
they also founded four hospitals which
is pretty impressive they both built
them they ran them they worked in them
as nurses and they gave all of them to
the government so they're kind of now
public hospitals but a huge contribution
to the kind of urban fabric so when we
started the project we actually didn't
start with a sketch we didn't start with
a model we actually started with a
mission statement and in a way it says
the new home will be a sacred space
dedicated to nurturing community based
on continued ministry and outreach it
will demonstrate simplicity beauty and a
wise use of materials and spaces
accommodation suited to varied needs
will be welcoming accessible
ecologically sustainable designed in
harmony with nature and with flexibility
and
potential for diverse use now and into
the future and that was a kind of
mission statement that we actually
developed with a hundred and fifty
Catholic nuns so not an easy thing that
we actually worked through it and that
became in effect the kind of beginning
of the project and so the idea that
words can have as much power as a sketch
and it became when we act when we were
decision making our decisions we would
refer back to the mission statement to
see if we were doing the right thing
the sisters wanted the most ecologically
sustainable building they could afford
and so in a way we work back and forth
to see what what could they afford
budgets kept changing all the time and
it was very much about the the finances
and the real benefit many buildings in
North America are leads buildings the
sister said we actually don't believe in
leads we actually aren't marketing
ourselves to anyone we have this higher
calling that's more important and so so
this is not a leads building because
they kind of thought it was a bit bogus
and in the end just wanted to do the
right thing at every stage so in this is
a kind of act so but what you're seeing
is that there's a double-loaded portion
and then two wings that are single
loaded there's an 1850s house that we
connect to and there's a chapel in the
curb that is the reflecting pool every
time there's a curb it's never occupied
by by private spaces but always communal
spaces so dining areas or sitting rooms
as opposed to individual rooms and then
we actually again do mock-ups so what
does a a monastery look like in the 21st
century we actually use these long
vertical fins that are sunshades and
that becomes part of the exterior
elevation we worked with really great
companies in Europe doing curtain wall
systems they built large sized mock-ups
they tested out them in all these labs
with all these micro points it's a bit
like you're having a check-up with sort
of leads tied to you then they blast
and we indebted and then they make a ton
of revisions before all of the external
pieces go into production so kind of
very high-tech but we said if you want a
sustainable building then your envelope
has to be the best envelope you can
afford and it will pay you back every
single day so here's a view of the
project Institute they really wanted to
redefine in effect what is a contour
line and that they love the organic work
that we had done and so we really work
to reshape in effect the line between
city and ravine and what you can see is
that in the kind of curve is actually
the chapel which is sitting in a
reflecting pool and here's another view
of it where you're seeing the
residential neighborhood and then the
ravine edge and in a way a kind of
negotiation between the two the fatter
piece in the middle is the double loaded
piece and then the two single loaded
corridors and then here's a view of the
chapel in the reflecting pool and you
can see the skyline of the city in the
distance and in plan and this is at the
lower level their congregational meeting
rooms for the whole order not all the
sisters live here so there is room for
54 sisters but their order is larger
than that and then here you can see the
kind of chunkier middle piece the chapel
which is accessed both from the ground
floor in the second floor and then the
single loaded wings that go off to
either side and then a section where you
can see the kind of skinny part of the
building and then you're viewing the
chapel and then the building elevation
beyond and then again you're seeing a
section cut through the chapel where you
can actually go from the sisters rooms
right into the second floor of the
chapel for the most infirmed sisters and
then a view of the kind of may 1850s
house when they bought the site they
said can we move it can we tear it down
because it's really not ours so I spent
about a year convincing them that hey
they should keep it and B we could
actually make it part of this larger
Sowell and you can see this canopy which
is the main entrance of you from the
sidewalk and the kind of foreground and
then in winter you're seeing the turret
of the existing 1850s house on the right
and then the kind of view of the main
elevation on the left and here you can
see these shaped fins so there they are
weathering steel on the outside and then
on the inner side is actually powder
coated aluminum and they go up the
building and they actually provide
shading for these long hallways and then
another view of the entry canopy there
are about 60 for geothermal pipes that
do all the heating and cooling for the
building we have you know we collect all
the rainwater we have PV panels on the
roof and each one was kind of like that
we had a long wish list which you saw on
that little sketch and then it was kind
of can we afford it price it back and
forth prices kept going up and down and
at certain points we had to make
decisions and in the end it's actually a
pretty amazing green buildings but it
wasn't like like we want to do
everything it's like can we afford to do
it is this the right thing will it
really be from a life cycle costing
perspective something that will really
benefit the building over like a 20 40
50 year time period so and then in
winter so we always think about what
does winter look like and what does our
building look like in winter and so here
you're actually seeing these single
loaded corridors they're illuminated
they have white oak on the inside and
then the sisters rooms are on the other
side and then a view from one of the
upper levels you're seeing the top of
this entry canopy this kind of the view
of these kind of fins sort of collapsed
and then and then the residential
neighborhood beyond the lobby where
you're getting the skinny lobby we
designed what we call our peanut columns
it's like a double column fiberglass
liners to create this kind of double
reading and then a single column the
reflecting pool and then on the left is
the chapel and then B
is the ravine so here's the double
loaded portion and a lot of the nursing
stations rehab shared facilities are in
this kind of this middle portion all the
elevators and then the single loaded
corridors which we saw as almost like
urban porches so this becomes in effect
these like fill spaces every second
window is operable so you can actually
live in in this home open windows and
have flow through ventilation and in a
way in buildings like this that doesn't
often happen also sister's rooms have
windows in them so that you can close
your door open your window open your
window and your door and there's
different levels of engagement mmm and
then a view of the chapel sitting in the
reflecting pool where you can see the
direct relationship between the sisters
rooms and the chapel the reflecting pool
and ramps that head you out out into the
landscape and then again sections
through the chapel where you're seeing
the the relationship between the two
this is the threshold to the chapel
where you're actually seeing this kind
of water as part of the the disconnect
from the main building and bringing you
into the sacred space and this is the
second floor of the chapel where sisters
will come in wheelchairs or it's
sometimes in a kind of a moving they'll
move beds in here and so it allows the
most infirmed sisters to be part of the
liturgy to be physically and visually
connected to the service and these are
large wooden fins that direct the light
and also are where we put the Stations
of the Cross which they we they brought
from their old monastery into this new
one so we fix them up and then remounted
them and then of you in a way this kind
of idea of pushing and pulling so the
building is pushing into the landscape
but the landscape is being pulled into
the building at the same time we
designed all the liturgical furniture
like the Ambo the altar to kind of be
part of this experience where it was at
not an impediment but visually again
connecting you to nature
so here you can see the altar where you
can look almost right through the base
of it and where the glass pushes in and
the water is pushing in and the building
is also pushing out and the view at
night looking back so you can see this
kind of play in winter and then they
also does not asked us to design the
eternal flame which is a kind of really
important part of the project because
it's it needs to be on all the time and
it becomes symbolic of the kind of fact
that that the community is alive and so
so we designed this special piece for
them as well so in a way in the same
valley is a project called an integral
house for a pretty amazing client he was
trained as a mathematician but he was
also a concert violinist and he wanted
three things he said I want curves so
curves were part of the program
he said straight lines are boring and so
and that he was a calculus professor so
he was not only interested in like he
didn't want a curving line he actually
wanted a shaped curving volume and so
that was his first request his second
was a concert hall for 200 people in
every house he'd ever had he had
concerts at the scale of 4050 people
which as much of chamber music started
in people as cells and there's a very
strong tradition but he just wanted to
do it at a bigger scale and then he also
said it had to be architecturally
significant so here's some very very
early sketch of kind of thinking about
it we built tons of models this is just
one of a whole pile
and then in a way we wanted to kind of
this idea of how do you paint with light
how do you actually develop a kind of
piece of a building facade that
addresses the kind of light condition of
43 degrees latitude so we actually did
that by actually trying to create what
we call almost like a golden wooden
curtain and you saw an image of that
earlier so the way we ended up
tectonically developing it is having an
upper portion with 97 different fins and
we did them all this is a drawing with
all of them that was a computer file
that we shared with our fabricators hmm
and that the lower fins are deep the
window mullions are embedded into the
side of the fin so you actually don't
see a window frame you just see glass
and wood there is a frame but it's
actually just kind of embedded inside so
it's just not visible and this is a kind
of series of mock-ups but you're seeing
everyone is numbered and they relate to
the image earlier before and so each fin
gets fitted then brought back to the
shop then kind of treated with heavy
duty marine finishes and then brought
back onto site and here's a mock-up
where you're seeing a few of them lined
up and that in a way all you we wanted
you to be aware of is light passing
across wood then below that and above
that or what we call our standard fin
and when you see this in the draw you
can see an e pay cap at the top the
glazing goes in and again it has a frame
but you just don't see it and then
there's a shaped wooden piece that
actually protrudes into the room and
every fourth pin is a symmetrically
loaded structurally so it's kind of like
a structural cage clad in wood and
here's a full-size mock-up of that so
the darker wood at the top is the IPE
and then the glazing would butt into
each side and then you see the shape
and here's a portion where you're seeing
this more repetitive bin as opposed to
the one where all of them are a little
bit different and then here's some
studies where we're looking at the
heavier portion up above and the lighter
portion below so we wanted it to feel
almost like revealing the ravine to you
as you enter the space so at the beach
floor it's denser and you only catch
certain views and then by the time you
come down to the main performance space
the whole thing opens up so here's a
series of studies and then here's the
actual space where you're actually
seeing it at a certain time of year and
our client is there and they're kind of
setting up and and then we actually
documented the same from the same
vantage point every season so this is
spring in summer it's this verdant wall
of green then in the fall it changes
again and then in winter it changes so
the foreground stays the same
none of the fins are operable nothing
moves but the landscape actually changes
quite dramatically and and spatially you
experience different things and then
this is a view from outside looking at
it and in a way we're in the largest
city in Canada and in a way we're trying
to reshape our relationship to nature
and in effect recalibrate the line
between city and nature through our
built form here's a view from the
entrance which really reads as a
two-story building and almost slightly
miniature and scale and then from a
section you can see that on the ravine
side it's actually five stories so you
actually enter at it at the street level
and you go down a full floor to the
performance level and there's still
another for two floors below that and a
floor above you so this topography which
is very much part of the idea of the
city is actually embedded in the
experience of the house cross section
where you enter at the upper level where
you see the railings and you descend
down to this double in this double
height performance space with regular
floors below and above
in-plan at the lowest level you're
seeing in effect outdoor terraces that
extend into the ravine then there's a
kind of that number two is an extensive
green roof and gallery spaces then this
is the ground floor of the performance
space and then the upper floor so you're
seeing the double height portion is
where the X is open to below and then
living rooms and and other spaces so
here's a view from the entrance and this
is what happens when two hundred of your
closest friends just come over for a
little visit we this is sort of looking
in effect along the contour line so
we're really creating views where you're
seeing the extent of the contour lines
in both directions and Toronto's a very
Victorian City and so normally there's
all kinds of fire restrictions window
openings and we were able to really work
with creative ways of sprinkler ring and
doing things to open up these side views
that are normally very hard to do we
also worked with bronze leather
stainless steel mesh to really create
this kind of sensual experience through
the project and always kind of for
grounding again this idea of foreground
relative to background so the ravine is
the sound condition and creating new
foreground relationships and that the
stairs we actually thought of almost
like landscape stairs so you kind of
descend down almost into a landscape
itself and then you know this is what it
looks like when a couple hundred people
are there with you so in the stairs
we're using cast bronze stainless steel
mesh the wood in the back is actually
white oak and then the walls are
poured-in-place concrete these big
structural elements one is a elevator
the other is a fireplace and then a view
where in effect the dining room becomes
a balcony for the performances and so
these domestic spaces actually become
more public at different times of the
of their use and then this kind of sense
that your you've entered a ravine and so
even though you're inside you feel like
you're more outside so here you can see
the denser bins above and the more
regular fins below and every fourth one
is structurally loaded from top to
bottom
and then a sense of the gain this kind
of winter light that we have and the way
that things transform quite dramatically
and then you know again this kind of
experience as a kind of as part of
concert and then the sort of sense that
you can continue to descend but you're
almost outside the building as opposed
to inside and then again using a white
oak a limestone and kind of thinking
about how all these materials come
together within the project so this is a
different view of that same stair which
is kind of feeling more outside than
inside and then at the lowest level
there's a pool and again thinking about
foreground in relation to background and
this is a winter view or the pool and
the water even though it's inside
becomes a reflection of the ravine on
the outside and then the same experience
in the summer there's a 35 foot long
window that's on a hydraulic jack that
descends totally into the ground and
then you're really outside and then we
designed a stair which is all a
hand-blown glass it's that there's a
skylight above there the treads are
glass that bring light to another stair
below and these are hand-blown plates of
glass they're laminated on the back and
then we have these bronze Clips so
they're the stair is viewed from
different parts of the project it's
you're seeing little glimpses of it and
never the whole thing till you actually
are in the stair itself
and this is a view of the back of the
stairs so there's a white laminate at
the back and then these cast bronze
clips look like musical notes and there
is a stainless steel raw cable
that holds the whole structure up so
it's kind of like a piece within the
larger piece and and then the concerts
have been amazing the musicians have
described it as actually like being in
an instrument and so and what's been
incredible is the contemporary dance
music this is Steve Reich and a Toronto
group called Nexus this is Philip Glass
pretty wild to be kind of in a space
where he's playing and the music and the
space are sort of working together and
then you know Boys and Girls Clubs local
charities that are really in the
neighborhood and then also this is the
Altenburg connection where it's actually
voice and pianos so the kind of range
has been pretty remarkable and this kind
of again the way that in effect you're
not just you're in an instrument in a
ravine in a city so the kind of layers
are pretty interesting so so what I
thought so those are two built projects
and I think they were really the kind of
ones that I thought you guys were really
interested in when you invited me there
are two projects that are in the works
and I thought it would be great to show
work-in-progress that as opposed to
finish things that again are a lot of
experiments so I'll go through this
really fairly quickly we've been working
in Moscow this is a site on the Moscow
River that used to be owned by the czars
it's an amazing pine forest and we love
forests in Canada but this is a pretty
special force it's actually a Scots pine
there's very little understory and the
trees are truly majestic so you're
seeing a summer and a winter version of
the same forest and our project we often
start with really like crappy little
study models but the idea was that it
was a series of terraces in the
landscape so that's kind of the kind of
bigger idea and that we actually worked
with sketches and
we wanted to create a whole series of
porches and we actually studied them in
drawings but also sectional models where
you're seeing the way light comes in the
role of fear so you've experienced the
light but you don't necessarily see
where the light is coming from it's
almost like a big long ship in the in
the forest the client said take down as
few trees as possible
which is really a challenge because
there's a ton of trees and so we kind of
wove this thing through the forest
itself and it's extremely elongated
the kind of main portion that's
double-height is actually shaped bricks
and then there's a long loge apiece and
all of the piers are also clad in brick
so here you're seeing the kind of
double-height the main store project and
then this long linear galleria and then
a smaller program at the other end and
then sketches where we're actually
trying to explore this kind of brick
facade and we work with a company called
Peterson tangle out of Denmark and so
here's a mock-up in our studio so we
actually had them ship all the bricks
and we had Toronto bricklayers
lay them up and you're seeing all
different kinds of grout different
colors rape joints flat joints to really
test how that should be done they
designed we designed 24 different bricks
and work with them and you're seeing all
of some of the different ways that the
shaped bricks create fins pointed fins
and then this undulating brick wall so
we were working really directly with the
brick company to create these specialty
bricks for us and here's a mock-up on
site and in a way what we loved is we
have we're combining the bricks which
are very handmade hand glazed with these
horizontal lines of Steel and that we
actually wanted them to be snow catchers
where Moscow is 54 degrees latitude and
the way that in effect you get this kind
of these little kind of mountains of
snow in the winter
and the building actually is thinking
about that and absorbing that and
accepting the winter climatic zone which
is about six months of the year and also
thinking about the other seasons as well
so he these are these are it's still
under construction but you're actually
seeing this brick wall with the forest
in the foreground and you're actually
seeing this kind of looking along the
face of it so these are the brick piers
and then this is of you taken a little
while ago where you're seeing the kind
of low Sun angles the horizontal
elements and this kind of undulating
shaped brick so not finished but in
progress in a very different part of the
world we're working in Hawaii and so
this is an area on the east side of Oahu
of one of the seven eight islands and
that those two islands on the right or
the mocha Luis which are very famous
right behind you there's a kind of
mountain that looks like it's like a
sculpted piece it's like a kind of
curtain but it's actually all stone so
the years of water and wind have shaped
this kind of incredible landscape and
that so and these are the mocha Luis
that you can see from the beach and so
part of the project is to link these two
natural elements and normally when
you're on the ground floor you can't do
that so we put all the public rooms on
the second floor and then we
experimented with different umbrellas so
this is a series of studies of is this
upper roof and we work a lot in like
plywood cardboard basswood and we're
sort of looking through the kind of
evolution we 3d printed all of these
connector pieces and really try to see
it as this kind of big wooden umbrella
so this is a perspective where when you
enter the house you're actually in a
double-height space and this wooden
piece actually becomes your canopy when
you first enter and then as you go along
there's
guy lights in it and you're walking
along toward the mocha Luis and this is
that what they call a lanai space it's a
covered outdoor space which is very
Hawaiian and then you also look back to
the mountains so this idea that the kind
of these two natural features which are
kind of almost invisible now become your
primary experience then at the same time
you can't avoid anywhere in Hawaii not
seeing this kind of idea of nature
embedded in everyday life everyone's
wearing these aloha shirts with kind of
like patterns everywhere it's just like
and you know every consultant we work
with or all like I've never met one that
doesn't have one of these shirts
different colors different days of the
week and but it's really a way an
embedding of nature into the way that
they live and so we were really inspired
by this and so we developed a concrete
waffle slab for the main floor and
actually wanted it to be a kind of more
as opposed to generic more specific so
this is the whole process where we're
again working with paper and then
working with plaster casts and kind of
really trying to kind of develop kind of
a language then multiply it so this is
kind of looking at a kind of series of
them and then we illuminated them then
we worked with a company outside of
Toronto and this is the positive so so
the positive is done in styrofoam and
then painted with body paint to be kind
of like kind of smooth then these are
the yellow are rubber molds done from
the styrofoam positive then every piece
has they've built a box around it
because but this is ultra high-strength
concrete and the concrete is the
pressure is so huge the ultra
high-strength concrete has no rebar in
it it's all these fine fibers and it's a
stronger than steel so it's incredible
and then the pink ones are what they put
in
side the mold so that as they're pouring
it so there's a kind of whole sequence
and then this is a mold so you're seeing
the texture of it and the shaping of the
coffers and then we'll add the LED
lights inside so we did a full-size
mock-up of kind of one bay looking at a
few different conditions
that's the above you can see them
pouring the concrete in it and then this
is the below so here it is like they
just did it in part of their bigger shop
and we did four petals that also a
slightly edge one of the edge conditions
at the same time and then a view from
the underside so you can imagine that
being your entire canopy on the ground
floor so really working with lighting
consultants fabricators structural
engineers to kind of really test ideas
that are not but kind of you know I'll
order that from a catalog but really
developing a language there really is in
keeping with the kind of architecture
that we're trying to achieve so I guess
I would say in closing we really think
about site as in place is so essential
to everything
light is a critical factor in shaping
our thinking winter summer that the
seasons for us are really important to
celebrate and to appreciate and then
this kind of need to really address
issues of materiality and craft which is
something that is I think becoming lost
at this part of the 21st century but we
have tools that can certainly allow it
to become much more vital in
architecture and I think we've been
really fortunate to work with really
great clients that are quite varied but
really are interested in architecture as
a discipline and often hard to find and
very rare so and then I gained this
interest of the scale of landscape the
scale of architecture the scale of
furniture and then all of the kind of
fittings are all important because
they're really about creating very rich
spatial experience
says that move from inside to outside
and the world that we're in you know
everything is so specialized so there
are you know interior decorators and
there's envelope specialists and there's
landscape architect there's and you can
see the dotted line where one person's
scope ends and the other person begins
and sometimes they don't hang together
and you can you all you're reading is
the disciplinary boundaries as opposed
to thinking about the spatial experience
so I guess we're trying to kind of maybe
operate in a much less corporate way a
less professional way maybe because we
really think about all of these scales
together we think about all you know so
even though we're not landscape
architects we design the landscape but
we love working with horticulturalists
who really know their plant material and
and sand as opposed to specking a door
handle we'd rather design a door handle
that actually has a specificity related
to the place itself so you know
different budgets different scale
projects you you focus on different
things but I guess we really enjoy that
kind of range of kind of ways of
thinking about design and that really
it's more about a spatial experience
that is the final outcome that then it
kind of you know the kind of the dotted
line of where one discipline begins and
the other end so we're really not so
focused on that but thinking about kind
of multiple scales at the same time so
thank you very much
you guys have any questions we have a
small studio we worked on all a coward
and I work on all the projects so it's
not like your project my project and so
and we just make lots of stuff so so and
we I would say that you know a more to
the corporate office different
principals would have their own projects
there would be a kind of way of you know
the teams that you build kind of create
that sort of separation and that in our
studio it's not big enough for that to
happen so it's a bit more like your
space out here where everything's all in
one room and you're kind of like you
know you can't avoid knowing everything
so about everything any other questions
as opposed to the sketch how did that
like significantly different
so the question was about the Catholic
nuns and how does starting with a
mission statement as opposed to a sketch
impact the project so I would say with
the nuns we were dealing with in effect
150 clients because they all had
different opinions there was a group of
five women that were elected every four
years to be the their leadership group
and we went through three leadership
groups in the time that we work with
them so so in a way that that was
changing and but we wanted to ensure
that this was their home it wasn't like
you know you design a university
building people come and go it's a kind
of there's this was actually their home
and so we it was kind of important that
there were a set of values linked to the
design and so I would say that mission
statement is more about what their
values are and what they believe in and
that it was a guide to help us make
decisions so it wasn't the design but it
was actually a way of decision making
when you have like a client that's kind
of like a hundred and fifty as opposed
to one it allowed them to speak with one
voice through the mission statement and
then we use that mission statement to
help make decisions so so I guess it was
a kind of it was a way of embedding who
they were into the design process
without everyone saying oh I wanted this
or I wanted that like it wasn't like a
list of things that each person wired
but it was a it was a way of guiding it
was it was articulating for not just
what their values were as a community
but what their values were as it related
to this new home that we were making for
them so so and it was I think you have
to design not only all these scales that
you have to design the process to
realize a building as much as the
building itself
I just want to say that I find you
weren't really rushing and I appreciate
you going through the drawings that kind
of lead up to the projects and the
detail I had a question about the house
or whatever else yep and I wanted to
know what how acoustics may be really
good question so our client because he
was a concert violinist acoustics were
super important but what he said is that
I didn't want to he did not want us to
consult an acquisition at the beginning
because he figured they would say it
should be a shoebox and he didn't want
to live in a shoebox so this was his
home and it was this amazing you know
location relative to the ravines
so we etched and it was very complicated
zoning wise so there's a there was this
conceptual zoning envelope and we
couldn't penetrate it was a whole bunch
of the zoning stuff and so what we did
is that one of the early models I showed
you that one looking in plan this big
wooden model that we made we actually
had several acquisitions come to our
studio and we said don't do any
calculations but a do you think it's
gonna work and B how do you think we can
make it better and so they all came and
they looked at the model and they kind
of thought about it and that that they
said they all said intuitively that they
thought it should work because of the
curvilinear forms and the kind of but
they then they had tons of little
suggestions so the shaped in so so if
the one wall is doing this there's
another liner where the balconies for
the dining room and the kitchen and the
living room are these upper balconies
and they really talked to us about ways
to shape that profile the way that the
materials that you could use on that
inner wall could rich and rich make the
sound richer than it was and so there's
and so we really listened to their
suggestions that didn't impact the
actual space itself but actually helped
to kind of amplify the the space
through sort of profiles and material
selection and so so we were on our kind
of like we were kind of nervous the
first concert was pretty amazing because
our client commissioned a composer to do
a piece and and it so during the
rehearsal you couldn't really tell it
wasn't until there was an audience of
200 people and the musicians and the
sound is pretty remarkable so in a way
they've actually done some recordings in
there Philip Glass really liked it as a
space and and there's just been such a
huge range of different kinds of musical
events there that's been really really
great and our clients position was that
arts groups need to build make friends
they not only need a place to perform
but they need to build an audience
around what they do that's dedicated and
loyal to help support them and so he was
using this space as a way to it was like
a friend building space and so he
wouldn't necessarily write them a big
check but he would let them use the
space as a way to kind of build their
audience does that kind of answer your
acoustics question
thank you so much for showing us your
work I was very struck in the beginning
about your talk that the number of times
you referenced being in Toronto and so
the whole idea of developing a regional
architecture that draws so much
information from the locality the
geography the kinds of trees that grow
there so much about the evident law of
light are there is there enough and I
asked this question really is someone in
a school is are there another set of
preoccupations perhaps that inform your
work that are not so regionally bound
but perhaps tie into a set of ideas of
architecture that come together in this
and practice that seems to be very much
driven by thought and experience I think
it's you know I would say for much of
our early work we could we could
literally drive to every project that we
were working on they were all within
three hours of our studio and now we're
working in Moscow Hong Kong Hawaii so I
would say that the kind of issues that
you have to address in it's a it's an
interesting question I would say that
there are themes that go through the
work regardless of the place and I would
say but there's a kind of under trying
to understand the specificity of that
place as opposed to something that is
generic so I would say that the kind of
question of what the appropriate
materiality is for these different sites
is a kind of ongoing question and we do
a ton of research to really think about
the kind of what is the right and
appropriate expression you know just
Moscow is different from you know sort
of Hawaii or Hong Kong so it's a it I
would say it's been really interesting
for us to kind of expand the kind of
conversation beyond the kind of you know
local context and to think about these
questions in different places
yeah
curious
so the question is about using a lot of
glass in Canada I mean I think that in a
way much of our construction is
contemporary as opposed to kind of a
wall with a punched opening I think that
in a way the performance of glass is
pretty amazing right now and that it's
never really just a glass box but
actually used in combination with lots
of other things so so I think that it I
think that it's definitely possible and
you know I think you just have to think
carefully about wall assemblies and you
know the way things are constructed but
I don't think it's really an issue about
glass vs. built wall or you know I don't
think that should be the driving thing
that you think about
great thank you
