so thank you Michael very much for that
wonderful introduction and of course
Cooper Union for inviting me to be here
I've wanted to come here and get
involved in some capacity for a very
long time of course I want to thank all
of you for coming out to and I know the
pressure sometimes why I'm glad
decompress
is something that's quite a force so I
appreciate you coming out
so my lecture is titled speculative
future is imminent and imminence and
imminence with an i is sort of an
impending condition and imminence within
a is sort of an inherent state of being
and I think that's a good way to sort of
in a very obliquely categorize a kind of
work and world building that I do I'm
gonna discuss my practice architectural
/ artistic practice in sort of a
chronological order and I always like to
begin with my thesis projects I feel it
encapsulate s' two things the first
being my conceptual narratives that I
deploy and as I begin to explain the
idea behind my thesis and discuss other
works you'll see how that comes together
the second thing is that my actual
creative process I do a lot of analog
and digital sort of back and forth
exchanges that might work starting with
sketches or starting with a 3d model and
printing out the 3d model renderings and
sketching over and you know scanning it
back in so you'll see a lot of that it's
very much sort of maintained in my
thesis it's called a bhikkhu phenomena
and so you're looking at a series so
this is a blend of computer model as
well as trace drives so I'll try and
grease
this is my camera there's a little bit
of cultural background of that okay
I'm from Nigeria I'm your robot and
you're Obama believe that life is
cyclical right so you were born you live
you have children you die you join the
ancestors and you repeat that cycle
there is a spirit that disrupts that
cycle that get in having a child it's
called an ibeacon spirit and it sort of
deals with this belief that when a
family may lose several children at a
very young age that that child is
inhabited by the Eco spirit so that's
very deeply entrenched sort of a
cultural belief in Yoruba culture but it
does have a political application to it
calling the people from and a bhikkhu
phenomenon and what that means that it
actually has a positive application so
the Abiko and sort of the cultural
understanding disrupts life but in the
political and socio-economic
understanding it disrupts this cycle of
violent and military coups or the beacon
phenomenon sort of positive outcome of
Nigeria's political trajectory as it's
sort of you know evolves towards a
democracy so I said that that idea is so
so so that's about taking this myth that
applies or it's a belief that applies so
it's a sort of cultural condition and
then intentionally missed co-creating
that myth and applying it to the
political social spectrum so I kind of
took that as a sort of one - one way of
floor making at the time there was a
program called forms these so this is
1999 and formzee has a function called
quick paint and it's a completely
useless function it doesn't calculate
correctly along the z-axis so if you
build a model of a house and you have a
bad
in a front door and you hit the quick
paint render it could throw the back
porch in front of the front door so just
makes absolutely no sense it's almost
insane to me that it was part of this
early CAD practice but true to the way I
like to use computer software I use them
what they're not intended for how they
can work with articulating my narratives
I saw it
disrupting the z-axis similar to the AB
you can kind of disrupting time you know
that's sort of progressive so I started
with building a 3d model and I guess
I'll click through some of these I
started with building a 3d model of a
king's palace which existed from
pre-colonial through colonial times in
Nigeria and then what I did was I I said
cameras in different rooms in different
areas throughout this model and I use a
quick paint and I ran four iterations of
it one in ten seconds one of twenty
seconds when it is one in thirty seconds
so you're looking at the fragments the
intentional Miss reading of this palace
structure right and and so what I then
did is that I took each of those
fragments from all the different
quadrants in all the different corners
and I projected them back in the plan
and then from there I pieced them back
together and then extruded and built
four separate buildings four separate
constructs so it's kind of a very
self-indulgent
esoteric way of kind of for making right
and thinking about generative processes
and the blend of digital and analog and
I can never find drawings on a hard
drive where it
which might perceive most of you guys is
it drive somewhere the kind of forms
that came out of it but what I really
like about this is you see the computer
model but then you see all of the
overlays and the lines and you trying to
figure out exactly how one projects
perspective back in the plan so that
idea of really belaboring the
relationship between digital and analog
is it the root of a lot of what I do
both as I you know pursue conceptual
political ecological environmental
narratives simultaneously thinking about
how I visualize those narratives how the
way that I create either a 3d model or
or 2d drawing how it conveys the ideas
that I'm after so I feel it's a very
kind of good entree into the work that I
do
it is also an absence of going to an
arts Fine Arts program or an MFA program
there were the drawings that I used to
apply for residency some visual artists
the first residency I did with was with
lower Manhattan cultural Castle and so
my thesis drawings were in my
application for this and so this was
2004 and this was shortly you know just
a few years after 9/11 and the fcc's
located financial district or it was
before 9/11 and it was displaced and in
return in 2004 Stiles part of the sort
of first class of lf-cc residents back
in the financial district so there was a
loose thematic surrounding the idea of
sort of violence and renewal so I came
up with this fictional office called NYC
duct department of urban codification
and kinesthetics
and I used that as a way of so
examining some urban planning
organizational issues also once again
working through my aesthetic and so this
is the early days so I'm still very much
heavily in architecture mode in a
process and so my collages are very much
you know the sort of sketching
elevational perspective or note-taking
so a lot of sort of processes one
develops the project this is called
subway is intermediary space so I had
four of these but I really only like
three so usually I only show three
Subway's intermediary space was sort of
my response to being in New York City
and thinking about the way one sort of
map space personally it took me two
years to realize that my favorite Club a
bar or restaurant or coffee shop was in
proximity to my other favorite bar club
or restaurant a coffee shop because it's
simple fact in New York you go down
underground you ride a subway then you
emerge so there's no kind of connect
from how you arrive there and so I take
the sea to go to this restaurant and I
take the one two three to go this coffee
shop and it was until I kind of walk
around above-ground and I realized only
two blocks away so I thought of this
idea of as a sort of one approaches
major subway stops and knows that huge
swaths of the sort of space surrounding
the subway is excavated so kind of like
a lowered elevated train sort of system
and building
programming around that and so this was
just thinking through that and doing a
series of rendering
and you know taking notes and thinking
about the significance of that for a
sort of larger urban urban planning so
sort of a more kind of almost like an
architectural project the next one is
the inverted panic saccade and for this
one the site was not Manhattan but
actually a map of Manhattan so I began
by printing out sort of Xerox map and
blowing it up and cutting into it
playing around with it and editing it up
like actually just expanding this math
to sort of fit the idea of this pan
optical conversion and as you may know
you know the panopticon has a sort of
strong historical provenance in the
world of architecture as a sort of
architecture of control and surveillance
and so I was thinking about creating
this sort of pan optical city where the
seat of authority and power have sort of
inverted and placed and in sort of
opposition to the way it is in kind of
prison architecture with a loose
conceptual idea of you know the
population and the inhabitants kind of
making sure that the powers that be are
kind of held accountable so once again
it's a blend of both analog and digital
ideas but then also a sort of conceptual
political narrative working through
ideas it's what it's more fantastical I
think i zoom in a bit so there you can
see a little bit of you know the ideas
that I'm thinking about these were
printed out there are 72 by 50 so is
that like seven feet six feet by five
feet I believe so these were large and I
built these like office walls and so
you know they had studio visits in at
this point I'm kind of creating work
that people can spend a lot of time with
you know I even um did just sort of was
sort of like created this kind of like
gestation period for Manhattan thinking
about it slowly swelling over the years
to sort of fulfill create this space for
this patentable City one of the studio
visits they came out of that was with
Christine Kim who at the time was a
carrier two studios and in Harlem and
she you know she liked the work she
wanted to she she invited me to be part
of an exhibit and we thought about it
for years and I ended up being and the
flow exhibit in 2008 and they invited I
believe 30 artists from throughout the
African Diaspora the conversation being
what does contemporary African art look
like and it shouldn't have been around
shouldn't have been a radical show but
it ended up being a radical show because
the perception of African art for the
longest times always been kind of
sculptures and masks and statues and so
kind of getting the perhaps book of what
that work would look like ended up being
very fascinating because of course it
looked like whatever the artists were
creating and making incredibly diverse
show so for myself I took a departure
from my kind of heavy-handed textual
architectural drawing collages to create
four sculptures or in the art world
column of architecture
cats so there's like a different
language if you will and I'm not sure if
I mentioned this but a lot of my work
because I'm fascinated by utopia to
stoke isn't very much inspired by
science fiction so much of what I do is
kind of projecting my ideas and concepts
and considerations in some sort of
future worlds and so this one is called
at least forget the name variable
facility yes yes and so I was thinking
you know of just this sort of housing
perhaps in outer space are hard the moon
but again very abstracted and I was
really enjoying kind of stepping away
from you know the prior work that you
saw and just having fun you know
building this interesting model series
of models this one actually was inspired
by mining facilities that visited in
South Africa maybe three or four years
earlier and I forget the name again
but you get the gist and this is
interesting because it's funny having
this architectural background so I built
this model and then I didn't add
expansion joints in the sort of slacks
on the floor so as the show progressed
you see the you see the floor beginning
to sort of warp and these guys like by
the end it was almost like this rolling
seas sort of pretending that it was this
kind of time composed performance
of this model as as a show progresses
this one was very interesting because
this was and and I'm I'm I work
frequently right so I have a library of
my own sketches and John's works and
bottles and ideas and seeing the lighter
have not seen the light that I fit back
into and then flip it and you know maybe
work in a different material or a
different scale and so this actually
began Astaire's and joins the sketches
as part of the AIA competition to decide
sort of research outpost in Greenland
for the study of kind of like Inuit
culture and so I decided to make on the
heart of it and it's fascinating being
in a context of the Studio Museum in
Harlem and in the show about African
artists there was a write-up in the
Village Voice around the show and the
author mentioned his work and was was
describing the idea of this work sort of
takes the hull of the slave ship and it
inverts it in sort of turning it on its
end and reimagining a sort of
celebratory or triumphant or resilient
miss out of this metaphor right and and
for me this was an Inuit research
station so it's just funny being in art
world or being in any venue and
switching any venue and the sort of
presumptions or ideas that people will
project onto the work and even outside
of you know this particular context just
coming from an architectural background
in our world the way your work is
received and perceived and responded to
for me is continually an enormous leap
interesting thing it's a sort of
experience and I enjoy sort of
reimagining my work and writing about it
in different ways and this was this was
more about sort of fractal exercise then
built over this sort of abstraction of
nine square grid so again I'm just you
know sort of evolution of coming from an
architectural background and navigating
the world of it Fine Arts visual arts
practice around this time I did a
another series of shows settlement
services and armatures and urban growth
strategies so now I'm fully departing
from the very textual layered collage
like architectural work and trying to
sort of elect a visual singular visual
communicating my ideas and here I've
always been very much interested in kind
of reimagining futuristic city
settlements that draw on certain
psychologies that exists now so this one
was called Central City settlements it's
sort of lab'ring thing like architecture
that you find in the middle east or
north
certain areas of South America or in
Spain you know some very close buildings
with sort of narrow walkways and in sort
of kind of decentralized sort of
organization but visually this is it's
interesting because this is a computer
model and so these all began as computer
models and then what I did was rendered
out a kind of low resolution photo real
image and then ran it through a program
first I used to run it through
illustrator but I found a better program
called vector magic and it vector Rises
photographs so it aprox or approximates
the lines and the colors and all of that
stuff and and what it does if you you
know the lower resolution image you give
it the sort of looser looser sort of
image it produces so what happens it
kind of creates this almost hand-drawn
painterly light quality and then I
overlay it back with our nine images
from the original model so again it's a
kind of blend sort of way of playing
with with you know this kind of digital
technology and so these are images of
the city settlements again my
fascination with urban planning with
cityscapes accompanying this this is
surface armatures so I'm taking more of
a sort of sci-fi inspired direction with
these and these are you know some have
less sort of overarching political
they're more about just sort of
architectural interventions and playing
with the mediums and playing around with
software and actually I also say I use
Sketchup exclusively for my 3d modeling
and 3d works so this is Sketchup and and
these images I began with a series of
photographs that either I taken or a
friend of mine had taken of sort of
abandoned and dilapidated industrial
buildings post industrial buildings
place them into Sketchup traced over
them and extruded in different surfaces
and Sketchup is good for that you can do
it incredibly quickly and then creating
these sort of futuristic human scale
interventions on cities facades I was
like prosthetic devices so this was
again kind of a series of playing around
with with you know architectural tropes
the elevation the perspective the idea
of armature prosthetic plus species and
again and interesting things so so so
the sci-fi is sort of dystopian idea
behind these that at this point I'm not
including any sort of scale figures so
for me I'm seeing these works almost as
almost like archeological finds so
they're so they're images that are exist
in the future beyond where we reside but
then as the audience and observers of
this word
it is almost like we're looking back at
civilization things that preceded us and
existed before us so it's kind of sort
of dual idea of the relationship between
projecting artwork forward and being an
observer of that artwork which
inherently makes you a kind of
archaeologist looking at a sort of
excavation site these were called urban
growth strategies and they I found in
some old chemistry book a series of
microscopic slides or slides of
microscopic imagery of various liquids
interacting on a cellular level and I
was just interested to me they should
have jumped out as interesting ways of
potentially organizing cities and city
spaces and public spaces and exurban
spaces in suburban spaces so I I just
started so much grace around these these
photographs and then and sort of create
these abstracted plainer fictional
cities sort of navigating through these
spaces and also thinking about the
potential scale or sort of the
programmatic detection of these things
an interesting thing at this time of
still be young starving artists
and so this was foreign exhibits also
gallery and shel Smith was called
visionaries and outcasts and so I was
printing these works out at Columbia
venez doing a PhD at Columbia at the
time in the urban preservation
department and so I was doing it late at
night where I could print for free and
it was interesting because all the
planning students so as I printed them
out I would lay them out on a desk and
the planning students came over and it
was just interesting to see them start
naming the types of sort of city
organizations that they were because
they thought it was a real thing that I
was doing you know so they're like oh
yeah this is spoken we all know wait and
it started arguing about what you know
type of sort of city strategies these
images you know were referencing and so
it was interesting for me like coming
back and overhearing their conversations
to see the fact that is kind of
self-organizing microscopic imagery
could sort of have a relevant projection
on a kind of macro scale for developing
cities liminal is what we call it in the
art world when you want to do something
but you want to sort of indemnify
yourself from a kind of critical rigor
you don't want to be an extra so I live
I'm in a liminal spaces between urban
design and abstraction of etc so it's um
and that's an interesting thing in art
world in architecture is there's in art
world there's less sort of
accountability around the images that
you produce and I still have so much of
that studio environment in my heart and
soul there is there is my drive to
explain it to you right and justify why
I did what I did at the same time as a
previous project 2008 there's a show
kitchen called futures disruption so I
collaborated with a friend of mine an
Alexa Cornell with but he was he was I
think a literature major and he got a
masters and a PhD in history and so I
collaborated with him to come up with
this project called adverse peek and the
public-private partnership program and
so he came up with this really
comprehensive narratives about the
dollar failing and all these commodities
failing and the major companies then
buying out buying out currency and these
commodities commodities and creating a
world that is solely about perpetuating
their brand right and so that's
adversity PPP is a kind of governing
body and a hammer speak of the sort of
social cultural body and address speak
is pretty much the way you speak about
brands now when you have your Beats
headphones and you're telling your
friends how awesome the sound is you
know you're doing this legwork for these
major brands but in this world you're
getting paid to do that affects your
ability to to effectively promote any
number of brands is how you make a
living so and it's interesting thinking
about visualization and how a
representation and how it kind of works
to push the idea so you see this a
complete departure from the kind of
painterly work that I did prior and now
highly digital almost 8-bit looking sort
of architecture because this world was
about kind of total surveillance total
control sort of rigid class structure
sort of absurd bureaucracy
and we also have fun naming each of
these works they have these very long
alliterative bureaucratic concerns that
we had a lot of fun coming up with this
is the gap map and it's called a greater
area protocol map but of course it is
also owned by gap and you can see sort
of the details of this world so they're
similar the earlier works by overloading
a lot of kind of information about this
world and about the particular
narratives but in a kind of highly
controlled more digital way and so so
sorry this is a sort of on the perimeter
so each individual in this world takes
an aptitude test and I will show you the
documents in the next slides and how
well you perform on this attitude test
determines what your ranking is from our
sr0 to our SRO for so ours are zeros are
in a service industry they're on a
perimeter is these sort of refugee camps
and scents and arts are foreign sort of
like these luxury high-rise buildings in
a sensor and so again we have these fun
names human interaction and furball
exchanges the hive daily solo de estilo
records all human interactions and
Kerbal exchanges are permanently stored
in these data silos and then the
security arm that surveilled the
populace 24/7 is the 3 SC 2 s sector
surveillance service center and synaptic
sites and so we made a series of these
bureaucratic documents that we believe
will be in this handbook and so this one
is called the 2 C 3 Q it is a construct
to calculate quantifiable quality of
adversity quotients and what it is it's
a document that
change to each of the specific brands
that you are speaking for and advocating
for and it is the sort of document they
use to kind of determine the responses
you get and kind of qualify and quantify
those responses based on a positive
negative or neutral response derived
from your now is your adjective so every
aspect of language in this world we
created is being monitored and processed
and a sort of to sort of take note of
kind of what response you're eliciting
in every single word so it's not even
like coca-cola is great it is coca-cola
is wonderful and what those changing
grapes are wonderful you know determined
for how coca-cola is is branded you know
the next one is the upended algorithm
intended algorithm for the average
annual adverse peak accumulation
quotients so this is your sort of
year-end review of your ability to
promote these brands right and so this
is example is Nike an image on the right
is an aptitude test and it is the 5a
is the average applicant aptitude for
ever speak advocate candidacy and it's a
very simple test but the sort of
psychological ramifications of it are
sort of hard to really understand right
they can we imagine the administrators
in this test can can gain much more from
this sort of simple breakdown than a
more comprehensive test and an
interesting thing is a lot of these
images actually borrowed from kind of
Cold War era and Soviet era
interrogations as enemy of the people
matrices that they would break down and
then just switch down our own
information so these diagrams are coming
from actual sort of fascist regimes and
existed in our world and that exists now
right
so it's so the currency is a
cryptocurrency
and there's an avatar for the
cryptocurrency we were interested in the
fact that thinking about the dollar bill
that has all of this occult symbology to
it
we used a mandala for this because of
how it sort of encompasses the entire
world right so it's no longer in
national lives or
lives cryptocurrency it's it's sort of
now embodies the entire globe and so the
sort of imagery shows at different
regions throughout the world there are
part of this of this sort of new world
order and a tagline you know the dollar
one is what its nois or Ordo seclorum
and this one is an empire imperative sin
five which is an empire without end in
Latin and in the next image this image
is the key to the prior image so it
breaks down everything that you see in
this image it explains everything
there's even here a kind of
chronological historical timeline so
this was something that people who are
there it the exhibit we're like of
reading through an incredible amount of
information you know because my
collaborator he wrote this an entire
huge dissertation about this world and
in my child sort of distill it down into
the wall we were given for our artwork
so it was like how do I corral an
enormous amount of information into you
know a sort of 15 by 10-foot wall and so
decision was to show the gap map which
kind of showed the way individuals could
navigate and interesting enough we also
use for thinking about the kind of way
individuals can navigate we're looking
at
apartheid-era South African past law
explaining how you know those who are
you know who or it's in service and
navigating through paper that's what
sort of procedure was for how they would
navigate where the checkpoints were so
there's a lot of information so if you
were if you were there you would be
reading through a lot of kind of what we
were thinking about so then when I get
tired of sitting in front of my computer
all day which is what I do probably 1416
hours a day I like to draw just kind of
step away and to go back to swim from
architectural but again still fun
whimsical still influenced by my ideas
so these are series of small-scale tree
lines that I call political impermanence
of place it makes loosely reflect the
fact that I've lived in Crown Heights
Brooklyn for 19 years now thinking about
how the neighborhood has changed
thinking about buildings being torn down
thinking about neighborhood to be
designated as blighted neighborhoods
thinking about gentrification thinking
about the evolution of these spaces and
then just reflecting in these sort of
very playful whimsical you know nine
these are yeah these are nine bite
swells of that big so you know sort of
very small drugs so and this is a nice
exercise I've done a number of
residences and residency sort of
afforded me the opportunity to step away
from the computer
build things by hand and deuterons my
hand both not having space in my
apartment at home but also you know
being mired in Commission work in
addition to trying to create
self-motivated work residency's an
opportunity for me to just draw or make
collages or build models or explore
different things and so you know you'll
see throughout the work that I'm showing
kind of moments when I step away so
creating and hand-drawn and handmade and
made art works then I always return to
the digital so this is interesting from
2008 to 2012 so I had the flow shows to
Museum of Harlem which was a big show
future disruption was at the kitchen was
a big show some poise in my kind of
artistic career to then continue to grow
you know but I just decided for some
inexplicable reason to pivot and start
an architectural firm for my friends and
I stopped making art for whole years and
try to get our architecture firm off the
ground and then in 2012 I was like I
don't want to do this like I don't like
going to an office even if the office is
my own office I still don't like going
today so this is the next series of
works I hadn't made work in four years
and I wanted to make work quickly to
apply for grants and residency so I made
these their urban installation states
they're all they were just digital
renderings right but I but they're what
I would make if I had a huge budget if I
had a nice big space to kind of think of
you know the sort of architectural
constructs you know that that I would
build so they're renting but you see I
have little moments of sort of showing
the scale so I have a little triangle
here and this
one I have the broom over here you know
it's kind of giving you a sense and so I
used these works and I made a lot of
these I made a lot of these and I just
used these images to apply against the
hardest residency's kind of get back in
the Fine Arts game right I actually
built a model of this one and it's
traveling doesn't look as cool as this
of course because I've kind of gotten
over my hands like yeah I can build this
and that built it kind of look like the
UM you know those means where they have
like nailed it where they show you
something amazing and they show like
someone's trying to make a Pinterest
cake that they see in their version is
ridiculous that was kind of like my you
know this rendering where's the kind of
3d model but not it's exciting so a lot
of these are again just they're very
formal and compositional exercises a lot
of them come from photographs from my
brothers taken so this is on a
University of Chicago campus
I think that's staring and building and
I'm kind of like reconfiguring it in
different ways and again just really
enjoying playing around with you know
color and composition and shadow and
light and just the idea
in endless budget so create whatever
installation I could create an
imaginative being you know somewhere
like to take water or something you know
really nice fancy institution and it
works these images were very well
received
I got residency's off of them I got
grants through these I also just had you
know different people reaching out with
with sort of general interest and that's
something I have to say a lot of what
I've done
so for these works so I created these
they're completely self initiated
projects but what I do and what I have
done at the time was then just to submit
these to all of the different
architectural blogs from art daily to
design to even designs but even you know
just inhabits hid just literally just
come up with the right up send all these
images out and this was future that I'm
out of them and so it managed to sort of
generate then because this is around
2013 2014 where the transition is sort
of digital publication is now sort of
prominent way and so now older
publications are looking for blogs and
digital content for their content so
this work sort of allowed me to get kind
of more attention for the kind of things
I was doing and created an opportunity
for me then to get different residents
seizing pursuing different work like I
said I did a lot of these
you know for the enjoys kind of talking
about it and churning it out and it's
sometimes fun not to have any sort of
overarching idea or political narrative
and just enjoy thinking about you know
these compositions and kind of building
topologies
so one of the first residences that guy
after these was a school of visual arts
the visible futures lab and this is a
really cool wonder they give you access
to CNC machine laser cutter 3d printer
sort of all of these different kind of
fabrication tools so I just really fell
in love with the laser cutter I spent
all of my time there just you know
coming up with different patterns and
thinking around you know thinking about
these different patterns this so so for
this work I initially started thinking
about is it was it was a sort of very
loose idea at the time I've been reading
different things and kind of like sort
of french-press around like a lot of
Islamaphobia so what I was interested in
doing was I first began by building
these models of cup of French row houses
and mixed rail houses and then and then
sort of draping them and and kind of
making them ornate with sort of Islamic
geometries and really overlaying it over
this sort of very you know French
European sort of building building type
you can see a lot of these row houses
lattice or you know central house in
Paris but then I just really was excited
with the laser cutter and patterns in
general so dented from there just expand
it out into thinking about different
patterns I was even looking
like fashion houses like collection
Chanel and Balenciaga and some of their
vintage lace patterns as well and so I
just was having a lot of fun with
creating what I imagined to be kind of
again as I mentioned earlier you know
things projected into the future but
then because we because we're the
observer they sort of exist in the past
as well so that's why this project is
called a temporal relics the idea of
kind of looking and it works
simultaneously in the future but out of
time
and in a sci-fi genre very interested in
steampunk steampunk takes a sort of
Renaissance and Victorian architecture
and it's about making these interesting
whereas contractions so it's futuristic
but through the salutatorian you know
18th 17th century legs so I was also
thinking what if steampunk was was
similar to that you know kind of
historical science fiction construct but
but not through a strictly Western
architectural you know or social lens so
this is almost like a call us of
Occidental Occidental Islamic steampunk
thinking about you know what a sort of
non-western so sci-fi imagery in that
regard would look like
so these were really funded and so the
scale of these this is like 15 I think
that's no 16 inches yeah so it's about
this big and the introduction of the
acrylic is I wanted to add color to it
but I did not want to have to paint it
and I had a laser cutter okay and also
the sort of juxtaposition of sort of
this stained wood with this very bright
acrylic really gave it a kind of more
playful look so I was really enjoying
you know sort of playing around with
these things so this is this is a
precursor new Africa 2081 this is a
collaboration with myself and a friend
of mine who first he was a german-based
producer then he was a lawyer and now he
runs a bespoke menswear line called a
Carrie Jones and like myself he's from
Nigeria Europe as well like myself grew
up in the States and it's menswear line
sort of has a kind of custom European
tailor and Jeff supposed with a lot of
nest African Prince and so for the
launch of his line he had seen some of
the futuristic stuff I've done and he
wanted to create a series of campaign
images that would juxtaposed Lagos
Nigeria as it was this now with a sort
of futuristic sci-fi Sensibility these
images are the most by far and I can't
even express it enough by far the most
important work I've done to this date
for the sheer fact that you know I don't
know like I just did these images for me
there were four threw him up on his
tumblr page
in addition to launching his line and I
guess just the idea of seeing the kind
of informal kind of settlement
you know architecture concept of an
African city in urban African see Jeff
suppose with sci-fi imagery was far more
radical than we felt it was but it was
insanely radical because the amount of
response we got from doing this work
literally transformed both of our
careers you know I mean completely we
reached out my summing branch from like
Lancome and L'Oreal and you know all
these different folks who are so
enamored with this imagery and wanted us
to either reproduce this imagery for
their brand or wanted to show the work
or wanted to you know polish filmmaker I
mean even to this day this was done in
2013 and 14 and even to this day I will
still probably get at least 10 emails a
month asking about this work
specifically and you know could could I
do something that does this or or just
so general interest in showing it
discussing it exhibiting it you know
individuals wanting usage rights for the
image for whatever they're discussing so
this has had a sort of tremendous
impacts on
you know sort of my ability that's kind
of afford to feed myself through art
specifically this is the image that was
not part of that stereos was done for a
Spanish business magazine and it was
about best practices for doing work in
West
African countries if you're in an
individual when it's started business
and understanding a lot of the sort of
cultural you know etiquette for for
conducting business so it sort of shows
a sort of which which Lagos Nigeria
you'll see a lot of you visit is
simultaneous a kind of very you know
polished you know venture capitalist
sort of development simultaneously with
this informal market culture and that
led into this product which I've been
doing now
for the past five years shanty
megastructures for the Lagos Nigeria and
this has been ongoing and it will
continue to grow I've done I'm now in
sort of the fourth iteration of this
project it initially started looking at
the third mainland bridge which connects
Lagos Island to the mainland and that
bridge is notorious almost has a
mythical reputation for the nightmares
traffic so I thought of sort of building
this large skyscraper sculpture of you
know structure along third main land
bridge so that it wasn't connecting two
points but the bridge itself became an
actual site destination and it was just
a sort of early skyscraper design I left
it alone
and and after the project that I just
showed you the collaboration and it's so
funny how it works with sort of work
that I do and how I moved forward I was
so tired of people reaching out to me
with this work that I had collaborated
on that I had to get permission every
time I show
you know so people would email wale they
email me and you'd have to be like oh
it's not contacted by so-and-so do you
want to do this you know me and and it
was so hard to generate interest in my
work outside of that imagery that I was
like to do some in Africa that I offer
completely myself so this is part of you
know part of my decision to kind of
undertake this but also the general
interest in in Lagos as an enormous leaf
fascinating site it's one of the fastest
growing mega cities in the world it's a
large mega city in Africa there's so
many interesting contradictions there's
an enormous amount of sort of creative
ingenuity but it's also incredibly
chaotic like I mentioned nightmares
traffic very little infrastructure
there's tons of development going on in
Lagos Nigeria but it's all mostly
aspirational and primarily focused on
kind of luxury development very little
love it takes into account or considers
slums in informal settlements you
looking at macoco village and and so you
know I just thought of of the kind of
erasure of these communities both in
this sort of public imagination for how
they would exist in these futures in the
future of a city in the future of a
place you know like Lagos Nigeria and I
always show this picture because
just endemic to Lagos all over the world
it's in Rio this is Ida B Wells housing
project in Chicago they tore down other
housing projects in Chicago
cabrini-green Robert Taylor homes
Dearborn these are all housing projects
which were sort of an privilege real
estate in Chicago only ten minutes walk
from you know the Miracle Mile amazing
downtown so so the idea of displacing
marginalized and poor communities occurs
all over the world it's a it's a you
know it's a worldwide issue so I was
invited to participate in the Shenzhen
biennial of her Betty in architecture in
2015 I believe and so I decided to
create a series of photo montages taking
the sort of vernacular of these informal
settlements and scaling them up to the
size of sort of very large luxury
developments that you see you know
office towers luxury apartments and
high-rises and retail and and and and in
placing them into sites of sort of life
as I mentioned privileged luxury real
estate and so these are all computer
images the the photographs are for the
most part they're composites of
photographs I've taken myself or a
source from the web and have pieced
together and
this computer model from Sketchup you
know placed it to the scene and sort of
overlaying a lot of the materiality from
you know that you'd see within these
communities and so I did a series
believe seven of these images and just
showing them you know kind of really
existing in these sites and the idea was
and this is where it gets interesting
coming from an Arkansas Savior an
architect and having architectural
background but then creating imagery in
the art world and presenting it in
artistic venues right the perception is
that architecture solves problems or
alleviates issues outside of policy and
all of these other factors that actually
affect issues and then looking at the
architecture itself and sort of
questioning the success of the actual
architecture and so for this I make a
point of saying that this is not about
creating a design so which is much more
about sort of creating discourse around
this sort of marginalization of these
communities right so it's a very you
know it's it's not complicated a very
simple straightforward idea you know
these spaces like a solid cabrini-green
they get torn down these communities get
displaced no one knows where they go in
that area these loans can be bulldozed
at a whim because some land owner says I
now want to build
Oliviana and people are given 24 hours
to pack up everything they have in the
entire community to destroy so not only
a kind of erasure from this or a
critical idea of developments and and
place of mark lies communities within
development but literal literally made
sure of their buildings of their homes
or their structures so I wanted to show
these massive massive building
structures sort of overtaken the
landscape as part of this project
there's a developments in Nigeria called
Eko Atlantic it's massive development
projects luxury development projects and
it's sort of like creating the Dubai of
Lagos and so on YouTube I found a series
of promotional videos and the
promotional videos had these outtakes
like two second to 10-second just brief
outtakes of areas of Lagos and skylines
that this city could potentially grow to
grow into so I downloaded their video
and I chopped out all the outtakes and
then I painstakingly CGI and inserted my
shanty mega-structure solution actual
video stills inserted my shanty
megastructures into each of these scenes
right so these actually moving scenes
and then I uploaded it back to YouTube
as a kind of my own promotional so I
kind of hacked into their video made my
own video uploaded my own uploaded my
video back up as promoters as
my own promotional video for the shanty
many structures adding in all of the
exact same keywords that they had for
their video and hoping that I would not
be sued morning things anything major
there is a copyright infringement tag on
a video when you go there but other than
that it's just existing on the web of
quasi Google a counterpoint to this
promotional video I also created a
series for the next iteration of this
was shown at the Museum of our
architecture technology in Lisbon
Portugal for a show called utopia
dystopian I created a series of VR
environments so now I've been working at
a distance of kind of montage but but
then I I created these VR moments where
you could actually really get inside and
see you know this work and the scale of
it because megastructures these things
are actually very very massive
[Music]
so you would be
[Music]
so you're kind of floating and roughly
you know 15 feet we can really sort of
see what it's like inside this inside
this world so I had I had like five of
these five of these beyonds
a little drama duster right here so sort
of loose kind of urban farming
aquaponics sustainability sustainability
practices one of the things I was
interested in highlighting in this
project navigate back to the video one
of the things I was interested in
highlighting in this project in addition
to the idea of just visibility was also
looking at some sustainability practices
that happened as a as a function of
necessity right so it's not only this
kind of idea that these communities
should be involved in how cities are
imagining the future but they should
have a they sort of say you know they
can actually contribute it's not a sense
of paternalistic we have to build
something for them there's actually
things that they can contribute and then
I did a residency and this was at the
Macdonald colony so this was a this was
a time to kind of step away from the
sort of rigors of the digital space and
get involved with kind of more
meditative and calming practice and so I
made I was actually very productive
nadal kind of it's great when you do a
residency and they feed you right it
kind of takes it takes it takes a lot
off the table good stuff and I had one
of the live work studios you know so I
didn't have to you know
I was right there in my studio so I mean
I was working from 7:00 till like 3:00
in the morning every every day I did a
series these collabs I called high five
dish steel so looking at a kind of
isometric you know drawings from from
the steel movement and also sort of
primary colors but my interest in serve
70 60 70 a design that came out of my
childhood particularly in Nigeria you
know my father was kind of an audiophile
it had all these different really cool
stereo equipments decided by the Danish
in 1970 whatever so I just did a series
of kind of checks positions of this
fantastical playful architectural
designs with you know these different
audio components I would do not time
okay let me know if I need to wrap it up
simultaneously then well they're not
sometimes tasty afterwards obviously
some know afterwards so I got lucky I've
been flying for residency's for years
and years and those urban installation
digital images I showed you really
landed me and kind of like the yes song
so in 2016 I applied to six residences I
got accepted to five and I was
determined to do all of it so I did
McDowell but I couldn't do what I did I
did McDowell headlands Socrates and then
Venus which is in Omaha Nebraska so I
did these and I did these serious the
next series was just sort of simple
black and white collages and cut
collages and did them wild eyes and
headed us which was right after McDowell
I had like three weeks down before I had
to go out to edit and this is for my
first solo exhibit which was in London
called not my business
and it was about kind of my so I was
born in Nigeria but I left when I was
six so it was sort of creating these
architectural filings around my
imperfect memories of Nigeria as well as
so the chef's opposed with a lot of the
kind of post modernist architecture
civic buildings and a lot of elements
and icons of the informal economy like
to see this motorcycle sort of comprised
of what would be history you know
European housing development that you
see a lot in a lot of West African
countries so I did I think maybe twelve
of these and it's all I did while it had
that I was there for four weeks and I
was trying to do 15 then when I got as
well I was like maybe I should just
enjoy the entire week and go for walks
in the last week and not stress myself I
also built a series of accompanying
models so this is called Fair god and
you'll see in Nigeria with a lot of the
sort of public transportation this is
one of those three millions which you
also see very prominent throughout
Southeast Asia as well they always have
fascinating bumper stickers and quotes
all over there very often time religious
quotes for taking that got hot people
because there's also incredibly unsafe
so everyone watch they get from point A
to B without dying so I wanted to kind
of play around with building a sort of
church on top of one of these structures
you know and this is called play Jew to
like sort of throwback to the kind of my
mom and dad playing you know how high
life
music when I was young so it makes a
kind of interesting sculpture with a
tape deck we also have a projector and a
member at the time was probably like
1982 flash board it's like my favorite
movie and if you ever see flash board
when you're growing up it might be one
of the worst movies and for me so this
idea of you know playing again the sort
of blend of architectural folly with you
know this projector that we had where we
watch movies and it also sort of
equalizer in the base and again you know
the tape deck this is this past year I
was a artist-in-residence open fellows
program at the drawing Center and so
using the same sort of visual language
as the Hankuk elaborate or not my
business but now but now taking that
same idea and thinking about my
neighborhood in Crown Heights and sort
of again sort of being bringing in the
kind of everyday urban vernacular and
combining it sort of these playful
whimsical ways again so creates so this
one with the bombs over here is called
it sounds like a sketchy block and it
reminds me sort of just before a
Franklin Avenue got really identified
I'm like 2006 I would be on a brownstone
reading the blocks his perception of the
neighborhood at the time in that
Franklin Park was a beer garden which
kind of really cracked it open but I've
been robbed
know about Franklin's sketchy blocks I
made sort of tenement with a CCTV with
these bonds coming down and it is a way
kind of reflecting a lot of those
comments that read and then the other
one is we're gonna win so much and now
this kind of response I like Donald
Trump in the insanity this is a weird
self-destructive jingoism so this was
the most recent iteration of the shanty
ministries and here's an interesting
thing so this work that I've shown you
right now is exhibited in Munich this
past spring as part of a show called
African mobilities this is not another
refugee show and the idea was to sort of
challenge people's perception of the way
architecture engages with the consonants
which people's familiarity of it is very
much through this sort of NGO they build
a school I'm going to build a health
care center in the nobility clinic I'm
gonna build it that's people's
perception when they think of so so the
curator of a bull might seat but she
teaches the bits in Johannesburg as well
as in Colombia she wanted to really
expand both the pedagogical and critical
discourse so there was a series of
workshops done throughout a bunch of
African cities and commissioned artists
artists and architects Randall's
workshops so a lot of really incredible
work that really flipped the way people
think of engaging with these communities
so I ran in Lagos workshop and so I gave
a lecture at the University of Lagos
UNIVAC school of architecture because
when Paul was not it's important to take
this work that you've done you know you
haven't lived in Nigeria since you were
six
Soviets hatched it's important that you
place it in front of people from Nigeria
students from Nigeria and get their
feedback right so I gave a lecture much
that I'm giving it now
and then when the Q&A opened up a
student the other woman she raised her
hand and she completely eviscerated me
she was like why are you making grueling
porn for the consumption of Western
media this is ridiculous
and she was she was like almost young
she was so angry she was shaking and she
sent us I'm sorry I'm so mad I'm shaking
and she just complete was like this
ridiculous look at this you know you
know you know why are you showing this
it makes us it makes it look like you
know we're backwards it you know I'm not
focus on the positive and again that
comes back to a sort of perception of
what our concentra can do also what it
should do
also of course everything would be
presumptuous of me so the leader that I
would show this work and not expect
feedback and not walk feedback so I say
all of that to sort of discuss the kind
of premise of this because then another
student stood up afterwards and it said
well no we have to interrogate why a
particular vernacular sort of makes you
think of luxury it was like because to
me this doesn't necessarily look like a
bad thing use local materials etc after
she said that she said that the room
erupted in applause and then after he
said oh he said maybe three quarters of
room erupted in applause so there was a
very spirited debate over at the kind of
work but what I ended up doing for this
was collaborating with a young writer
from Lagos while I love WA and I told
him about the chantry megastructures
world and I said just come up with three
stories I didn't give me
this is what the world is you know
you're from Vegas you know make these
you know right three short stories and I
will animate whatever you make and I
gave him a couple parameters said let's
focus a settlement a smaller setting
maybe a shop and another setting maybe
in Syria Oklahoma so this was for the
first one on meteorite and and so what
he ended up doing was creating an even
further marginalized community of
shipping containers but it had all the
sort of complicated aquaponic systems
running within them however we're
getting protein and fish the stories
about a father and his daughter and
legally fishing in sort of these
privatized fisheries owned you know by
these foreign national companies and and
sort of what happens so I then built the
world and again missus ketchup and I
built this
you know so he described it and I built
it all up and kind of animated this this
short story the next one took place
inside a tech shop is called offline so
he created this world where you are
required to be online sort of the way
you want text and so in the back rooms
of this computer shop and it's a modeled
off of in Lego since there's a market
called market swell markets well in
computer village and and you know these
places where you can get an enormous
amount of electronics and mobile phones
and computer parts and tronic parts and
all this other stuff but in the back of
the shop is a sort of hidden loud
these masks and inhaled psychotropic
drugs you know completely drift away
from being online 24/7 and again I was
like just imagining that world
and then this one is dreamscape and it
goes back into chanting megastructures
I'm now looking on the inside of sort of
what this world is about and it's about
an individual who works 20 hours a day
and everyone who's part of this world is
given sort of finite life sentence and
sort of deal with overpopulation so this
is the last seven minutes of this
individuals life and working in this
space is terrible but each individual
has an assisted dreaming system so that
every night they can dream and live as
long as they want to in these dreams to
select various dreams so this is about
as I mentioned the last seven minutes of
this person's life and
[Music]
[Music]
life
wishful so today my
it's to be accomplished she came before
this possible
the whole people
[Music]
this is debit the rules the only thing
it's laughable
[Music]
Nicole
the young man stood by its head
processing the special shape when he got
some water would ease the smooth down
[Music]
[Music]
what stuff
as a difficulty saw the American Society
on it but such holder
[Music]
last time on this one
[Music]
air hisses - fire - Bella another gently
moving bursa the answer actually which
the scientists and philosophers this one
that was his pulse and it is on th
diamonds
[Music]
: this way she only has seven minutes
[Music]
surely this
growth forces will transform into sanity
birth process
[Music]
he's a no no that was my
as for success life's processes were
ugly
what Oliver that is capital city and
destinations one of you is the best
thing ever
just a month plus less once the most
experienced the speech become industry
any tests
[Music]
[Music]
because
the years be like man this one
Joanie's of this one wants to be the
death
sold
[Music]
it's up to code and there was something
kind that is
Xena it's one long division space and
most of disciplines that
that's all
[Applause]
thank you so much
fantastic I guess I'll start with the
question one of the things I was struck
with continuously is its how much all of
your work is sort of textural it's there
like I see it in every project all the
way all the way through it and yet when
you described it as whimsical playful or
silly architecture I'm playing around
and at the same time it is
it's amongst some of the most
politically provocative architectural
work I know and there's so many other
architects that are being rigorous and
exhaustive and thorough and yet getting
nowhere near the provocation that you're
getting and I guess my question in
certain ways do you find is there
something with crossing between art and
architecture that gives you the freedom
to make those those steps or do you find
that within it within an art world when
you presented us to get a very different
kind of response or
different ways or we're in that kind of
mix allows you to do things that
architects would be afraid to do yet
what I see is you're doing it in very
architectural manner and succeeding
through the aesthetics to make a
political transportation yeah I think I
think sort of operating in the arts art
art world around definitely gives you
that freedom you don't mean and it's
funny because that's sort of what I say
is that is it my artwork is inspired by
my architectural background but very
very specifically by my architectural
educational background right in the idea
of having a project and setting the
parameters and setting the rules right
you know whether you know we're given we
have to decide for this and that or
whether the program is this or that
what makes your own architectural
project your own what makes you the
author is that you have to set those
rules and the dependent divide between
the architectural architectural
education in our practice is vast to a
certain extent right even if you are
operating in an academic once you've
graduated there's still the pressures
for the kind of architectural historical
you know pedagogical writing and work
that you do right but if you're in the
art around the sort of the critical
rigor in that regard and the politics of
that are not as apparent and isn't and
are not as constricting right so then I
think that in terms of the artwork I can
make a lot of exceptions you know to to
how rigorous I am you know me too how
much research I do at the end of the day
it's very much a kind of visual project
for me and I don't want to take away
from that and I was one of this house
you know
whatever when I was active excludes
their their kind of well there's many
kinds but I would always distill it to
two types those who obsess over an
enormous amount of research and don't
get to the making of things you know
need but there's so Cham strong by all
the things they have to consider before
they make right and then as those who
make and then do a kind of post
rationale kind of go back and forth
between analysis and research but are
driven by creating things first and then
and then kind of you know bumping what
you create up against the logic of your
ideas and your narratives so for many
others this there's an enormous amount
there's enormous amount of freedom to do
that kind of work and I don't resent it
in the art world it can get frustrating
for instance like I've mentioned you
know when would a young woman whom is
rated me but also that killed online you
know to me CNN did did a story on chance
admitted structures and I did just
interview with them and I explained what
it was about and then they just synaptic
title on it said it's this the future of
Legos so completely change what I was
talking about making a scene so that I
started getting all these deals and hate
males who people from Nigeria saying
what do you mean is this the skyline
this backward you know it's uh it's
interesting you know me and it's it's
it's it's actually exciting to see and I
think that's why I personally do very
well with criticism because I love
seeing what people think about it you
know I mean I love hearing what they say
that I have an enormous enormous blind
spots there absolutely is an aspect of
this work that is more important because
that's what I like that's also why you
know said in my answer I was like I like
this dopey is because what they do
because Nats honor of science for almost
all science fiction is is a dystopia
because you take an issue and you
project it into the future
and you either exacerbate that issue
specifically in film and literature
right and the world has just gone hell
right or if you resolve that issue it is
at the expense or at the sacrifice of
something huge you know which you
discover in all utopian science fiction
you realize we're eating people or you
realize that we can no longer have
emotions or you realize that we have to
dress a certain way you know I mean
they're just there's a kind of dystopian
sacrifice in service of a utopia almost
like an utopia simply doesn't exist and
so it's that freedom to explore those
ideas explore contemporary issues in the
realm of fantasy and science fiction
that like I enjoy and feel like I can
work a lot more with that than they're
doing the sort of bottom-up you know
community engagement analysis of the
issues working in that way so yeah so
and what was your response to that
take that CNN like what was your answer
one of my answers was please read the
article not just the title you know
because people weren't getting what the
gist of it was it was like and that's
the interesting thing when you're doing
architecture is that like I mentioned
there's just a fundamental belief that
it architecture is here to solve a
problem so if you do something
architectural and it's exacerbating or
illuminating a problem then the throws
are going off when they think of
architecture while you do an arc Academy
and then they put you into this why
don't you do XYZ which is which which
for me is very funny and interesting
because you wouldn't say to Steven King
why don't you write a romantic novel
it's not what he writes you know needs
so for me it's almost the exact same
thing I wouldn't do that because that's
what I'd like to do you know to me but
you don't have that kind of freedom as
an author at least in people's
perception to be like I like to write
horror architecture novels I like to
write comedic either me I like to you
know dislike no you are supposed to do
good you are supposed to you know so I
mean so that was my response was just
like if you can imagine that I'm an
author and I'm a storyteller and that
this is the genre in which I want to
work in because it's what I like to
write you know and what I like to depict
can you then you know meet me halfway
you can kind of do a little you know a
little reframing of how do they look at
the work you know
so if you were so if you were
commissioned in these would you say yes
I think I mean if I like some of the I
think that many of these ready-mades
where you are dialing up certain aspects
of reality half so enough
I'd be mighty Hulme informational taxi
that has you know that these religious
aspects are enhancing or you've ever
even said that some cosmetic industry
runs approach to you
so in those I can imagine you saying
always yes to to doing those
Commission's even if they have an aspect
of criticism or my to use the word
provocation but what about these others
like are these I would I would write I
would love to build you know be I would
I would love the building and if I was
given a kind of freedom to work in this
particular way but been and I understand
this sort of I would understand the
constraints right and as you said and
it's so funny because I mean I didn't
get to it but I but I'm doing a lot of
public art at work now that is an
artwork that I've do so large-scale
sculpture and 2d work and public art is
is is for the most part commemorative in
some way and celebratory in some way
right but then sometimes I do slip in a
little provocation you know and I do say
something you know then I don't think it
belongs completely to the world of us
sci-fi or intopia or dystopia or
margaritas
or I already I think it's something you
mean and I don't know what it is but I
find it super custody yeah and it's
interesting because neither venue is
able to reconcile the other I have the
same problems in kind of architecture
world as I do in art world you know I
mean with with how our conceptual is
this work how are you know mean how then
without those expectations is it in the
art world and especially moving into art
world for the longest time you know kind
of work I was doing it wasn't really
understood and art world wants you to
kind of locate yourself amongst your
contemporaries and what other people are
doing you know but example the
provocations is this was commissioned by
Forrest Ratner huge developer in bounce
out Brooklyn and one of their luxury
high-rises in the sort of storefront
window and so when I gave him the first
sort of sketch it was you know just
showing you know these Camino this decal
of curtain walls and Fort Greene Park is
very nearby I was like we're gonna have
vegetation leaving through I'm gonna
have this kind of hanging gilded
birdcage thing right and they're like
okay that's cool and then I added the
CCTV cameras because it's a luxury
building and as people who don't have
access to it right and it was funny then
you know I represented it in their
lounge and and it was like the like the
developer sort of liaison I was like I
see what you did crash like that didn't
you like like like I bet that wasn't in
the initial sketch wasn't
and I wasn't in like okay fair enough
fair enough you like recognize the kind
of you know because there are cameras
all around there and it is a lobby there
is a you know and you do need an idea to
get it you know it is it is part of the
sort of like kind of you know large
development that displaces and isolates
and isolate certain folks sorry yeah
sometimes I'll you know do things like
that and this is in Cleveland but all of
this is for sort of a a site where you
know demonstration is allowed and
sanctioned
so this is sort of more appropriate if
you know sort of more appropriate with
it but yeah you know that the kind of
the expectations change when you're
dealing with the community directly
write as opposed to our thinking of
these communities in the general sense
right I'm thinking of the favela this or
I'm thinking of South African townships
you know Johannesburg townships or
whatever but when you did have to go in
and build or create interact a lot more
and that's sort of the sort of factors
that changes being an architect
architect so I mean that's yeah that's
that's part of kind of figuring it all
out with very very architectural artwork
but being a visual artist so I I wanted
to ask the same question now a third
time
it's gonna come here a few weeks he just
published a new book and we has to do it
with a series of essays and one of the
essays that he talks about it
articulates the reasons why he likes
being an architect or argues for what
what constitutes the architectural
problem it's a predicament of having to
advance a particular discipline but at
the same time it's in the service of
things that have to work a certain way
in the service of people and that and
those these things are often in conflict
with each other but you have to
reconcile um's so he he turns the
problem of constraint into a positive
now within that context one of the
artists that I've always very very much
appreciated and this may be a
mischaracterization of your work but I'm
trying to channel them together is the
work of Thomas Starr Sinha and I've
always said that he's one of those
architects who had to leave the
excuse me who had to leave the
profession in order to advance the
discipline in other words he and and you
can correct me if I'm wrong but he also
has a very distinct narrative vision
about you know a world without gravity
or you know
with the sky and space and all of that
and and some of these may come from
sci-fi but they all probably come from
other sources also but in his case if
you know him he's maniacal about
actually building in because you can't
build them here and here but you can
build it in the context of the museum
and the museum becomes the very
mechanism that liberate him to to do the
things that nobody else particularly and
so given the incredible profound depth
that you've been able to establish in
the sensibilities of your work as a as
an artistic narrative within the context
of drawing painting etc etc resource
question becomes more poignant
if that the moment you start building
them in it because it brings you back to
issues of construction and detail
tectonics that that you wouldn't want to
compromise on in
because it changes it and I at that
point I wonder where your allegiance
begins to veer off to or how was your
architecture change as a consequence of
that no I think you see you say that
because now that new more public art
building consideration that I have to
take into account and it is also an
advantage for me coming from an
architectural background because I speak
about it in the same way I speak about
the design challenge as a liberating
challenge right and I do believe that is
right you know I mean even even sort of
a budgetary constraint what can I not do
you know the mean of it see reality
that's straight seasonal weather the
change you know I mean what can I do I
find it very very exciting so it's so so
in that regard it's kind of less about
seeing it as restrictive and it's about
doing the things that I wanted to
quickly you know what I mean and that's
where this sort of freedom for the
shanty Mecca at the end of the fact that
I can build these very quickly and I can
examine them very quickly so there's an
idea of sort of getting to the things
that I want to say right and and and and
that's why I can sort of discuss the
juxtaposition between I'm sitting you
might front of my computer all day long
doing all this but then when I go to the
residences and I'm doing stuff by hand
it's more meditative I slow down I'm
much more thoughtful about the time it
takes to do this how to cut this how to
model this how to build it and the same
sort of sensibility that I would bring
to them doing you know projects that
need
they need to be fabricated did anything
change with the coachella piece
something bigger singing pills yeah
that's the biggest one I've done yeah
yeah oh yeah that was yeah
so yeah that was a an interesting thing
is this so I was found by the assistant
curator Rafi Larry you know because I've
been to headlands residency so while I
was ahead of us he just contacted their
director first he went to the website to
look at current artists and it was
perfect I was there I was there from
April to May and I was just before you
know around the Coachella time and they
were looking they're already looking for
next year's artists and so he asked them
who do you think you know you could work
with to do something and the high five
distill work which I did at McDowell was
what inspired this this came directly
out of that they saw those collages and
they said do you think you could
reimagine one of those in some way at 30
50 feet tall and I said of course that's
Coachella but this was easier because
they have an endless budget and an
enormous amount of money they have their
fabricators they have engineers so I
just provide them drawings and kind of
went back and forth with them other ones
required court you know we were to fit
in figuring you know figure and even
even protest you know which was just
these large water jet cuts steel
profiles required you know three tons of
concrete bags to be placed into the
bench so I like that kind of thing right
but the ability to say something very
quickly about a particular issue
especially a broad expansive issue such
as the lack of housing you know because
in these communities you know my
familiarity with the digital world in
fact that I personally move very quickly
in you know in the digital world you
know at this point I can get to what I
want get sued a lot faster you know an
often time they have a very small window
to do that the adverse speak I had two
months to do that so you know I sent a
friend Maddy who wrote a whole
dissertation so I have to build this
world out very quickly I have to figure
out a way to do it so it's more of a
functional kind of compressing time and
how much I can say about a certain
project you know but I would be very
fascinated to you know imagine taking
reaching into small moments of the
hammer speak and maybe you know
retrofitting a bodega around the address
be guided and thinking you know I mean
those you know that those are part of
the part of the the whole sort of
conversation and essentially because I'm
not at all dogmatic about any of a right
so it's all part of the conference you
know it's like this so it's very
important you know only idea be sort of
flowing school bottom-up floating school
d-didn't macoco those like and that's a
perfect example of very well-meaning
architecture completely crippled by a
lack of infrastructure a lack of local
or oversight Lego state government they
won't have anything to do with it except
for sort of feed off of the positive
press that it got right they want to
maintain it and cooling and if he can't
he can't now direct his entire firm's
resources so you know looking after this
project and the community itself doesn't
have the money or the
resources to look after so it has became
the nightmare I suppose a perfect
example of what happens when you have
every well-meaning intention to do this
bottom-up project and and and and you
know thinking about how it works and all
the tectonics and structure and all of
it works but just a simple function of
maintenance
you know maintaining something on on
Lagoon when you have storms violent
storms during the rainy season you know
to me for four months it doesn't matter
how good your architecture is you know
there that how well meeting it is and
not to be at all
doomsday that you can never be good but
that systems that love and so many of
these issues involve so many different
people and so many different levels in
so many different disciplines in so many
different ways that to think that we've
been sullen as architects is often what
 system afoot and I think of what
you said at one level is it's raising in
creating the possibilities of discourse
so the argument that it seems like you
have at that presentation of [ __ ]
Center is perfect because if you can get
people to start arguing about where and
how these issues sits
illegally politically socially and
economically through the images
producing for the aesthetics that you're
producing you're doing a huge amount of
work right there that maybe hopefully
let's say motivates a different
discursive discussion around those I
think that's very architectural thanks
so much
and I think I don't know maybe we are
all going to just ask the same question
ever ever again the work is super
provocative and so maybe pretends to
drive us on
in a direction but so I'm struck by two
things one is I think I may not be right
but I think I may be right that there
are no in your digital construction so
Legos for you know as powerful as I
think the project is as a premonition it
is there are no people within your in
your city so there are no inhabitants in
any of your projects until the last one
where your colleague your your co-author
who was the writer populates those
places with stories and at least in one
of them a figure things Oh
[Music]
and for me there was something that
shifted remarkably in the kind of power
that re-enters the conversation
nightmares that at least an entry point
enough of an effect condition that the
figure brings into your probation so
that was kind of my a feeling in them
and then the B point is that so for you
now it seems that there are physical
things that you've made that makes the
idea of the material versus the digital
and not just an academic one for you so
you know you've actually had the
experience to build some things have
pieces in space yes they're slower yes
they are not as complex yeah
so the narrative maybe is not as
expensive but there they are there in
space and how do you as an artist
respond to them in terms of your your
company now how you're drawn to the
digital versus now you have these things
in material space I guess it pivots on
the person yeah no that's a really
really good question because I usually
mentioned that when I first start
showing the state settlements sort of
painterly ones and I know they're
completely devoid so again Ferdy that
comes back to looking back in a world
that exists before us when we were
looking at it and you know look it's
like looking at a Chernobyl or something
and you're sort of imagining who was
there the interesting thing is that I
don't have the renderings in here but
the sort of one-point-five I have a
bunch of renders that have people in it
you know and market women and selling
and but that's a very point that you
mentioned that because that was absence
from it and you're right is kind of like
the absence of the empathic social said
it also becomes you can see my
detachment as well right and
and that definitely does pose a
cognitive issue especially when one says
they're they're doing work that
acknowledges the community it doesn't
have anything right so uh yeah you know
I definitely understand it and
especially because that is absolutely a
blind spot there like I like getting
pointed out like you're right it's
interesting you talk about this but
there's not a single person even a scale
member from this community in this kind
of imagery it's definitely something
that I thought about as I then evolved
through the iterations of this project
so regarding building in a sort of
physical realm now and so response to
that you know what this kind of human
interaction changes for me has been
incredibly rewarding
right so for example with the Coachella
one year I had to you know because it's
nothing but a bunch of hi children
running around they didn't want me to
have a point I initially had Apple it
was maybe like five feet you know or an
eighth or like there's nothing but
liabilities for us right and but I was
like if these are just coming out of the
ground
number one aesthetically and
compositionally there's an imbalance
there's a balance that I want to create
but also the idea of is that these are a
community sort of abstract geometric
Buddha listy kind of community that you
can't access right but I wanted to do
something for those who are festival
builders right one thing is a cast a
huge shadow gets up to 115 degrees there
so I want to create you know a place
where you can step into the shade and
kind of like you know relax a little bit
and then also I had to fight back and
forth with the fire marshal to get the
place which was three steps so first
I was like can we get 5 steps to 12
inches each I can't do that so like
almost like barter system you know or
like playing cards or something like can
we get three steps to ten or eight or
five steps at sixth and finally is three
steps at ten inches which create a
substantial plinth and now I don't know
if I have committees here but you know
you see people kind of like leaning back
against the trunks and so the idea of so
the idea this was sort of like the tree
is from time immemorial to gathering
space for oral histories and
entertainment everything which is very
fitting for a musical festival so I
wanted people to kind of arrest at the
base of the tree and so a lot of that
happened you know these are folks who
have been out there all day and they're
tired so they're hanging out so they're
to see that engagement you know was was
something that was for me this being my
very first public art project it was
very much a kind of a warm and exciting
thing where my god you know let's not
let's not leave it all behind and same
with same with protest as well
especially seeing you know the March for
our lives and seeing this image so I I
created four four images of individuals
in law and different forms of that
process from a more kind of aggressive
impassioned challenging the system to
like the passive the man handing out
flyers or less you know less
bracelet if you will and into a moment a
kind of reconciliation along Mather for
two protesters from opposing viewpoints
or you know from the same side you know
providing sort of safe space for each
other and in the sea like the young girl
you know kind of standing on it you know
it mixed this protest which I believe
was for there were two major ones there
was one about Planned Parenthood or
about a lot of the sort of gender rights
issues and then there was the assault
rifle when the mark for our lives and so
you know a kind of tone of seeing this
image with that image and knowing what
those protests were about and seeing how
well the work kind of calm you know
complimented that interaction was
something very excited for me you know
and and knowing and working digitally
from its inception and you know working
with the scale building it up until you
know eight months later seeing it in
this particular process was something
that
okay I like yeah you know so like that I
like that idea
you know me of creating those moments in
those engagements the senator of
architecture blocks down the way and I
notice there's a feature of over full of
information all the words take our
gentrification diagrams are very very
fragmenting buildings into pieces of
information that are almost identifiable
and even the example of afrofuturism
it's so fascinating a topic because of
how you know if we could raise history
of colonialism and if the possibilities
of this continent can develop in and it
reached that topic into the topic of
megastructures
fi something power of dust over the
paradoxical in their megastructures in
real life is actually a mechanism of
unifying of the state control instead of
over full information of information is
actually organizing and simplifying and
then controlling business evasion but a
girl works you're using mega struction
of veracity a manifestation of
fragmented information of this
and self-generating structures I just
imagine if that structure exists in the
real world
and what do you think there would be
what do you think it's political
implications does that represent the
sort of modernity that you were
expecting instead of the female student
that raised question to you and it's not
a notional authority what do you think
about that to give the factory of
artists real life yeah it's a great
question
and a lot of the earlier stuff I feel
like that you said you're questioning I
feel like I want to add to my artists
take it now so thank you for that the
idea of you know sort of large
structures being a function of kind of a
state organization in control next
interesting I did because initially the
idea of shanty megastructures was making
it big to make it hyper invisible a
counterpoint to all the large-scale
development that you see all over the
world you know the bigger the big
Trump's I believe is today saying okay
well let's do it as well but then I did
being that it would evolve and grow in a
way that is you know he mentioned is
very organic a kind of informal because
I don't believe the initial ideas behind
the way
man they're gonna spread over you know
the urban landscape and through the
highways and join the highways and
they're off was an idea of you know in
looking at a lot of these settlements
and even visiting macoco and it looks
completely random but when you visit the
site there there's there's incredibly
strict rules on how you can build and
where you can build some nothing random
about it all every single zone in that
settlement has a community leader and if
you marry someone you want to start a
family based on ecological factors
environmental factors the way this thing
is growing spatial factors they will
tell you where you can build your house
you know I mean so there's nothing you
know it's so so there's this it's it's
kind of a tightly control sort of logic
around it and I wanted to sort of
address that in a kind of sci-fi
inspired way now logistically I don't
know what kind of structural nightmare
that could be here how well resources
could be mobilized to have something
like that grow organically at that scale
right we're not there you know I mean
there cannot be a massive superstructure
organic development it just can't you
know it just can't happen so it's more
of a kind of far-reaching idea but it's
interesting that you mentioned that
because I actually named the world and
it's chat because mobile technology
drives Africa
right it's probably the most important
technology sub using those terms and
chats and for a chaotic a chaotic
anarcho technocracy right and it's
chanting megastructures is SMS so in my
little futuristic reimagining is a chat
SMS system which speaks very much to the
mobile technology my love of Navy things
so I mean yeah that's something to think
about and it's interesting because what
I've shown work because they have been
when I'm showing in architectural venues
individuals who want it to be real and
and and and you know per your comment
about it sort of pushing the discourse
that ended up being a real thing because
I was invited in 2016 to be a keynote
speaker at a symposium in Berlin for the
eighties AEDs that I'm seeing I guess
well yeah exactly and it was it was a
real symposium about developments in
development of the sub-saharan city you
know the sub-saharan African city and I
just waited cuz I I don't really get
posture syndrome but there was a moment
of like what am I doing here because I'm
reading the bio of the other keynote
speakers and one was a woman who went to
MIT and runs a robotic lab in Kenya and
is responsible for organizing the routes
the garbage trucks take for efficiency
and waste management and all of this
the pati technological and pedigree of
palm could agree you know you know you
know all this stuff and another guy's UN
director of housing if you know for for
the UN and it's like lake artists so
like but but but but but that's a prime
example that they found the work and
they wanted you know what
I was doing and they asked me
specifically to discuss two projects
shanty megastructures and the
microscopic cell urban growth was that I
shown you because they felt just it
would contribute to the way then more
you know practicing developers or
whoever may just begin to think you know
maybe it couldn't help having sorry it
couldn't hurt for you know those who
actually have access to policy and
developing infrastructure and writing
you know pop you know policy and
allocating the funds and resources those
idea that it couldn't hurt for them to
see see work like this so I mean it's
very interesting you know because I've
not mentioned that I initially have just
made a very clear line between what the
works responsibilities was you know what
I intended but then over time you know
folks like you know those who it Berlin
and other folks to reach out and say
well no you think it can have an impact
in kind of very real practical but a
very real practical sense
I would say right on yeah I mean and we
wouldn't argue with Cooper that it's
necessary yeah interesting
it's getting late is there any last
question that people ask it's a tough
question when you make your your art and
architectural work do you ever receive
critique where if you're proposing this
as architecture this things where it's
like your concept do you your secret eat
where it's considered like
impressionistic or this this idea is so
far-fetched and it doesn't attribute to
certain ideas in your presentation it's
just it's just something that I came
across and critiques or something cause
the work impressionistic and the idea
that we should be trying to
get to maybe a bit more formal or
there's a club there's an architectural
concept that I'm not touching on yeah
definitely definitely sometimes and and
I mean that's all part of the kind of
this question he mentioned the work can
have up in it hip hop exhibit for Centre
for architecture you know and and so you
know that entire premise I've seen a lot
of online chatter about that it was
being impressionistic and not touching
upon or you know I mean it and and I
mean just it's for me it's just really
all up for debate and like I I like
those kind of conversations right
because at times that is the kind of
work that I'm doing you got I mean I
think all of us are I think even the
most intense gatekeepers of whatever
traditions and practices even you mean
no one is immune from that kind of you
know from those kind of considerations
and having to think about those things
and I mean it's just part of part of
producing you know a particular type of
work and part of articulating your work
in a particular way and they just think
thing is you can change if you talk
about in a very different way you know
need I was just didn't refuse Yale's
Yale's Mark one program and it's just
funny that you know
and the other one since I guess back in
I guess back in May and I'm not in the
academic world regularly but it's just
funny seeing how far the left it can all
go when you say one thing and no one
believes it right and the job of the
critic when you're you know when they're
reviewing your work is to sort of like
pay attention to what you think you're
doing and the rules you set up for
yourself and then see how well according
to their own precedents and presumptions
and experience they feel you are doing
that and I think it's that way with
anything else you know needs so people
bring their own ideas about the kind of
work that you're going you know - the
kind of work you do and sometimes we
really are doing that work you know and
that's something you gotta have to
acknowledge well and the question is do
you want to lead into it you know or do
you want to dial it back and take the
criticism is something that you should
really take into consideration and I've
done both sometimes have been like yeah
you know I'm definitely operating in a
kind of privileged detachment here
to think about XYZ and other it's time
for Finland we could tell Stevie can you
write a romance novel slap me it's
always the case by a case kind of thing
yeah Guga teeka's provocative work
sometimes that work fun to play I could
load it it information or my loaded
statements and then it's making it's
like receiving decoratively when you
gauge it like you said is it writes it
and I just come back to it used in 14 s
edition which I think we should yeah I
mean it's interesting that it's in SPD
and it's very interesting because
architecture in the art world is still a
vastly misunderstood thing right and
there's been so few architecture our
defendants you know I mean or these kind
of clearly curated thematic these are
the these are the architects you know
these are the whatever these are this
it's interesting I see it I see a kind
of apprehension and misunderstanding the
miss reading of it all the time of what
it is and what you know as into book the
finance world is such an interesting
world because there it is very much of
this was how daily this space right you
can be at the top of your game as
artist but you cannot transition
transition in a fine art as a comic
artist but yet an artist who's existed
in the art world like a Roy Lichtenstein
can do them a comic art and either
technically or even conceptually be far
beneath someone who is in that world and
it's like no you can never cross over
into their world your key your Unisa so
there's there's the dis this moments of
kind of pretentiousness around around as
well you know which is which is so
interesting for me in the architecture
world where where even as students is
where we learn to kind of certain level
of craftsmanship and I'm we're going to
see shows you know when I just graduated
going to art shows and seemed like you
know it's looking it works in galleries
and staying like glue and smudge it you
know meaning things that we just don't
really we try really hard knocks and
remember my friend who also who's like
he's not a very Nam you know he's a very
successful artist but I remember going
to a show in the Jax Hilton gallery and
looking at and the artists work and he
was looking at the collage and all these
smudges and glue stains you could really
see and he's just like I was it's not a
travesty
you know everything and I'm like this is
art world it's very different it's that
you know either it's so it's yes it's
it's a it's it's fascinating because
there's so many things we learn coming
up through an architectural education
that doesn't have any kind of value and
kind of MFA or fine arts education unit
I mean and probably you know the same
thing over in our kind of world as well
that's it's a very fascinating it's a
very fascinating space so I can navigate
back and forth
[Music]
