[Applause]
nice it's really nice to be here thank
you all for being here on a Friday
evening a very nice Friday evening
actually we probably be nicer to be
outside or just be resting so I
appreciate that you're here and I will
try to make it work for a while I'm
going to just talk about the different
assets of my practice so the things that
Michael talked about I'll actually talk
about all of them including teaching
which I've actually never done before so
so it's really just a slice it's not
very in-depth in a way it's just a slice
of all of the things I consider
and my practice so the framework is
building on building and I'll be showing
projects that kind of follow well that I
proved in these two categories just for
the sake of talking about them and to be
able to talk about the way that we do
produce buildings but also we're engaged
in questioning buildings as objects and
it's in relation to social structures
and things that are kind of immaterial
this catalog is this kind of the miss
the list that I made to try to make
sense of the different parts of the
production
so there's studios you know the
collaborative practice like Michael
Senor ball and we've been working
together since
five so for quite a long time and then
at the same time and actually predating
that I've been doing projects on my own
and so under the kind of unbuilding part
is this other work that I've been doing
which is more which was kind of enabled
by a fellowship that I had
study program in studio practice and
critical studies and so I'll show
projects that are kind of facilitated by
that and I'll just kind of go in first
like talking about this studio sumo will
zoom over we have three categories that
we work in University work working for
in the arts and then dwellings one of
our clients Josiah University where I
also have taught and smell his pot I've
taught in the Living Studies department
and in the Global Studies department and
each time I've taught there I've taught
from the research that I was doing but
over time we initially started our
relationship was as academics teaching
and then they were building and over
time they regain their trust and they
asked us to first like do some studies
and then
one of them happens so I'll be showing
loops to projects from this University
this one is at the front of the
university and there's a campus walk
that takes you back and at the back of
the university this is our first
building in this kind of ghj both a
bridge that connects it which is a
business school so this school business
management was actually our first
building at 75,000 square feet it
consists of I Toria at the bottom three
levels of classrooms that kind of loop
around in a J and then a graduate center
the building has in the in the center
it's basically open so that you would go
through go up here oh and onto the hill
which you saw in the picture so that's
like going through here behind this up
those stairs up to this level and
there's a kind of depth out here this is
a cafeteria so these projects we are
capacity in Japan is that we do concept
design so the client asks us to you
[Music]
you X project so in this case it's a
Business School we meet with the faculty
they tell us what kind of classrooms
they need and what their idea for the
public spaces who are here the idea was
to have a different type of university
than they have in chicken university
building especially for a business
school they wanted to have open spaces
the equivalent of swing spaces for
students and faculty to kind of mix it's
a very hierarchical system generally so
that mixing oops
mixing yeah that's a good slide like
these spaces show these kind of Swing
Out spaces so places where the faculty
could meet with the students in an
informal way and where students could
meet other students and
so the building has the classrooms and
offices a graduate center but a large
part of it is actually these more open
spaces and so when we were designing
this we also designed the furniture so
everything that you see here like the
colors the furniture those are things
that we designed or most of it like for
this area we designed in other places we
selected it then another thing working
for the Japanese projects is we work
with the contractor and contractors they
are very different than here they're
kind of a one-stop shop in that they
have all the design disciplines within
them so they have architects interior
designers landscape designers mechanical
engineers everything is kind of within
the construction company and so when we
need we do a landscape layout and when
we need to pick plants we work with
their landscape architect who helps us
pick the right plants and kind of make
sure that we follow it under the
regulations are when we were designing
the building we work with their
architects to make sure we have the
zoning and things like that and then
also we work with them on the details
but but usually we do a concept design
where we don't figure out the details
the client accepts it and then we we
work with the contractor and kind of
just work back and forth drawing details
so I I sort of skip this but this was
showing the layout of the floor so on
the ground floor you basically enter
into a big space with the two auditoria
on the the sides and the Graduate sorry
entry this way with the graduate wing
they are then auditoría auditoría
graduate lane cafeteria this deck lets
you have onto the
and then classrooms and offices are up
above so the idea of of the project was
this kind of green line which was an
open space that cut through the whole
building and joined from the campus walk
to the the fill and the gym beyond and
then this other line which was the
public walk inside the university so
then these are just some shots of it's
mostly about like the material palette
and the way that we were working with
different shapes every floor has like
different shades of blue you're kind of
choreographing these blues in the end
it's it's kind of subtle but like
working with the graphics we established
a landscape strategy which was this kind
of pattern that went through the
building so that pattern goes through
the building on the ground floor it then
goes up into the public spaces and then
there are these kind of big solids like
solid colors that are like either carpet
or sometimes tile that mark out the
places where people meet
not just showing one more of those
spaces where here you can see the
pattern is actually carpet and the
pattern of the same pattern is outside
as this inside it's also on the ceiling
so it was it was kind of like looking at
this pattern which would be continuous
which would go through out and change
materials next category dwelling this is
in Harlem and it's actually on the top
two floors of a kind of sandstone not a
brownstone building and when the client
got this project it was it was basically
this partition space into lots of a
little room
and we opened it up because it was just
for one person so we opened up his face
kind of opened up this part put in a
skylight and just basically cleared up
and open up the whole space to let light
in to kind of make it brighter that was
one of the things that the client wanted
to have it be brighter and just simple
just kind of like clean and simple so
this is showing the dining room and then
upstairs the stair which we designed it
takes you up this kind of double height
space into you a kind of it's not really
a bedroom but the master suite because
it's not closed off except for with
furniture so the way that the room is
closed off is with these sliding doors
pocket into the furniture and this is
actually the shower that you're looking
through this is the view from outside so
we did the duck and the bedroom and it's
just meant to be a continuous space
except for one of my mentors
[Music]
so this is the same University client
but it's under dwelling because this is
a dormitory so it's the same University
client but a different campus they have
four campuses in Japan a little about
the structure of Education the the kind
of top universities are public
universities which are very hard to get
into you with limited spots and so then
people who don't get into those
universities go to private universities
and this is a private university and
there they have four campuses on the
outskirts of Tokyo proper so it's the
equivalent of having campuses
brats and so this one is a campus that's
near one of the airports Narita Airport
and it's their youngest campus it's an
International University and the
students who come here are actually
students from the United States and all
around they come like in the summer for
intensive summer courses and they like
study Japanese and kind of take
departmental units so for this where you
see the red circle that's the site I'm
not going to show all of the the kind of
extent of studies for this project but
we actually were approached to work on
this project in two
for and we did a proposal
[Music]
so we get a clinic Matt's nut housing
program just looking at this idea of the
village but then when it was priced out
it was extremely expensive because there
were so many units and lots of like area
and square footage that they couldn't
afford it because it's a university so
they actually have a pretty tight budget
so it was shelled for a while then in
2007 they asked us to look at it again
then in 2014 they asked us to look at it
again appendix that it had to be as
efficient as possible so even though
when they originally approached us they
said we don't want a bar building in the
end we designed our building because
that was the most efficient and the most
likely cheapest so so 2014 we did the
design and this happened very quickly to
our experience with this client has been
that if she annexes she the head of the
university has liked what we've done we
move the project moves very quickly so
so we kind of developed a concept using
the bar building which has a South
exposure you're looking at the South
exposure that's why there is the screen
this is like screening to block the Sun
that's really common
the face on the other side is
north-facing and faces rice-fields
this is kind of like the edge of the
campus and it's facing all the rest of
the campus so it's kind of the prying
face but basically the building is
shaped like this is dormitories and then
right here is an international center
with the gallery at the bottom and oh
actually right here our classrooms and
service spaces and then dormitories up
above it's actually segregated between
the sexes and women aren't on the same
floors and there is a suite for like
that kind of the equivalent of a
headmaster like someone who would kind
of shop around
responsible for those students who lives
here so this is the main entry it's also
another kind of entry similar to the
business school where you can basically
go through the building and like not
have to you can like experience the
building without actually entering it so
there are like different ways that that
happens like one is as you're you're
walking through that hole into this
which is the gallery space and a deck or
as you're walking on the bridge up above
into this kind of deck area behind the
screen is actually access or entering
into a kind of library kitchen area for
the students so the facade is is kind of
a the big thing on this project it's a
very economical project with very tight
units its width is actually less than
it's like just a look it's less than
three meters so
it's it's a very narrow bar for its
length and the units are very small so
the other distinguishing features and it
has two corridors this is actually open
to the air so that like this whole part
breathes and then this corridor beyond
is access to the rooms direct access to
the rooms and it's open intermittently
so it has sliding doors on it sliding
doors pocket and when the doors are open
then this is also open so like that's
really only for Linux you know the
weather is right whereas this is this
space is always open but the idea that
we were working with here was we wanted
to make a kind of angle of space which
in Japanese traditional Japanese
buildings is the kind of porch space
that usually has like sliding doors and
access beyond it and from here it like
expands the space out so that's kind of
the idea that we were working with with
these balconies and we have them put so
the balconies line up with the sliding
doors which line up with the doors for
some of the like public spaces inside
the dormitory so that you can get this
long long length of space so then these
are just details like just little shots
from different parts of the building of
like the reception at the top left kind
of dining hall library area gallery area
and then just kind of material shots of
stairs and screens so we also design the
beds and it's essentially a Bock bed or
this is a room for two students so the
beds are above and the desk is below so
that each student has their own kind of
try to like desk area but we also have
convenience units where there are four
students in a room so there are rooms
with two students in a room with this
configuration then doubled for four
students in a room and then there are
rooms where it's just for the one
student where it's a little bit more
like deluxe and then also where it's
more of a suite and the reason that the
rooms are like that is because the
students are coming from different
countries with different economic
constraints and the university wanted to
make sure that they could all afford
like to live in the dormitory for the
screen we worked with a aluminum
manufacturer so what's kind of unique
about the screen is that those slots are
at different depths they're like three
millimeters deep five millimeters and
seven
steam and that's part of the effect is
that they're not flush they're these
different deaths and then they're also
kind of staggered a lot of the I guess
like the first project the business
school its kind of made with simple
shapes and simple blocks of color but as
our projects have
recent projects so it still has like
kind of a simple form but there's also
this kind of like growing kind of
pattern articulation in the later
projects
[Music]
so now the arts this is actually the
Saitama campus the first one that I
showed at the entry here and we were
asked to do a museum a small museum for
the collection of the founder of the
university so this is the slide facade
of the university so easy to museum of
art of the University Museum and then it
actually has because of the way that we
designed it it has a shape that goes
like this basically like a sleeve and so
it has to to kind of entry facades one
which faces the public as you enter the
university and one which is
more facing the campus but when you come
from the entry facing the university you
have to make a decision about like how
to enter so it's you can go this way
or you could go this way these are
signposts which actually have touchings
of epi prints in them and the museum is
a ukiyo-e museum so if you were here you
would kind of read these and you would
know that that's the way to go for the
museum if you go this way you basically
end up outside but I'll show more so
this is what you would see as you're
going to the left and then going to the
right you would enter into the museum
either here or further about so the the
development for this project came from
it actually came from not wanting to
have an elevator and so we were trying
to work out a way to to have the ramps
access the second floor because if there
wasn't going to be an elevator they had
to be able to get things out
second floor in the end once the
building was past its concept phase
curators not involved and of course
there had to be an elevator because part
is heavy and they're not going to take
everything up the ramp as to the
insurance wouldn't even cover it if they
were to do that so sometimes things
happen for a final object and and then
they they just kind of stick but that
was one of the funny things
so we basically were working with these
three galleries three boxes that we were
ramping up to and that we wanted to
float within another and they had to be
sealed boxes to protect the collections
and we were kind of floating them within
another envelope which could loops which
could be aerated and so this is showing
here like just the shell that's on the
outside the way that it's like a flat
surface there's an excavation then it
folds around these volumes that surface
is articulated with a series of slots
the slots themselves were coming from an
inspiration of this really
this yukkuri print which has brain and
the kind of motif for rain was was
actually like enlarged and that's what
we were using to make these patterns but
we kind of tweaked it a little because
we wanted it also to be random but we
were trying to get something that in a
way had a graphic sensibility that was
similar to the prints themselves this is
one of the galleries this is actually
the traditional gallery the most
conditioned space and the kind of black
wood with the white cases where the
article that's the kind of traditional
treatment then this is the entry
actually and so in the entry which is in
the middle of the building with the
traditional gallery this way and then a
contemporary gallery that way we
designed a reception desk and then the
treatment in this space is different
from the treatment outside so the
treatment outside is very smooth the
treatment inside is this kind of it's
actually a very traditional Japanese
treatment as well using boards that are
expressed but we did something slightly
different which you can see here where
we have the board's not flush with each
other we wanted the
kind of extra lip so that there would be
a little bit more of a like a texture to
it and so this is just showing like the
kind of layout for the the panels to get
this pattern and then it would basically
be repeated as these kind of
cast-in-place panels were or made the
panels on the outside were actually not
cast in place they were precast and they
were done in a factory with a slightly
different well a different kind of
technique so what you see here pushing
the wrong buttons is you can see here
like the way that there are these two
walks and then the galleries and you
enter in the middle this is the upper
floor this is the lower floor and when
you come here you end up oops in that
space you end up back here and so this
is kind of showing where you would be if
you
down and around you basically would come
outside or you could go into a glass box
gallery which is the gallery for
artisans so where there's art up above
it's more like partisans and crafts
below but it's it's still part of the
kind of art concept and then what you're
seeing here the landscaping like that's
also something that we design as part of
the project so that like it it's like
sculpted up the hill so mikata another
museum project is in Brooklyn this was
there they're kind of former home which
is a small home on the corner dating
Fort Greene on Hanson place and so this
client came to us and had one one
request wall to request one was she
wanted flexible gallery space everyone
gallery space but he also wanted to map
of Africa in the reception area and so
what you're seeing here is the identity
of the museum that we kind of developed
those light boxes projecting out or the
gallery is so the windows are blocked
off but we made light boxes with their
identity in them and then this corner is
looking at the reception area which is
where you enter so they approach with
this is kind of showing apart so it's
showing the approach toward flexible
gallery space was to have wall panels
these kind of movable walls that were on
rotating kind of like pivot hinges here
that would be custom-made so these walls
could rotate flat against this perimeter
wall so that the space could be one big
space or different sized spaces and then
in the reception area what you're seeing
is a map of the flattened out amount of
time zones of the world on the space and
then within it we were locating the
African Diaspora so the way that we
interpreted the map was to to like make
them out that located not just Africa
but actually not Africa but the African
Diaspora because it was the museum
reflect that African Diaspora and the
idea was to not have it be a 2d thing
but to have it be both 2d and 3d so for
us that was the big exploration like the
first was well how do we what is the map
how do we deal with it and these are
migration routes and migration cities
for people of the African Diaspora so we
just located them using military maps
economic migration maps slave trade maps
and just kind of located them all in the
space on the time zones we worked with a
woodworker to once we figured out the
system he fabricated the system for us
and it's actually using a very
traditional kind of Japanese handicraft
where everything is doweled into
everything else and he
to make it part of the inspiration for
this was baskets because we were working
for another planet on an exhibit for
baskets and basket weaving so what you
see here is a kind of 2d painting
painting of the map and then a 3d
projection of the map as the furniture
and the reception area with all of the
different cities located on it so with
this we also made a kind of booklet that
showed just the booklet for the map
that's showing that the African diaspora
that's that's within it then this is the
gallery and here you can you can see
some of this structure like they're
basically just these big poles with like
sleeves and rollers - and then of you
looking out where here you can see more
of the 2d and
okay so the last section that I'll show
will be on building and actually there's
one more section and research so I'm
building race is one of the categories
and there are a few projects in this
this one is a shotgun house in project
row houses in Texas which is an artist's
I guess you could call it in colony but
the artist colony is situated in a
series of row houses along with rope
houses that people are living in so the
constraints for the people who live
there is for single mothers they have to
be enrolled in school and they can
basically look there for free and that
artists come in in residency periods
like for several months
like from three six months or 12 months
to do projects and the person who kind
of thought of all of this was an artist
himself and he was very much interested
in shotgun houses and in his community
and
wanted to have like an exchange like a
way for people in the community could
hit like benefit from the art itself so
this house was actually already gutted
when when I started working on it and
there were curious histories about the
house one is the first one for me was
just the lament of the the named shotgun
and the way that shotgun is related to
the fact that it has two doors one lined
up with another and that that shotgun
you know it's like the idea that you
could shoot a gun and that the bullet
would just go straight from one door out
the next and how that itself is layered
on top of housing for or like black
people basically for like people have a
certain kind of economic and like racial
class and and what does that mean and
then also this house in particular had
traces of where walls had been that were
not there anymore and this one was
really curious because this one closed
off and there was actually another door
here so that you could have like a
separate rental unit that was team and a
lot of these houses had that so like
even though these were units where
people would live like multiple families
they could have like still a space where
someone would like like a stranger or
someone we
right there what was really unique about
this too was in the fact at the other
door was this beautiful garden and so
the houses with the mothers were on the
other side basically on the other side
of the block from this and so part of
the project came from being in the
garden and the like shadows of light in
the trees and this project is all about
that it's about like ideas about the
house of light in the house of dark but
then the way that the light dart play
has to do with shadows and so that's
what that image which won't stay this
supposed to show yeah so in doing
research about shotgun houses which is
what I started with on this project so
researching just the name of the house
and then that the type like where does
the shotgun type come from in doing
research it's a kind of contested
history like some history say it comes
from West Africa other histories say
it's a plantation type the shotgun type
is is very similar to a railroad
apartment type and so as I was
researching the shotgun I started to
also research plantation architecture
and
looking at plantation architecture I was
reading about just I had I read this one
very interesting meeting by a scholar
named John Locke which was talking about
plantation networks and so and that very
much influenced this project so it's the
idea that the plantation didn't exist in
isolation they exist with the fields
around it but then there were other
plantations with fields around them and
in the fields that's where the slaves
would go when they could get a chance
sometimes at great risk to see other
other slaves it's a place where they
would go to exchange news to have
communion community or just not to be
seen or to run away and so there are
songs that talk about the paddy rollers
and the paddy rollers are basically the
patrollers the people who would patrol
the edges of the plantation and try to
keep everyone in line and so I became
really really curious about this and
started to try to find more more
information
was looking also just what does it mean
like this house like what could a house
like this mean what does domesticity
mean for people who are in this position
and I started looking at slave
narratives looking for traces of
domesticity and basically what's put in
the house in the words are the things
that I found and I grouped them in four
categories one is art one is field and
one has to do with autonomy and so
basically the narratives that I found
for the field were all about people
going into the fields to meet each other
so it was slave narratives where to go
into the fields might mean you would you
know risk being whipped or something but
you were going because she wanted to
learn
wanted to have a church or you wanted to
meet someone in your family who is from
another plant on another plantation but
you could meet if you were in that kind
of exterior space the hearth was about
family and love and kindness and those
narratives were about people who did
things like sold themselves back into
slavery so that they could eat together
with someone they loved autonomy were
stories that were like there was one
story of a little girl who was freed and
she a lot of a lot of the stories talked
about once people were freed they just
kind of stayed where they were and so
she have stayed where she was and one
day some guys came by
am I on a horse and sent you're free you
have to go so they kind of took her and
took her on a horse to take her away but
she didn't get to take the things that
she priced the most and so to me that
was like it represented someone having a
sense of themself and the sense of
autonomy and so those those narratives
were actually placed on the windows in
in the house and they were all because
the house as I got it was already white
so it was set up for like a perfect
gallery setting everything that I put
into it was white as well this project
de facto de jour was an installation but
I should say like these installations
that I'm showing we're done by
invitation and the kind of larger
framework for the installation was
someone else's project so like the
shotgun framework was for someone else
and with this I was invited to take one
city out of 13 along this historic
training line so the train line is
actually a north-south group that was
critical for the great migration in the
20th century of african-americans from
the south to the north
during the Jim Crow era and the city
that I took is Philadelphia the city of
brotherly love seat of the Liberty Bell
and just kind of critical to the ideas
of democracy and freedom and from that
city I mapped all the others so de facto
de jure is is basically by fad or I like
implication so something that's not like
a law or rule but it's implicit not
explicit and so what I was looking at
were rules along the train line and
rules that govern space so I was
interested in kind of mapping a spatial
topography along the train line and what
I looked at well this was it had to all
be somehow contained
than a travel box that was one of the
constraints but most of the project was
really trying to figure out how to to
map roles of public accommodation within
the twentieth century and it in the end
it took the form of a game so you would
get the box and inside the box would be
three dials really simple you would pick
a time you would pick a city that the
train would stop in and then you would
pick a public accommodation that you'd
like to go to so the year is the train
stops and the traveller goes to X public
accommodations are of course like the
train station is a public accommodation
but hospital school amusement park
Church things like that and it also
included home so once you pick those
places you would pick a card so you
would you know go to this city the time
pick a card and then you would look at
it and see what the rules were the
public accommodation were so those kind
of these codes are for the public
accomodate
the city the time and then whatever the
law was so so basically like if one
wanted to go to a church but you were of
a certain race at a certain time you
couldn't go to the church and and these
are just all the laws that were passed
that government space and the idea of
having it be a game was that I wanted to
share this information and also the like
working on this in my office we all
agreed that this should be something
that people could engage in in a way
that it was interactive so that you
could feel it and it's not like someone
telling that to you so it would have to
be something that you could just kind of
play with and games are really
interesting because you can educate
people without them knowing they're
being educated and it can be kind of fun
and it doesn't have to be didactic so so
that was was how it took this form
actually but the interesting thing about
this so before the cards they were
actually all of these maps just mapping
the laws within
kind of larger matrix trying to
understand this idea of like spatial and
legal topographies like this the spatial
effects of legal topographies and so the
way things were not was this is zero so
zero is here and it's negative and
positive and negative is segregation and
positive is integration and actually
this is kind of like the mason-dixon
line like right along here like Maryland
DC DC was interesting because it
actually in terms of its laws it
reflected the south a lot like more than
the north even though we kind of think
of it as being located or in york then
these are all public accommodations and
everything is is sort of like a mirror
so it reflects in both directions tying
this along this axis to so if the time
goes from emancipation first Civil
Rights Act in eighteen sixty four or
five to the second Civil Rights Act in
see four or five and then it sort of
goes past that a little in terms of its
its time and so these are here like
major kind of events and acts that were
passed like laws that were for either
segregation or integration so all of
these things were mapped and the dots
show density so the bigger the dot the
more laws were passed the smaller the
fewer laws that were passed in those
places and then this is just a totally
different way of mapping the same thing
a linear map showing longer lines more
laws passed order lives less but the
most curious thing was the way that laws
were passed and then in the wording you
could tell that people were breaking the
law so like one law might say that
you're not permitted to go to swimming
pools but then another law would be
passed that would say
not allowed to go to swimming pools and
beaches and then another law would be
passed I would say
swimming pools the beaches and I don't
know like whatever is like the next
biggest thing so each law you could tell
that people were circumventing the law
like by the way that they tried to top
it with another law and then the other
way you could tell that the laws were
being broken you could also tell who is
breaking the laws by the penalties so in
some cases the penalties were against
train conductors be new train conductors
were breaking as law if it was against
ministers we knew ministers were
marrying people who shouldn't be married
to each other and then they also
targeted specific people so like white
women were charged along with ministers
for marrying across their race so that
was also one of the kind of surprising
things and interesting things also laws
against the Chinese when railroads were
being built the Chinese were brought in
and then there were all of these was
about racial and securities that were
passed against the Chinese but like they
occurred in different states and and at
different times and they really just
reflected
charities so the outside was a different
kind of map which was mapping which you
can see here like every state and just
as a kind of like segregation or
integration index and they were just
like not on the outside of the box
integration to your left segregation to
your right the last category for this is
and this is a project that I did and
this project predates everything that
I've shown so far which they weren't in
order but this is the one that's the
first one which I read this manifesto
about women standing urinating and this
manifesto was published in a what's
called a fanzine which I guess would be
I don't know what the equivalent would
be like right now it might be like if
you made
if you did something on snapchat or
something like that or a published it
online but this was part of like a
movement called the riot girl movement
which was a kind of not feminist with
like the big f feminist movement but
actually more of a punk feminist
movement and so I read this and as a
designer I just started wondering about
it but then also as a just with my own
kind of research interest started
wondering about it and I kind of did a
drawing of a project and then after I
did the drawing of the project I do
research on this area and then actually
built an object but it began in a way as
a meditation on identity so it's about
an object but it's also about female
identity and as its kind of put on women
as a problem so a lot of the literature
that I read in working on this project
talked about the problem of female and
now
you're the problem of like I don't know
like you know whatever I think the very
first thing I did though is I made a
standard like a specification kind of
riffing off of American Standard where I
put a drawing of the object this is
actually like another drawing of the
object after it I made it and kind of
projected a version of myself like just
a head of a brown woman with this toilet
and so it's all about it's a project
called
our standard and then the project itself
is funky sparse so it's all about new
standards and new objects for whether a
part of it has to do with objects
objects that are utilitarian but also
objects of desire so this is showing the
first drawing of the object and just
trying to think about like more
utilitarian things about how would this
actually be done how would it work and
then just a shot from like when I
actually did start to build it I blew
the drawings up full-scale and then
started reworking it actually
in my studio this is just some of the
after not after but like side effects of
the research were giants that I did from
the research that I was looking at and
then all of the different accoutrements
that came with this object in order to
make it viable so it's not just a urinal
for women in order for its you really
work clothing how to be address things
like toilet training actually came up
and and our kind of primary as something
that needs to be addressed but also in
using it there is the idea about your
you're actually addressing a female
identity these are shots from alexander
cures the bathroom which was at the time
the only book I could find that even
talked about bathrooms but it was this
extensive huge study of bathroom and
toilet practices so the way that it's
been installed as parasitically where it
would be in a location either hooked up
to water bottles or hooked up to
existing fixtures and it would you know
it would work that way so here the water
would come in
and the wastewater go out there is a
blow-dryer so you don't need paper
there's the mirror and it riffing off
the idea that women's women's lines that
women's toilets are so long because
they're always at the mirror so you've
got the mirror there but then it also
has pants that are redesigned so that
the zipper allows a woman to keep her
pants on and not be exposed when she
uses the urinal and there's also a ring
so that you don't have things hanging
down and you can operate this avert the
ring is actually something an idea I got
from a friend who was doing research in
the 19th century who told me about how
women used to have these rings to lift
up the hoops I mean her hoop dresses
when they had to do whatever in the
bygone era
but anyway so these are just clips of
like details from this and the drawing
became a kind of instruction diagram
that was also part of the object so that
someone would know how to stand in
and like traveling in Japan it's
actually interesting because the toilets
there were pit toilets the first time I
went in 1999 there were actually quite a
lot of pits where it's like toilets in
the floor and now they have Western
toilets more but they also have diagrams
that show people how to use the toilet
so it is a necessary thing when you
introduce an object to have instructions
for how to you said I think I might like
just kind of go a little faster so this
one is really just it's a project I'm
working on now but this was done in 2010
as a kind of installation of project it
was outdoors in a sculpture plant annual
and it was really a play on doilies and
wallpaper and tea so it was taking these
kind of feminine things and then
building them in steel and inserting
them outside in a playful way the last
thing I wanted to talk
though it was just how all of this
relates to teaching so I'm going to just
show one project and it's actually a
project that I've done many times I'm
doing it right now I don't call it this
anymore it's kind of become less
encumbered I suppose but it's a studio
that's based on a series of challenges
when I first ran it it was the idea that
there would be a new challenge every
week so the first studio was really this
runaway it was really run away because
it was like you were just before you
finish one thing we had to move on to
the next so it wasn't about deep dives
each time it was about responding to a
prompt and it was it was actually
devised it's always in response to
practice to the way that in practice you
get asked to do all kinds of things and
young practice especially you try to do
them and you might not actually like
have the wherewithal to do it but you
try to do it and you're doing
competitions you know you're just doing
all these different things and so the
idea of the studio was that it was a
jump start to practice and that through
doing these projects really what the
student has to rely on is themselves and
their own interests so it's not about my
interests about their interests and that
interest is the thing that develops
through these projects it's the one
thing that they can rely on so the way
that this has developed over time is
that I've learned that I can do this
kind of project within one site and all
of the projects actually become a story
about that site or a story about an idea
so the first time I did the site was the
site was Long Island City but we did
every challenge was in a different part
of Long Island City and it actually when
all the students projects came together
it was a map of the development and the
changes that were happening in that
I'm doing it right now actually in MIT
and Yale and we're using the framework
thresholds which is what I'm researching
but first holds is not just the kind of
threshold that's architectural but it's
also social thresholds like these kind
of limits like a thirst hole that
science is a limit before something
changes or limit before crisis actually
and so we're using threshold as a way of
looking at other cultures but also as a
way of looking at form but the first
time I did it it was more like just a
lot of different challenges so that's
what I'm showing here so actually these
pages are the result of the final
challenge for this studio which was to
design the book so they all had for
their final challenge to design a book
that would contain everyone else's
challenge in it and one student was
unlucky enough to win and then she like
she basically like her design was the
just design that everyone else's work
had to fit into but as things though if
you're the designer you end up doing a
lot of the work for yourself
so I didn't do this again after we did
it
time the next time the students each had
to do their own book so that one student
didn't have the burden but anyway the
way she laid it out was really quite
nice and this is showing each challenge
everything was kind of on a schedule so
it's also about the clock ticking and
the idea was to just show the the
pressure I think and the schedule and
the difference of the challenges and
then for each student how they responded
to it so the idea here is taking clips
of their responses with the challenges
and then each student have their own
pages so what was nice about her layout
was the way that she made a kind of key
on the side so every student had that
key and then the highlight is sort of
showing them the challenge and their
interest and then each student had you
know specific things that they were
interested in some were more
architectural some were more product
oriented the challenges ranged from
being
like a kind of week I try to always have
a competition so this one has a
competition for posthuman dwelling
there's a plan with ice scraper which
not a competition but just one that I
gave them because I thought well did
they do something tall and they could
then one was for crisis shelter and she
did a trashcan shelter this student one
was with public housing Amsterdam houses
behind Lincoln Center and the idea of
like could you make a kind of insertion
that could be an income generator for
the the public housing projects and so
that was one yeah so this is really just
showing one students approach to these
different challenges and the kind of
language that was developed but then all
within the framework that was given by
another spoon challenge yeah so so for
me
but this studio kind of represents I
think it represents a lot of my interest
in teaching at least like what I what
I've kind of come to after when you
first start teaching you're basically
teaching what you've been taught and
I've been teaching long enough that I'm
not teaching what I've been taught I'm
teaching something else and so what I'm
teaching is not necessarily about
context or site specific it's not
something that's like growing up from
the site or the context but it is
related to context and it's not always
driven by program and it's not driven by
process either because there's not
enough time to develop or process in it
even though all of those things are part
of it it's a different way of
approaching a studio project for for
where the students are right now so I
taught this last spring and then I'm
teaching it now this spring and the
final challenge is
it's that they would not have
disconnected challenges but that they
actually make sense of the work that
they've done the whole semester and put
it together as a thesis and the way that
it works is that each challenge is I
format each one so that they are
basically creating documents all along
this all throughout the semester and
building up an argument that they would
present at the end but they also have to
revise that argument as they come to
realize what it is or it's the end of
the semester so I think I think this is
pretty much it so I just wanted to show
you a kind of range of what practice
could be or what my purpose is as its
developed over
[Music]
[Applause]
