pleasure to be here it's my first time
being at Cooper so like you heard I'm
faculty in the Department of
Architecture at MIT I have a few main
roles outside of MIT I also run the 3d
printing and additive manufacturing
journal so the the journal was started a
number of years ago by hot Lipson from
Cornell and then I took over I think
three years ago and the journal is
interesting for me and you'll see how it
it feeds into some of the research but
it's really the only journal focusing on
all things 3d printing additive
manufacturing of all sorts and that in a
way forces it to be across all
disciplines so it's not just designers
and artists and architects it's also
mechanical engineers and material
scientists and computer scientists and
and you know we're really interested in
in the forefront of this this world
another role though is running the
research lab as you heard so I started
the research lab at MIT it's called the
self-assembly lab but before that I have
I studied architecture I have a
background in architecture and then came
to MIT for design computation and
computer science we have a growing team
now from many different backgrounds so
we have the 15 people total in the lab
these are some of the full-time
researchers so we have undergrads grads
research scientists visiting artists
product designers mechanical engineers
computer scientists biologists a lot of
different backgrounds that make up the
research lab and the way that I got into
this actually is through software so as
I said I was studying architecture and
then got really interested in the limits
of our design tools this is the first
CAD tool this is Sutherland sketch pad
that was invented in 1960 something I
believe in MIT and that obviously has
contemporary counterparts and
sophisticated design tools computational
tools simulation analysis structural you
name it we can have sophisticated tools
that allow us to imagine things
analyze things test things create things
and all of that computational power
became really fascinating to me because
in a way code became a new language for
design just like the pencil or the
t-square or CAD tools or many other
tools that were offered as architects
and designers code was now a language
that we could use to imagine and create
things and that nearly the same time as
that CAD tool was developed the first
CNC machine was invented at MIT
this is 1955 and the first time they
connected a computer with a milling
machine that obviously also has its
contemporaries in digital fabrication so
3d printing CNC routing laser cutters
water jets etc 3d printing I think the
first machine was 1985 by Chuck Hall so
you know these tools have been around
but only in the past number of decades
have they connected with the
architecture and design world and and
right as I was graduating from a five
year be arc I went to MIT and I was it
was really the kind of influx of this I
was teaching myself how to write code I
was developing software tools I was
getting really into computational things
and digital fabrication was flooding the
scene every school was trying to have
more and more 3d printers more and more
robots more and more CNC machines and
laser cutters and you know everyone was
kind of tooling up and just as I was
seeing code would become a new language
for design I was seeing code become a
new language to make things so we could
imagine things we could computationally
generate things and then we could
fabricate things that we couldn't have
fabricated before because of these new
tools so it sort of exploded our
opportunities as designers but it became
more fascinated about what happens after
that so yes we can design these
sophisticated things yes we can
fabricate customized parts but
essentially it becomes a big jigsaw
puzzle so we see all of these
fascinating installations happening
around the world at all the schools and
practices or even things like the
serpentine pavilion
PSone you know these are famous examples
of the pavilion influx and in our
culture and most of that in at least the
recent recent number of decades have
been kind of exaggerated because of
computational capabilities and digital
fabrication tools and and everyone talks
about mass customization so whenever you
hear about 3d printing or laser cutters
or CNC routers you know not only
architects and designers but across the
manufacturing space people are always
talking about mass customization like 3d
printing gives you this free complexity
supposedly that you can make anything
you want and it doesn't cost any more to
make something complex that it does to
make something simple and in some ways
we all drink this kool-aid but the
problem I kept seeing is that you know
this is an installation we did and we
did a number of other installations
around the world many other people are
doing this but no one wants to talk
about the blood sweat and tears that
went into it no one wants to talk about
the hundreds or hundreds of thousands of
rivets bolts screws man-hours and
student labor essentially that's
building all these projects and so even
if you have mass customization the big
problem is assembly so it basically the
argument is I could make every component
of a building unique and it doesn't cost
me any more money well that doesn't make
any sense if you think about assembly
because if every component is unique you
have a big assembly problem because now
you have to find exactly the right part
in this jigsaw puzzle and figure out
exactly where it goes so it's it's a
logistics nightmare so I was really
interested in that problem like why do
we have all these computational tools
and we have all this code as a new
language for machines why can't we
translate that to construction can code
become a new language for construction
so the way that we think that we can do
that is through materials by looking at
materials specifically in trying to
embed more and more material information
input embed more capabilities in our
physical materials then those materials
could help us make decisions those
materials could potentially assemble
themselves they could make us or enable
us to make better things they could
contain information
and actuation in the materials
themselves so it's you know we're seeing
software we're seeing fabrication and
we're trying to make a new proposition
for construction you know a whole nother
direction could have been well let's
just use robots and have like massive
robots that build everything for us but
we're specifically more interested in
how do we look at materials in a new way
and then more capabilities and materials
so we take that kind of stance and this
is the scale and the kind of sectors
that were interested in construction and
manufacturing product assembly
distribution logistics product
performance this sort of human scale
world and probably for all of you and
just like me with an architecture
background this is nothing new like this
is the world that we operate in the
human scale world but to me this is
really important and interesting because
for two reasons number one most people
who are talking about self-assembly or
programmable materials outside of what
I'm gonna tell you that's all happening
at the micro to nano scale so there's
really a boom in synthetic biology and
material science happening right now
where there's all these capabilities
that are emerging but they're micro -
nano scale we can't see them we can't
feel them they don't directly impact our
everyday world at least in the product
kind of building landscaping in that
human scale world so it's quite
interesting for us to think about these
principles at the human scale and then
the other reason that it's important for
us to look at this scale is because if
you look at how things are built at the
micro and the nano scale go all the way
up to the human scale then skip over the
human scale for a second and then think
about how everything is built at
planetary scales so for example with
planetary skills there's no like 3d
printers that make planets
there's no machines that make weather
patterns there's no one that dictates
traffic jams or flocks of birds or
schools of fish and a lot of these
things at huge scales and you know
population scale all the way up to
planetary scale they build themselves
there's no global designer
there's no construction process and the
same thing happens at smaller than the
human scale so think about how our
bodies are built through DNA think about
how any natural system is built think
about how anything in chemistry and
physics work there is no top-down design
there's no one that sits around and says
like I think this is what a human should
look like and then I'm gonna build like
a DNA sledgehammer and I'm gonna put the
DNA together piece by piece so there
there's really no such thing as top-down
design or top-down construction outside
of the human scale so that our human
scale we have created this thing of we
have like master visions and then we
think about these designs and then we
send these designs either to people - or
robots and people and robots build the
things that we imagine but that doesn't
happen anywhere else so that to us is
really strange like why at the human
scale are we the only ones that come up
with these top-down ideas and top-down
construction processes and what happens
if there was a kind of different
perspective on that so the main motif
that basically every other scale uses to
build things and to design things is
called self assembly and
self-organization so self assembly is
where you have a bunch of components and
those components should come together on
their own without humans or robots and
those components need to have the
blueprints inside of them those
components need the capability to
interact with each other find one
another and assemble precise structures
self-organization is closely related a
little bit different usually people
think of self-organization more as like
traffic jams and schools of fish and
flocks of birds and these processes that
basically never have a final state
they're always fluctuating between
organization and chaos whereas
self-assembly often is a final
configuration there's a final design
that it moves towards anyway we're
interested in these processes and trying
to see if we could use that at the human
scale so one of the first examples that
we showed is a project with a molecular
biologist where we have this glass flask
we shake it hard in the parts break but
then we shake it a little bit softer and
the parts come back to
so this is a you know real-time video
it's not reversed or anything I'm just
shaking it and just by changing the
amount of energy so if I shake it hard
it does one thing and if I shake it a
little bit softer it then assembles
instead of disassembles and if I don't
do anything or if I shake it really
really soft it basically won't assemble
so the only thing I'm doing is I'm
changing the amount of energy in the
system but all of the information is in
the materials and the way that we know
that is because if I'm blindfolded it'll
still build the same thing or if I give
it to you you're you know random person
on the street I come up to you and I
give you this thing in a few seconds or
minutes you can give it just the right
amount of energy and it'll always
assemble the dodecahedron structure even
if you don't know what it is even if you
have no prior knowledge there's no
expertise so it shows that there it's
basically the opposite of our
traditional construction mentality like
normally if we want to build a building
or we want to build a car you either
need skilled labor or precise machines
because no one assumes that having
unskilled labor or really bad machines
would lead to successful results you
always need to have skill or information
you need to have blueprints and this is
showing the opposite that there's really
no information in the human there's no
skill and the human the information and
the precision is in the materials the
human is just giving noisy random energy
so that was one of the first
demonstrations that you know this is
roughly that big that this could happen
outside of the the micro to nano skills
and then from that we've experimented
with lots and lots of different systems
different environments etc each time
we're trying to study why does this work
what can we do with it
how do we change the parameter so in
this case what we changed is that every
unit is different in the previous
example all the units are the same so
here they have different geometries and
they have different lock and key
mechanisms they're under underwater and
we have pumps that are agitating the
system so the parts find one another
then they assemble into a chair and the
chair shows that it's not just about
symmetric structures it's not just about
dodecahedron there's nothing specific to
that previous example that is limiting
it it's not that we can only build
certain things we can also build
arbitrary things we can also build human
design things like chairs or brackets or
connectors or components things that we
have come up with that are not just
naturally found or symmetric you know
buckyball like structures these are
these are arbitrary and the way that we
can show unique components coming
together is a principle called error
correction so basically self-assembly
works because of three three key
ingredients number one is the energy
that I talked about you need just the
right amount of energy not too much
energy not too much you can do that in
all sorts of environments you can have
turbulence you can shake it you can have
tumblers you're gonna fans a lot of
different environments number two is the
geometry the geometry is important
because if you change the geometry you
might get a chair or you might get a
bracket or you might get a dodecahedron
or you might get something else it's you
know kind of obvious that as you put
things together the geometries gonna
influence the global thing and then the
most important in my mind is the
interactions between them how do you
make sure you know if you had a bunch of
magnets and you throw a bunch of magnets
together you're gonna get a big mess
you're not gonna get anything useful so
how do you make sure that you're gonna
get something precise and repeatable and
not just get a random mess and the way
that you do that is that principle
called error correction so basically DNA
does that by ACTG so there's different
base pairs called ACTG and they they
only match the complementary pair so if
you have a a CCC TTT u whatever it is
some pattern only the complementary
pattern will be able to connect and
every one of those connections is very
weak so this phenomenon a week local
bonding so every bond is very weak it's
popping in and out popping in and out
all the time and only when you have
long sequence of correct structures do
you get much stronger than anyone bond
so that ensures that your pattern
basically can zip itself up because if
any one bond was too strong it could
never separate itself so you need to
make sure that you have all these bonds
that can connect them then you can zip
themselves up another way you can do
that is through lock and key mechanism
so you know in your house or in your car
you have this lock and key mechanism and
that's a way that you can match the
right pattern to the right lock or the
right key to the right lock and in this
case we do the same thing with geometry
so every node has a complementary node
and only that other node can match it so
it basically has a lock and key and then
the last way that you can do that is
through patterned attraction so think
about magnets or surface tension or even
like when you have static electricity
with a balloon you can actually pattern
that with positives and negatives and
the obvious one is is magnets velcro
does the same you have positive and
negative velcro and by having certain
sequences like positive negative or
positive positive negative negative or
positive negative positive negative you
have these patterns that you can make
and those patterns are only going to be
matched with the complementary pair and
so in that way you can ensure that very
precise structures should assemble even
if it's a random environment only when
the two complementary pairs stick will
they match and then you can grow so any
one of these is kind of weak but then as
it grows larger and larger it gets it
gets more precise and stronger so the
first one was in a kind of tumbling
shaking environment the second one was
in a water tank and then this one that
I'm going to show you is in an aerial
environment here on the left-hand side
you can see all the these are components
at the nodes they're actually made with
velcro nodes so we have positive and
negative velcro and then that's how we
can pattern to make sure that you know
certain connections can connect with the
complementary ones the other thing here
is that they're all made with 36 inch
diameter weather balloons so the weather
balloons
have helium in them and they can float
around I'll show you a video and then
talk about it
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Laughter]
so the idea here was that you could have
components that assemble above the
airspace or above a construction site in
the airspace and then come together as
the helium dies it then comes back to
the ground and you're left with this
space frame structure particularly we
were interested in that concept of that
provocation for urban construction sites
or extreme environments places where
it's hard to get people hard to get
machines hard to get materials it would
be beneficial that we could assemble
without piece by piece
human precise labor but that we could do
it in the air and as I showed each one
of these experiments you know these are
just three of many that we have done
they're trying to test something
different trying to test different scale
so kind of centimeter scale structures
up too many metre scale structures
trying to test different environments
tumbling versus fluids versus aerial
structures testing different types of
connections the lock and key mechanism
unique geometries versus velcro in this
case lattice cubic lattice structures
basically all of this research we really
think of as our basic research those
basic research and applied research I'll
show you some of the applied research in
a second the basic research in a kind of
academic setting is typically things
that you're trying to ask questions
fundamental questions about what's
possible ask questions about our world
why does this happen why doesn't that
happen if this happens what can we do
with it what's the logical extent how do
we push the limits of scale and material
properties etc so in that way it's sort
of our our farthest futures are our most
abstract but you could think about it in
a way as a future of fabrication or
future of construction that we're
imagining that material should have the
information embedded in
those materials could be assembling new
things
the ultimate goal in my mind is that
it's not only about pure assembly but
it's also about how design emerges
through that process that you know you
can imagine that chair for example and
in the same way that our bodies grow and
adapt or evolve or respond to different
forces in their environment it would be
really interesting if you can have some
materials you do pop deposit them in
some environments subject them to some
forces and the design and assembly
emerges through that environment not
just that we've predetermined the design
like we've shown but rather design could
emerge through the functionality of the
process so another category of research
we focus on as I was saying is much more
applied applied research the goal is
that you want to take that research and
it's probably more applicable to many
everyday applications it's much maybe
more near term and the goal here so this
research is called programmable
materials the goal here is that we want
to take physical materials and add
information and capabilities into those
materials in order to enable them to be
actuator sensors enable them to have
computational capabilities or enable
them to be smarter and have higher
performance perhaps or to be physically
active literally transforming themselves
and the way that we do that is a few key
ingredients so the first thing that we
start with is the materials and the
geometry so you know if you want to
design a facade system or a chair or you
know product some other product like a
garment you're probably going to start
with the material properties for example
or that's one place to start so think
about wood so if you take wood for
example the second thing you want to
think about is what kind of activation
energy can I use to trigger the wood and
the obvious solution would be moisture
so we know that woods Wells with
moisture so we can use that activation
energy in order to to do something with
the wood but you could start at the
opposite end you could say what happens
if I have a lot of temperature
in my application like a lot of heat
then you want to think about materials
that could be activated by that
temperature so maybe you're going to use
a metal or maybe you're gonna use a
plastic thermoplastic for example so you
take that material property but you have
to fabricate it in a way that it has
very specific geometries in two
dimensions and three dimensions because
that geometry is basically encoding the
information in the structure so it's
sort of like Braille you have geometric
information the joints the backbone the
structure of it and the 2d and 3d
pattern maybe it's multiple materials or
maybe it's a single material just like
wood grain for example the wood grain
isn't encoding what the wood is going to
do when it swells and that allows you to
enable certain type of mechanical
transformation like folding curling
stretching shrinking twisting so you can
take some material activate it with some
energy and get it to physically
transform so the way that we started
this is with a project called 4d
printing and actually before that when I
was a grad student I was under Neil
Gershenfeld slab and the Center for bits
and atoms and we were under a DARPA
grant so DARPA had a program called
programmable matter I was 10 plus years
ago and programmable matter at the time
meant to program matter we would likely
use robots so basically everyone in the
grant was developing smaller and smaller
robots and probably because of the
architecture background I started to
build larger and larger robots you know
thinking that maybe we could build these
large modules that were robotic and they
could reconfigure assemble themselves
transform etc but quickly I started to
question that that principle because if
you want to build a building you
probably don't want to build every brick
out of a robot because if every building
component is a robot it's likely gonna
cost a lot more it's likely gonna fail
it's likely gonna be harder to assemble
so it's not that scalable to build
everything out of robots as you scale up
for potentially maybe as you scale down
it makes more sense but but still maybe
maybe not so we started to think about
what are other ways that we could
a program of material to transform and
then I started this collaboration with
Auto Dustin Stratasys the goal being
that we would multi material print so we
would use sort of the latest printing at
the time which was the konnex poly jet
printer you could deposit many different
materials at the same time by depositing
those different materials and
three-dimensional structures and taking
advantage of different material
properties we could get these printed
structures to transform so we print
different materials the black material
here is just a rigid a rigid plastic and
then there's another material that's a
little bit harder to see in this in this
video but it's a hydrogel and that
hydrogel is swells with moisture so you
print these structures and at every one
of the joints for example we can have
different geometries in those geometries
encode what kind of angle it's going to
turn into or if it's gonna fold left or
fold right or if it's gonna curl or
twist or whatever you want it to do so
that's how you encode that information
about what it's going to transform into
the black materials the structure of the
backbone the joints all that kind of
stuff and then the hydrogel when it
meets moisture it senses that an
environment and actuates it allows you
to control it through printing different
combinations of that thicker material
will be stronger but slower than a
material weaker but faster you can have
different joints for example so we then
figured out how to do fold and curling
stretching all these different
mechanisms so we'd print the structure
we dip it underwater and then it
transforms from a line to a cube or a
line into the letters MIT or a flat
sheet into a truncated octahedron or a
flat sheet that can do curved crease
origami into a saddle shape flat sheet
that can expand and contract to create
double curvature without any manual
forming a 50-foot long strand that
folded into a protein we printed a lot
of different structures that went from 1
D 2 to D 1 D 2 3d 2d to 3d different
types of transformation each one of
those experiments was trying to test
something different in the beginning we
only knew how to
twofold things that we went to curling
and then we went to arbitrary angles and
twisting and expanding and contracting
but after that work one main question
kept coming up how do we do this with
other materials and other machines
because a lot of companies started to
approach us and say can we do it for
clothing or shoes or cars or planes or
medical devices and it wasn't just about
plastics and it wasn't just about
printing you know we had shown it in
this one specific way but could we do
the same thing with other materials and
other manufacturing processes and that's
where we came up with this much larger
agenda that we call programmable
materials so we want to be able to
ideally take any material you can think
of textiles metal wood plastic foam
rubber and take different types of
fabrication processes printing sure but
also lamination injecting you know
welding weaving knitting you know all
these different fabrication processes to
arrive at similar results but with new
new materials so this started with a
group of collaborators and product
designers and computer scientists
mathematicians material companies
software companies and now it's grown
into many many many other other
collaborations we've worked on a number
of different materials the first
category is on composites like carbon
fiber Kevlar fiberglass that can
transform I'll show you some of that
another category is on textiles and we
have a lot of work on textiles that I'll
show and you have even even more recent
work looking at how textiles can
transform but I'll start with wood
because I hinted at it before wood is a
really interesting example there's a
long lineage of using wood as an active
material so you can think about Japanese
joinery for example or boat building or
like wine or other alcoholic barrels
wood barrels or Eames furniture all of
these examples use moisture to swell
wood and when you get the wood to swell
it then becomes active often in the in
the joints or the boat example it's
about precision and water proofing you
can use the moisture transfer
in order to make the material swell and
be more precise in the Eames example
they would steam bend plywood to get the
the famous forms with the chair and then
in the more contemporary example on the
right alkane mangas this group in in
Stuttgart uses wood veneer to open and
close and that based on the grain
pattern of the wood it opens and closes
with different curvature but the two
main challenges here in the Eames
example there's a lot of energy that
goes into forcing the plywood into shape
so they have you know really complex
molds and they need a lot of steam and
they force the plywood into the shape
that they have predetermined so they're
not really taking advantage of the
natural capability of wood to curl or to
help them design new capabilities
forcing it and then on the right hand
side it has the beautiful elegance of
responding to the wood grain but the
problem is you're limited by the grain
that you can find so I think about that
is the sort of tree in the forest
problem you don't want to have to go to
the forest to find just the right tree
that has just the right grain properties
to do whatever you want you want the
natural property wood but you want the
flexibility in design so what we started
to do is actually print wood and by
printing with wood we can then create
our own grain we can create different
densities and different 2d and 3d
structures of wood but still have the
natural property of the wood that would
swell with moisture so we originally
started to make our own filaments you
can now buy wood filaments so we extrude
it it's basically sawdust and plastic
it's sort of like an MDF you can extrude
with that and then you print your own
grain so you design different grain
patterns you then subjected to moisture
you can either dip it under water or you
can change the moisture in the
environment and by changing the grain
pattern you get different behaviors
curling behaviors so you can have a wood
that curls or twists like this or you
can have wood that folds to 90-degree
angles or any arbitrary angle you
would the curls into furniture like
shapes a lot of different behaviors
you're gonna have fish scales with wood
all sorts of different shapes that would
naturally wouldn't do you can have total
freedom in the design that the behavior
of the wood is the same so then we did
the knot to the Eames we made the the
famous plywood elephant but we showed
that you could just print the flat
pattern just by subjecting it to
moisture you can get the elephant to
form itself into all the complexity just
by designing that complex grain and then
another project we did more recently
with Christoph the product designer was
these flat sheets so the idea was that
we would print these flat sheets really
really fast with minimal materials
there's no extra support materials
they're just printed flat you would ship
them in vacuum pack seals but with
moisture inside of the package so that
when you opened it it then transforms
into these bowls and baskets so the flat
sheets are easy to print these bowls and
baskets would be nearly impossible or
very difficult and time-consuming but
they can transform themselves just from
the moisture embedded in the package so
then another category was talking about
is the composites so we take in this
case carbon fiber but it's a very
special kind that's fully flexible so
normally carbon fiber is rigid and
strong in this case it's very strong and
light but flexible and then we print or
bond or spray onto that carbon fiber
with different polymers and then as the
temperature changes in this case the
carbon fiber can fold repeatedly to
different angles so by changing the
pattern that we print just like the wood
grain if we print different patterns in
relationship to the carbon fiber weave
we can get it to twist or curl versus
fold to a specific angle by changing the
different materials that we print or
bond onto the carbon fiber we can get it
to respond to moisture versus
temperature so we can change the
activation or we can change the angle or
behavior of it so an example
collaboration with this is a project
that we did with Airbus and they came to
us with this challenge at the top of
their engine they
have a hole in the engine and that that
cools the engine so it's important for
the functionality so the engine doesn't
overheat but it causes drag so it
reduces the efficiency of the plane so
what they were going to do typically
would be to add an electromechanical
flap or a hydraulic or pneumatic flap
the same as the wing so it open and
closed but the problem here is the same
thing as the kind of robotic building
problem which is that if you add a
hydraulic or electromechanical flap it
adds weight which also reduces the
efficiency the plane it adds cost it's
probably going to fail now they need
more maintenance now they need more
controls run to the cockpit it's gonna
stop production you know there's all
these constraints that would make
solving this problem actually worse than
not solving the problem so they came to
us and we developed this single piece of
carbon fiber so this is a cross section
through the component there's a single
piece of carbon fiber and it opens and
closes to control the air flow so
there's no electronics there's no motors
or sensors or anything the material is
the actuator and the sensor at first we
were doing that based on temperature
change but you can imagine if you land
in Antarctica versus Arizona it's not
particularly useful to respond only to
temperature change so then it went to
pressure differential so you can notice
that when you're driving down the
highway and you roll the window down and
things get sucked out and it's called a
pressure pressure differential and you
can use that as a force so basically as
the plane is flying faster or slower
there's a certain force that causes the
material to transform and when you
reduce the speed the force is not there
and then the material can can go back so
that's one example of that another
category of materials all the textile so
there's a lot of ways to activate
textiles the most simple that we started
with was a pre stretch so you take a
stretchable textile you stretch it
around the plate and then you print or
bond or stitch or spray you add some
other material onto that stretch textile
so in this case we're just printing but
you can do the same thing with other
processes so we print on to it the
material that we're printing onto is you
know just a simple standard polymer
nothing fancy it's just the stretch of
the textile that's actually providing
the energy
so by printing a circle for example when
you cut it out it jumps into a
hyperbolic paraboloid so the different
thickness of the material and the
geometry that you print promotes
different things like pleading and
tufting and textiles where itself forms
and rather than manually forming the
textile the stretch of the textile is
what causes it to transform so then
again with Christoph goober on the
product designer and a show in London we
did a project where you stretch the
textile around and then you print this
very specific pattern so that when you
cut the textile it then jumps into the
shape of a shoe so it takes a single
material and can transform itself into
all the curvature of the shoe and this
was a nod to the shoe manufacturing
space because it's really interesting
space that that innovates a lot but shoe
manufacturing is predominantly manual so
there's a lot of forming and stitching
and gluing when they make shoes out of
leather they take big you know natural
pieces of leather and someone's
literally sitting there looking at the
leather and figuring out where to cut
and where to place different components
on the leather they're manually forming
these two things together so there's
almost no automation in in shoe
manufacturing and there's a lot of
people pushing the boundaries of that
now but that was a kind of new way to
make shoes potentially so then we
started to go beyond that combining what
you saw in the carbon fiber we thought
well maybe we could sort of make our own
textiles by taking these fibers and
filaments we could make macroscale
structures that when you shine light on
them they transform so these are 2d and
3d structures that have a behavior
called augs it's so authentic is when a
material normally when you stretch it it
gets smaller but in augment cereals when
you stretch it it gets bigger and when
you push on it it gets smaller uniformly
so it's materials that transform
uniformly expanding and contracting and
we can build these 2d and 3d materials
out of these fibers and sheets and
filaments making
sort of macroscale textiles and the the
ultimate goal here was to create
porosity change so you can imagine
apparel or garments or Footwear that
open and close for breathability or
waterproofing when your body gets hot or
the temperature outside increases or
when Sun hits it or moisture hits it so
we now have a project looking at taking
that further through industrial knitting
so another way is to change the
structure so this is a biaxial braid
it's basically a Chinese finger trap and
by puppeteering this by basically
pulling on different strands or
different toes in the braid are these
fibers you can get this by axial braid
to expand or contract to you know
lengthen or shrink just like you know
from a Chinese finger trap but what's
interesting about this is that the braid
is the structure and the flexibility so
there's no mechanisms there's no like
joints or or you know ball joints or
angles or anything like that it's just
the the over under over under over the
braid that gives it both structure and
flexibility and by playing with them you
can get pretty massive transformations
so you can use this as a 30 foot tall
structure the same exact thing us
pulling on it to load test and then this
is a sixty foot structure the exact same
principle so there's a little person
normal size but little in comparison to
the tower if you're pulling on a sixty
foot structure making it transform so we
were interested in what if we could make
architectural scale transformations
without hydraulics pneumatics and
robotics and the reason we started down
that road is this is built with in
collaboration with a company called tape
towers they're based out of Lititz
Pennsylvania they make all the rock
shows an Olympic venue so like Adele or
you - has anyone seen Chuck Hoberman
structure from you - anyone no I'm
talking about
so this transformable structure YouTube
concert and a lot of the Olympic venues
they're the ones that build it and
they're the ones that design those stage
sets and shows and almost all of those
Cirque de Soleil or any
those examples are big electromechanical
hydraulic pneumatic structures they're
basically architectural structures for
millions and millions of dollars that
they need to assemble in 24 hours they
need to work like a huge robot and then
they need to disassemble it ship it
somewhere else and build it again so
it's a kind of extreme scenario for
construction where you have like the
ultimate timeline for construction and
it needs to do all these crazy
mechanical maneuvers so it would be
really interesting for them if they
could basically have textiles that were
as large as buildings but could be
transformed shipped and assembled in you
know a matter of minutes to hours would
be really lightweight low low energy so
we have explored a lot of that that then
turned into a project with Google where
we made a transformable meeting space so
Google has this new campus out in
Mountain View and they were interested
in thinking about the open office
there's closed office so open offices
are great for flexibility closed offices
are great for privacy
neither is great for both so what if you
could have a meeting space that when
it's when you don't need it you just
transform it it's up in the ceiling when
you do need it you transform it down and
you can have a meeting space or a phone
booth or a room or an office so you can
kind of transform these pods and we've
made many different configurations like
that circular space wall configurations
ground floor and a lot of different
shapes and sizes of these different
meeting spaces that can transform this
is based on that same biaxial braid
principle and then one last project in
this programmable materials section this
is actually a student project from one
of my studios in undergrad studio where
they were tasked at building
transformable towers so this is a
30-foot tower made out of weather
balloons inside a textile sleeve and
they basically just pull on these
tendons there's three tendons and just
the configuration of like a ABAA
whatever pattern and the tendons you can
get this 30-foot tower to transform into
almost any shape so it's basically like
a huge robot arm that can go into any
shape you want but it was made for
few tens of dollars in in about an hour
so they can make these large things that
transform in really simple ways so all
of that category research is about
transformation how materials go from one
shape to another shape you know one need
to 2d and 2d 3d etc we do that with
small scale materials we do that with a
lot of different printing and
fabrication processes now we're going
into industrial knitting and textiles
but we also try to do that at much
larger scale transformations
so sometimes it's high-tech and
sometimes it's low-tech ed at many
different scales the third category of
research is on phase change so what if
materials can go from solid to liquid
and liquid to solid what if it's not
just about shape change could they
change property as well and so one
principle that we study is called
granular jamming so granular jamming is
a kind of strange word for a really
common phenomenon so when you go to the
grocery store and you buy coffee and the
coffee comes in this brick like this
really rigid pack because it's vacuum
packed all the particles inside of there
gets stuck and they have nowhere to go
so the coffee beans or coffee grinds are
basically acting like a solid even
though if you cut a cross section
through it they would be amorphous
particles they're arranged in a kind of
random way and from the material science
world we know that when particles are
arranged in a random way that should be
a liquid only when they're crystallized
or in their lattice structures that they
are they usually solid but these are
amorphous particles that act like solid
what's interesting about it though is
that it can go from solid to liquid
liquid to solid so often granular Jam
mobile systems use a vacuum and a
membrane so you have a membrane you have
particles inside and you pull a vacuum
on it and by pulling a vacuum you mint
you make it strong and rigid if you
change the particle configuration you
can get different behaviors if you're at
the beach and you jump on the sand and
it's really hard and it hurts but when
you play with the sand it's really soft
that's the same same phenomenon it's a
way to go solid to liquid without
temperature change we've done like this
project was an acoustic project with
Google
horrible acoustic panels another project
that we did was on reversible packaging
with steel case a furniture company so
you know you have a chair they normally
wrap a blanket around the chair and then
ship it but in our case we made this
this blanket that has foam particles
inside of it you wrap it around and you
pull a vacuum on it it basically molds
around the chair it turns into styrofoam
you ship it and on the other side you
release the vacuum and then you know you
have a blanket again so you can wrap it
around a table or something else but
more interesting to that in my mind is a
project we did with Grazia koehlers
group at ETH Zurich so we did this
project where it started out we went to
a conference on jamming so there's a
whole group of people mostly physicists
and material scientists that only study
jamming and there's all these people
that are interested in like mining
companies are interested or even like
candy companies or coffee companies
because in their factories like candy
gets stuck in a hopper or gets stuck in
a pipe and they don't know why so
they're interested in this phenomenon
and and a few architects went there
gratia Kohler went there I went there a
few other people and we started thinking
about how do we use this principle in
this phenomenon for architecture because
essentially you don't want to build a
building out of a jam bubble system
typically because you it's super energy
intensive you need a lot of vacuum which
you know is not easy to have and then
it's super susceptible to puncture if
you just puncture the membrane then your
building will fall down which is not
very good so we started to think about
that the reversibility is the most
important aspect and then we developed a
system where you can do this with rocks
and string so just loose rocks and loose
string and we exhibit it in Chicago in
2015 at the architecture biennial so
basically we have this yellow bounding
box and we layer rocks and string rocks
and string rocks and string over and
over and over again the robot spits out
the string and very specific patterns
and then when we remove the bounding box
all the rocks fall away that don't have
the string so only where you have the
string the rocks jammed so there's
basically loose rocks that fell away all
the rigid
rocks are just because of the string so
we printed the string in specific
patterns the string takes tension the
rocks take compression
there's no adhesive there's no
connectors or binders or anything it's
just loose rocks and string it can take
three tons on top of it on in this
specific shape and we were interested in
it specifically because it's it's
effectively reversible concrete so
concrete is great as a construction
material because it comes as a liquid
and then you pour it and it turns solid
but the problem is that it's really slow
so it takes a long time for you to wait
like one of the lead leading times in
construction is just waiting around for
concrete so in this case you pour it
like a liquid because it's you know a
bunch of rocks or particles and then
it's instantly solid there's no waiting
there's no cure time and then more
interested in that it is reversible so
here at the end of the show we just
pulled out the string and just by
winding up the string the whole tower
then disintegrates so it's like you
could build a modular system a concrete
in order to get rid of it you have to
destroy it you can never reuse it again
you know bricks are sort of modular but
in this case once you reverse it you're
left with exactly the same material it's
a hundred percent recyclable you're left
with 100 percent the same rocks in a
pile of rocks and a spool of string so
you could just pour it jam it pour it
reverse it Jam it and do it again over
and over and over again and then this is
the last project I'll show it's a
project on again phase change liquid to
solid but it's a new printing process
that we developed so steel case again we
had a collaboration with them trying to
look at 3d printing and this gets all
the way back to some of our our other
interests in 3d printing and they were
interested in challenging the three
issues of a 3d printing so basically
it's just too slow it's too small and
the materials are not good so how could
you print a chair for example because
today if you printed a chair it would
take forever even if it was possible
because most printers are pretty small
and then the mature
girls are just not up to their standards
so we developed a new process called
rapid liquid printing and we print
inside of a vat of gel and that gel
supports the material so the gel
eliminates gravity you can draw inside
of the gel like calligraphy like
three-dimensional calligraphy if you
change the pressure or the speed you get
different line weights and then the
material cures underneath the gel so you
draw in 3d space as fast as the Machine
can go you can have different nozzles in
different shapes and sizes literally
like calligraphy you extrude the
material it's two-part material or its
photo pure or chemical cure and when
it's soft when it solidifies you can
take it out of the gel and just wash it
with water so the reason this is faster
is because there's no support material
normally with 3d printing if you want to
print something you need to print the
supports we don't have to print layer by
layer and we also don't have to wait for
the material to cure the reason we can
print bigger is because it's really only
limited by the size of the Machine so we
have a 5 foot by 10 foot machine for
example or we can print millimeter
structures and then in terms of material
properties we print with only
off-the-shelf industrial material so
silicone rubber and foam polyurethane
rubber foam plastic acrylics epoxies
even concrete's for example we can print
with so it's not like some super special
strange 3d printed material it's the
same exact material that you know a
company would use for the cushion in a
chair or a rubber gasket or you know or
the soles of your shoes it's the same
material in this case we printed the
beach bag so this is a beach bag made
out of silicone rubber you can see the
kind of behavior of it they're true
elastomers we we have structures that
can stretch and Bend and curl we have
rigid structures a lot of different
materials so in this case it's much much
faster if you want to compare it to like
SLA printing we can be at least 50 times
faster than typical printing we can
print up to you know five ten-foot
structures all the way down to very
small and we can print with them
standard dust raw materials one of the
most recent projects is showing
inflatable so we print with silicone
rubber and then we can inflate it to
make soft robots or other actuator
so that this is a structure that's
totally airtight watertight and by
printing different chambers you can get
different behaviors you can get it to
you know more from one shape to another
you can get it to expand or fold or curl
you can get it to articulate you can
stretch it so normally 3d printed
elastomers or are not even close to
traditional elastomers and rubbers you
can get maybe 100 200 percent elongation
at best and in our case we're showing
close to a thousand percent elongation
which is the stated material spec so if
you got a rubber that you were gonna
cast we showed that after printing you
have the same properties as as the
molding process so then for the Victoria
and Albert Museum in London this is a
collaboration with BMW we did a whole
kind of lattice as matrix and we can
inflate and deflate different chambers
and we can make this single sheet
transform into all sorts of different
structures so they were interested in
this as a kind of future of car
interiors so you can think about like a
car seat for example maybe when you sit
down it morphs around your body or it
becomes more rigid or more soft or it
creates massage features or airbags so
it's all inflating and deflating in
different different zones and then
actually in New York right now at the
Patrick parish gallery we have an
exhibition where we used that same
inflation technique and we collaborated
with Christoph again to make all these
products we made lamps and chandeliers
and vases and sconces and you know all
sorts of different products all of the
inflation so we print and then we
inflate them and they transform into
different shapes and sizes
so all of this research from the
self-assembly to programmable materials
and the phase change materials all gets
back to the same problem in my mind that
essentially as industries try to build
smarter and smarter things we're
fighting this uphill battle of cost and
complexity so you know everyone wants to
build smarter machines smarter building
smarter clothes smarter shoes and the
only way we typically know how to do
that is to have more skilled labor or
more automation so basically we
need to pay more money or we need to
have smarter things that cost more or
fail more often or have more components
or more devices so think about like
smart buildings today that typically
means more devices like more thermostats
and more robot shading systems and
cooling and sensors and devices and all
those things cost more and more complex
and harder to assemble etc so you're
you're basically in this conundrum where
the smarter thing is worse than the dumb
thing and we are always trying to
question ourselves like how do we build
smarter things that have less parts that
have less complexity and have less
failure so they're truly smarter and
better and easier to use and easier to
implement and then the other thing that
we're up against is that when we think
about smarter construction or smarter
assembly everyone goes to automation
so basically automation is like the only
solution that anyone talks about in
construction and manufacturing no one is
talking about cheaper labor because
basically we're in this problem where
construction - manufacturing
manufacturing cost too much so the
reason that everyone goes abroad is
because labor is cheaper and then labor
gets more expensive as the companies
develop and then they move to another
country and then it gets more expensive
and then they move and you know as
everyone knows Trump is trying to force
manufacturing to come back to the US
which is you know maybe not the best
idea but the problem isn't about labor
the problem is how do we assemble things
in better smarter easier ways and most
people think about automation basically
we're gonna have robots that assemble
things or robots that build buildings
and we have kind of two perspectives on
that one of them is if it's true that
we're going to have automation and
construction and manufacturing if if
automation is going to change
manufacturing construction we should
still be building with smarter materials
because those materials can collaborate
with the robot those materials could
allow us to build things in a better way
so instead of having to have these crazy
high precision capable robots maybe we
could have just average robots but we
can deposit materials and then the
material can kind of do the last mile
problem
can become more precise or it can say
you know there's too much load here so
the rollout you need to move over here
and you need to you know sense this
capability and let's go over here or
maybe we're just building with the robot
the same way we build traditionally but
at least the products that we make
should be smarter the products that we
make should be able to adapt to our
bodies adapt to our environment
transform have have higher performing
systems without all the devices so
that's one perspective the other
perspective is a bit more ambitious and
you know through our work and a lot of
our colleagues in different fields and I
talked about before that DARPA grant on
programmable matter if you look at all
the researchers who are under that DARPA
grant almost every single one of them is
not doing robotics anymore most every
single one of them is doing materials
soft squishy robotic systems through
materials so through synthetic biology
and DNA origami or multi material
printing or programmable materials like
we've shown a granular damnable system
or soft robots all of them are doing
essentially robotics without the robots
and so we think that the future of
robots is not necessarily
electromechanical hydraulic pneumatic
systems the future of robots is
materials materials that can sense
actually make decisions have information
embedded in them so it may be automation
or robotics is the future but it's a
kind of different perspective than we
thought it was because those
capabilities are going to be embedded in
our clothing and our shoes and our
buildings in really really elegant
material ways so the the goal and the
vision of the lab is that today we
program computers and machines and
tomorrow we'll program matter itself so
I'll leave it there and maybe take a few
questions thanks so much
I don't know how we're doing on time if
you want to do questions or move what
are your thoughts questions concerns
I think thanks very much for your for
the talk it's super provocative
interesting
things you're working on but I also
curious about how your I think the
parallel project that you have going is
what is the nature of learning and
research and what do you do as the
teacher versus what do you do
try to get something look and and so how
does the structure of your Center in
your lab work when do students bring the
projects into the room we want this
industry bring projects into the room
why do you ask the question what are we
trying to do materials need to be we
need to question so there's a lot of
different angles on that so one how the
lab works is most of the people that
come to the lab are either former
students or people that reach out like
student undergrads and grads that reach
out to us and you either know the work
or know me through teaching and then
become part of the lab and at MIT they
undergrads for example have something
called your ops undergraduate research
opportunity they get paid to do research
or they get credits do research and then
grad students are getting paid tuition
or stipend and so in some ways they they
want to do the research because they're
interested or because they want to get
credit or because they want to get paid
so they you know operates in that way
sort of like a business and it's less
like a studio so I try to differentiate
a studio in a lab because in the studio
I think the goal is for the students to
develop their own agenda and their own
thesis and their own direction and you
know I can start with a provocation or a
site or constrain or whatever it is but
really the students need to guide it and
lead it and that needs to lead to their
future careers and that's you know what
enabled MIT enabled me to do that
through through that program but when
they're in the research lab the research
lab itself has an agenda and has
projects and has funding and has goals
and whatever and the students are
working on those and they can totally
lead them they can start new projects
they can all do that but that you know
in some ways it's more like an office
and that way that they're part of a
larger team that that has an agenda it's
not only their personal goals and agenda
and so I try to separate those because I
think they're too you know different and
useful perspectives and how projects
start in the lab it comes from all
different directions so one of them is
some kind of more academic perspective
like it's the what ifs is like is it as
possible it's they're kind of crazy
scenarios it's maybe that aligns more
with like exhibitions and gallery
projects or collaborations with artists
and designers like or the granular
jamming work all the self-assembly work
a lot of those are like starting from a
question or a provocation like these as
possible can we do something and then
you test it you know rigorously and you
figure something out and discover
something and build it and scale it and
demonstrate it some way and maybe then
we'll write papers or do something else
with it or show videos or whatever and
then another way is it comes from
industry like the Airbus collaboration
or some of the Google collaborations
start from some issue that they're
having they approached us they see some
of the research they say is it possible
to take some principles you've learned
and apply them and then most of our work
is somewhere in the middle that it you
know it starts like the the rapid liquid
printing where it's a collaboration with
someone a company or you know agency or
an even an exhibition and it's like
what's what's interesting in this space
or what's the future of 3d printing or
we're interested in like a new type of
packaging or you know it's very very
open but it's within a certain domain
and then you know my mind that's the
kind of best of both worlds and we think
of I think about the spectrum of the
radical to the relevant so like a lot of
our projects are are on one end of the
spectrum and the MOE of the best is when
it's in between like the rocks or some
of the balloons on this radical spectrum
like what would be the most interesting
provocative wildest craziest possible
thing we could think of to to push the
limits of what we can do or what's
possible today and then the other end
what would be the most useful applicable
beneficial
thing that we could do for some problem
or society or whatever or collaborator
and the best is when you solve a look
both ways but often we land somewhere
here and our projects you know align
somewhere along that along that spectrum
so yeah I think the lab I teach
full-time and I run the lab and you know
I'm doing a lot of different things and
they all you know maybe it's not the
most clear separation between the two
but we you know we tend to not be like a
typical academic lab where it's just
like we get government grants and then
we write papers on it often it starts
with a gallery or it starts with an
industry partner or it starts with some
like crazy idea student has and we see
if it's possible and we explore and then
we figure out where that leads us and so
it's a little bit more blurry how we do
these things I don't know if that
answers it yeah
I understand that this on the scale just
materials themselves Andy yeah I mean in
some ways all of that work all the
self-assembly work is is based on
thermodynamics or at least that's one
example of where this happens and we're
just showing it at a kind of macro scale
so in the balloons for example if you
had many millions or hundreds of
millions of those particles and you
zoomed way out that would be a gas you
know that would be a temperature change
from one environment to another or that
would be a chemical transition from a
solid tool or from a liquid to a solid
like the balloons is exactly
crystallization so if you think about
graphite to diamond graphite and
diamonds are made out of the exact same
thing the only difference is the way
they came together which is like the
balloon structure if you make a cubic
lattice or you make something else
you're going to give a different
material so it is you know chemical
transition or it is thermodynamics or
it's a lot of these systems where you
have components and they come together
on their own but talking about the basic
versus Applied Research are one of our
latest projects in that category of work
is a project in the Maldives and it it's
an example in my mind of where basic
research turned to Applied Research in
like almost a day so this group from the
Maldives approached us because they were
interested in or they were concerned
about sea level rise obviously so it's
an island nation like like many coastal
regions or island nations they're
worried that you
to the sea-level rise but the Maldives
is really fascinating because it's
unique in that it's grown over the past
100 plus years so basically sea level
ride is double doubled and tripled as we
know and the islands should be sinking
but they're actually growing which is
really strange and they're not really
sure why but that points to the fact
that sand accumulates naturally and
self-organizes into sandbars and islands
like these islands are grown basically
through sandbars it depends on if it's a
volcanic island or you know San made
island and so what we're trying to do
right now is study why do sandbars
happen and merge why do islands grow
sometimes and can we collaborate with
the forces of the wave to accumulate
sand and could you design it so that
your island always grows so imagine you
have an island and you put certain
things in the water depending on the
tides and the swell and weather and
patterns you could have different shapes
underwater maybe they could more from
one ship to another and potentially it
could ensure that your islander your
Beach could always grow instead of
sometimes grow and not sure why and why
does it sometimes get destroyed you know
there's a lot of people that look at
building reefs off of beaches to stop
beach erosion but the problem is it only
works in certain conditions like if you
have a swell direction or a tide from
another orientation it doesn't work any
longer and actually hurts the beach so
we're anyway we're studying this
self-organization of sand and it's a
very very real problem that can have
real implications and it started from
this kind of super academic basic
research like self-organization
self-assembly and
really quickly so we're pretty fluid oh
sorry for that for the metaphor but
we're pretty fluid going from applied to
basic or going from the industry
collaborator to like a government agency
to you know academic collaboration or
gallery or something we try to work on
different scales and different domains
and figure out what makes the most sense
at the time
[Music]
it's kind of changing the tech topics of
architecture so how do you think this
spark material material is going to
yeah good question yeah I don't think
that we're proposing you know that the
entire building would be making made out
of one system and like every detail
needs to be the same thing I think it's
more about trying to look at different
materials and specifically understand
what those materials are capable of and
and tap into that so for example we
built a basically like a sticker or
graphic that you could apply to a
glazing system like a skylight or facade
that would open and close based on
sunlight so some of those programmable
materials and it's just open and closing
all the time based on sunlight or if
it's cloudy year you know overcast and
that's a very specific material it's not
saying that the entire building is gonna
be made out of the material has like a
very specific application it's not
structural it's you know it's for
shading or solar heat gain and then we
worked on an acoustics project or as
about adaptive acoustics with jamming so
you know that has a totally another
application so I guess I'm more
interested in like in any given detail
what is the thing that we're trying to
do and is there a way that we can kind
of enhance the capabilities of that
looking more tapping into the material
properties themselves and therefore we
could still be building with all the
same materials we're building today and
then those hopefully those materials and
those components and those details can
just do much much more and kind of push
the limits of what they're capable of
because I guess I see it in a like a
larger arc where in some ways because of
the computer and because of robotics and
digital fabrication and stuff I'm seeing
that we've lost the the like material
intuition and we used to have that in a
way like in any craft scenario whether
that's textiles or wood or metal working
or in any scenario where it was like
true craftsmanship we had an intimate
knowledge of a material property and we
would understand what the property of
that material was and you can expand it
or contract it or you know use the
dynamic capabilities of it and you can
look at like old thermostats in a house
or you can look at Japanese jointer all
those examples I was talking about and
we would tap in to the material
knowledge like for example that there's
a book latitude I think it's called it's
all about how they built the first
device that couldn't measure the the
latitude or is it longitude one of those
forget now but it's all about longitude
I guess it's a fascinating book and in
the end the solution was material that
they figured out essentially a
bimetallic strip that could transform
but we sort of lost that because we
figured out that if we add a bunch of
mechanisms in robots we can make
something adapt like the nest thermostat
replaced the previous material based
thermostat and just put a computer there
and you know in my house the nest art
that just broke after a year in your
life that sounds but the other
thermostat lasts for hundreds of
hundreds of years and it's not saying we
should just go backwards and use all the
things before it's more saying that now
we have all these new capabilities so we
can actually go far beyond that if we go
if we start to tap into the material
capabilities again like we used to with
all of these new capabilities of
computational digital fabrication we can
have unbelievable performance that we
have kind of forgotten about and we now
just sort of think materials are dumb
and we have all these brilliant ideas as
designers and we're just gonna force the
materials into place we're gonna be like
I want you to do that make a chair
instead of allowing the materials to
collaborate with us and come up with new
design capabilities or new performance
so yeah it's sort of like technology
meets craft and then you can do
something new with performance that
being said
research groups that are like very
robotic for impurity and my being to
ever collaborate with people like that
yeah yeah there's a really interesting
lab called the micro robotics lab at
Harvard Rob wood runs that and then
Jennifer Lewis also at Harvard has a lab
Rob wood is mostly on soft robots so
it's like soft squishy gooey robots that
crawl across the table that are made out
of material and pneumatics and squishing
things
Jennifer Lewis is more material science
a lot of different printing stuff
similar to the 40 printing but I like
really micro scales there's a lot of
people that are kind of around our
sphere but have different agendas you
know we've just taken this kind of macro
scale material fabrication route other
people are much more interested in like
biomimetics or some other agenda or like
soft robots or micro robots edge and or
really into material science and
developing new material capabilities you
know everything I've shown you in this
presentation is off the shelf standard
materials we haven't invented any new
material so all of those capabilities
are just about the combination of
material properties but there are many
research labs who are inventing new
materials from scratch that have like
crazy unbelievable properties and so
yeah sometimes we collaborate with some
of those researchers other times we have
similar goals but different approaches
you know I think there's definitely one
argument to say like I I'm taking a sort
of like provocative stance about
materials on the future of robots but
certainly there's a hybrid scenario
where you know computers are and robots
are really good at certain things like
repetition and and precision they're
really good at global communication like
it's hard for me to hold up a piece of
wood and for that wood to communicate
with another piece of wood in the back
of the room but it's really easy for you
know a computer to do that so there are
certain things that materials are not so
good at and
electronics and robotics are very good
and you know there's definitely a more
elegant solution where you could combine
some of those for sure you know more for
like our own clarity we've just tried to
take a specific agenda but but yeah
there's a hybrid approach I was thinking
on the idea for the self-assembly more
things smarter materials are kind of
dealing with this question of agency and
what it is that a future and in that
context I'm also wondering about the
problem of Labor man-made things so then
this region should keep you ever related
with this or not
with the this smart materials dealing
people that are done
no way so what is the relationship
between when humans interact with this
did you know building that promise thank
you for example the last piece of the
rock right awkward on the five you're
all just taking up this right okay so
it's
yeah for a while I was interested in
this thought experiment that what if you
had a bunch of components and you just
dropped them in the middle of a park or
a square could you ensure that as people
played with them and built stuff you
could guarantee that it would build XYZ
like they didn't even know what it was
they just show up and they find these
parts and the parts cooked together and
it then has collectively they build some
super precise thing that they didn't
even know of that would be super
interesting and that kind of addresses
the problem of like communication and
instructions and precision and all that
kind of stuff that it would be in in the
materials we never did that project yeah
but I think it's an interesting scenario
that that could be around I mean you
know in some ways that's the that's the
reason people arguing for robotics
rather than people in construction or
manufacturing because people make
mistakes or they have different ways
about of doing it they have different
levels of skill speed and all those kind
of things and that built that hads
tolerance to whatever you build an
imprecision and that's why in that kind
of craft scenario often it was like low
numbers of people and there was an
intimate knowledge with joints and those
joints would kind of overcome the lack
of precision in the human but without
that you have basically like propagating
failures propagating tolerance as people
build more and more it gets worse and
worse worse and every trade has
different tolerance and they try to
interface the best they can but that's
you know where a lot of the problems
come so in certain contexts like cars
it's great to have like automation as
much as possible and the goal is to have
like 100% automation but they make many
many many cars the exact same way
whereas in the building scenario you
make one typically or maybe a few other
than like you know housing maybe here's
a context where you build many but it's
a kind of different scenario than
manufacturing so
it's interesting and then the question
of like failure is interesting so on the
rocks it's really bad for vibration it's
really good for load so like static load
and impact is really good for one of the
ways to make it really if you don't care
so much about the reversibility but you
care about the speed for construction
you can coat the fibers if you coat the
fibers it'll be incredibly strong good
for a vibration good for load impact all
that kind of stuff it'll stop the five
year old from disassembling it but then
you can't necessarily reverse it you
kind of trade-off the reversibility so
you know that's something you could
potentially do in each one of those I
think the ideal scenario is that you
have like is it a is it a fabrication or
manufacturing agenda and if so can you
design the activation energy so that
it's only happens in the construction
phase and it doesn't happen in the
application phase so you don't have
accidental failures or is it a
performance so like I take a sheet of
material I trigger it with some
temperature that would never be normally
found I get it to transform into
whatever the product is it's never gonna
unfold or it's not gonna fold again
because that heat is way above human
temperature whatever that's an easy one
if it's about performance
I want a shirt that opens and closes
based on temperature how do you make
sure that it doesn't do it when you
don't want it and that's kind of the
scenario you're talking about and so you
need to think about what is the everyday
use what types of activation energy do
you have and then there's another one
which is a sort of disassembly which is
that if you if you can use these
activation energies to assemble things
can you have other ones that will
automatically disassemble it but ones
that'll never naturally happen again so
I can you use I don't know can you use
like electricity or some type of like
frequency to disassemble it but that
wouldn't be naturally found and you use
extreme temperature to assemble it and
maybe there's another activation err so
you're basically coupling like many
different materials that have different
types of activation
for different different scenarios but
anyway that's a much more complicated
scenario you know most of these are just
like trying to get to the point where we
show it possible and then you can go
beyond that if you also medically
configuration can do is to help me
understand for about collections to
space meaning it can become a full-scale
object to the chair but also an exterior
well fragmented somehow
besides sequence of skylight
what I find really subduction of these
material animations yeah and what scale
do you see the limits of them projection
like how far these material biologies of
the that are now being active light is
their limit yeah I mean a lot of these
are scale independent so that's one of
the things we're trying to show it
self-assembly is that it can happen at
this largest of scales and the smallest
of scales it's really mostly about
dialing into that that length scale that
you're working out what are the
materials what are the forces you know
human scales we have gravity but
molecular scales that there is no such
thing as gravity but surface tension is
you know Vander Waal forces are massive
forces that we just don't experience at
the human scale so that's you know those
are kind of differences in nuances that
you need to you need to be designing
around those differences at different
scales but the goal would be that these
systems could go across many different
scales same with the materials like
often people will be like oh well the
wood you know it's not gonna be strong
enough to make a chair or a desk it only
works with you know a couple inches and
but we know that wood for example you
know a tree root moves buildings and
sidewalks or in when they would do
mining they used to often use wood and
then swell the wood and it would crack
the stone and then shear the stone off
so they can have really significant
forces and large-scale transformations
it's not just about like super thin
surfaces that fold so I'm interested in
in scaling them up and down
programmatically most of the things
we've been looking at is like
reconfiguration for like architectural
spaces so lots of we've done a lot of
like reconfigurable furniture projects
and office spaces and like
from one thing to another thing or like
more up in the ceiling or expand or
contract or open and close or change
porosity or visibility so it's mostly
about those kind of systems like how can
we make one thing whether that's a wall
or a chair or a screen or space you know
a series of walls and it can transform
into something else
I think less about like a global agenda
to program more about like more moments
like in this moment I may need this or I
may want that and maybe it could do
something else in the next moment it's
kind of I guess more focused than the
larger agenda I'm like this is a new way
to approach program
[Applause]
