thank you will that's a very I think
beautiful and perceptive presentation
we're still friends I think I think it's
very accurate because one of the note
that we found that our practice and I
kind of reacted response to things we
have experienced before but one of our
common bosses because we were at the
same time for two different offices in
New York and I always got that first so
after a while I wasn't the impression
that Jennifer was following me she
claims that's not the case but when we
one of the things that Steven Paul liked
to say was that every project needed to
be a a reinvention of the wheel every
project needed to be started from zero
but although that's appealing because in
a way is a kind of challenge to
imagination until they're kind of the
capacity to rien de the world with some
kind of mystery that is based on us
identity that you are uncovered through
the process of the project it also
implies a kind of at a historical
attitude in other words if if you start
every project from scratch it's mean
inventing the wheel then there nope
there are no valid precedence in a way
or the I mean there or the valid
presence at any rate need to be
suppressed or concealed and of course if
there's no history there's no progress
and there is an order that it's not only
legitimate but also ultimately
unchangeable
and it's an awful world you know it's
like I don't know Nietzsche's turn or
return or Fukuyama's and the history I
don't know how you want to call it but
it's it I think the notion in a way
although poetic and fun if you're the
one doing the project from scratch every
time I think takes away the kind of
fundamental social and disciplinary role
of architecture which i think is to be
dissatisfied with the situation as it is
and wanting to change it wanting to
transform it in a way and that's
something you cannot do alone and that's
something that you have to in order to
attempt you have to rely on on precedent
on on certain disciplinary cultural
architecture so in not that it matters
or it's the most important thing but
since it was mentioned I think that one
of the ways in which we departed from
that precedence of if you like our
former mentor or employer is is that we
believe instead that architecture exists
in a kind of condition of permanent
tension between repetition and
inventions and
and I think that invention is the most
interesting perhaps wanted when it hides
itself behind the form of repetition
when when the architect in a way
disappears behind an order that is
bigger than you know that the little
effort that we might be attempting it's
you know part of a larger piece of
culture in anyways I'll start so we are
here because of the show in the hallway
which was a show organized by some
friends in Rome they're called campus
pace and they they partnered with the
lift rock museum in early on which has a
vast collection of architectural
drawings and they have they got together
and they had the idea of taking examples
from their selection and offering them
to architects as a kind of challenge for
them to design and make a book so they
came up with a list and then the result
of that is what you seen in the whole
way if you've seen it you know it's it's
right there and I will go back to that I
won't talk so much about our book or
book is just one most many and I'll talk
a little bit about the conditions are
animate the production of the book where
the idea of doing the quote came from
you know it's so we are thinking right
someone calls you on the phone I'm gonna
send you to let me just make the whole
place so we have to wait to kind of
create the ground I think you know their
intention I read a little bit about
their intention cockroaches the frack
centered value our collection less with
the cultural diligence of a curator than
the amateur curiosity of an architect
couple discussed the traditional
monographic a pelagic or historical
readings
to a do adopt a loser and unconventional
framework that fares human emotions and
architectural principles so there's you
know relate all we're saying before the
architecture principles are things that
carry on right through time I get
examined they pass them along and
emotions are the things that you know
you feel when you are making or
inhabiting the project so in a way Luca
and updesk Adair's
luca is my friend in rome of delta
there's a director of the frog museum
are aware of this conversation and I
think thank you we do the introduction
fits very well with the spirit of the
show since this is our first time
talking here I thought I made a very
quick introduction to the things we've
been doing this is a book that came out
at the end of 2016 that we don't mention
it was published in Denmark and it's our
latest effort in that sense we also so
we're normal architects office you know
doing projects for people that we can
the walk in the door or call on the
phone to do project but we feel that
more than a I think more than a self
promotion or of course you know there's
always a promotion or aspect of doing
something because you need to survive
and you need to be known and there's so
many architects but that's not the
spirit that animates doing a book doing
an exhibition or doing a show it's more
I think well the one hand is it is a
generous intent you know giving this
lecture talking to students and on the
other hand is selfish intact which is
getting a reaction and
also clarifying for yourself what you're
doing you know sometimes as we don't say
their deadlines you can so you have to
get yourself away from that doing
something that doesn't make any money
but actually cost you a lot of money and
then that kind of helps you see where
you're going
this is we were part of a series of
published texts and drawings that a
friend of mine in Rome is doing the
thing is called Divi sorry
and there are they do a very nice
website that publishes absolutely
everything and then they they published
more books on print so this is seasonal
prints and this is the the latest effort
in that sense is a mono graphic issue of
the Korean architecture critics
association they just came out you know
a month ago or something like that
and it's it has a very nice spot that I
say which is my partner but it has a
very nice collection of travel
photographs by Jennifer Lee and it has a
couple of like this you know this is
Beijing by night images and then a
couple of depressing sounding text by
main architecture and ruins and
architecture in denial so and then of
course like everyone else we have a
website that this is I do a new website
we just renewed it and you know since
you can't pack everything in in one hour
whoever is curious can go there the show
that we don't mention is a show at the
end of 2016 I'll show a couple of the
sort of exhibition work we've done this
is at the architecture gallery in Berlin
in East East Berlin and
beautiful terracotta buildings on carved
mark Sally if you've been there they
were built after the war for the
bureaucrats of the of the government and
the show is called exquisite corpse and
it was mostly there was some drawings
but it was there some models but it was
mostly a show of disassembled
sketchbooks
there you go the name exquisite corpse
you know you disassemble the sketchbooks
and then the page that makes sense
anymore you know it well it gets
scrambled by the way that the sketchbook
is unput together if you like and then
our latest not the latest one before the
ladies this is the main exhibit of the
first Sol architecture biennale called
the cities exhibition that and it was
installed at the Don the moon design
class averages is humongous well with
building that Sahadi design and built in
the center of Seoul and the show was is
a finished product the show was curated
by human pay who's a very well-known
curator in Korea who once did the Venice
pavilion together with me Sokcho they
want the golden line and 2013 so he
invited us to do the exhibition and so
we did this labyrinth for people to get
lost and no be able to make any sense of
the show and and then this is our latest
thing is the at the we were invited by
abdel kader after doing the book that is
out there to participate in the first
early on Biennale
and then we did a show called the
indifferent pavilion and inside the
colliculus and pupil area in only on and
it's kind of the pavillion has an
interior and they install at the altar
so it's a lot of responsibility but
there are basic constant loops of video
projections that show a kind of
cancelling out of different different
architectures including our architecture
most of this work you know this is kind
of a confidential it's only this one but
we are thinking of splintering part of
the office into something that would
dedicate itself full-time to doing this
kind of thing our working name is for
propaganda and will be directed by Stan
Lee Cho is sitting here at the end in
the front so all this work we've already
done together with your entire team but
Stanley is thing and I kind of
directorial role in the production of
this thing so I think it's opportunity
to thank him and then I'll show some of
the Phil projects it's a graphic
mentioned by widow in Beijing is there
this is an aerial view of course this is
near the airport in Beijing on it east
side of the city is a housing project
done by a developer friend of ours is
it's two million square meters of
housings 20 million square feet of house
a very big and we're just doing the
small funny shaped building in the
image which is the kindergarten this is
you know somewhat image of the project
before it was built but I like the show
together with this imagery business it's
a sunny or day when we took the photo
but it's a is a kindergarten for 650
children and and all the classrooms have
a way of escaping into the playground
through the terraces through the outside
so this is not you know attempt to
embody a certain dialectical opposition
between play and the discipline of
learning that is typical of the Chinese
system so I was finished last year and
then you can see here the way that the
building breaks up towards the top in
order to allow the possibility for every
classroom to have an outside space and
to go outside and these are some images
of the interior and the construction
that main entry lobby a typical
classroom
this kind of connection you know this
kind of social situation of you know
very subtle ambiguity between staying
and going you know like people running
out on people staying in class or this
discount that this life out there if the
class is really boring you know let's
hope because you can see that all this I
have escaped this is a small house we've
built in the rainforest in Costa Rica
literally in the middle of nowhere it's
eight hours away from any the closest
hardware store so it's hard to build and
the idea was I'm gonna go through these
very fast cuz I want to get to the pole
but the idea for these was that a
different personal disposition towards
the wilderness this was a couple of
family and the man was a strange guy who
loved the forests and spiders and snakes
and the wife not so much so the house
needed to be near the forest far away
from the force at the same time so we
kind of broke it up into pieces which
kind of goes well with the go what goes
well with the weather in Costa Rica of
course where you don't really need
enclosure and you can you know do things
like this you break up the house into
each one of its components and create an
independent structure and then because
it was so hard
there was no gear in the way that you
could build there we devised a system in
which two channels are connected by a
bracket that could be adjusted on the
side and then the angle of the roof
which was complex could be could be
constructed with two we didn't have to
send one of our architects from New York
to believe
Rica for two weeks when they were
building the roof this is a house in
Argentina which seems to be perpetually
under construction hopefully it'll be
finished soon this I think a little bit
to go but it's a very simple house it it
is a desert it's a part of Argentina
that is a desert so water is the most
important thing and there and the entire
landscape of the area of the territory
is being completely artificial eyes by
an irrigation system that allows the
place to be inhabited and there's a you
know the main production is winemaking
this is the house that we don't
mentioned because of our own vineyard
tail so but the main idea is you know
Sun and an irrigation is where you need
to grow the grapes so the house faces
north where the Sun comes from the
southern hemisphere and the light
bounces on that pole into the house by
being reflected into the pool of water
is a very simple project very small
house so back to the book these are Luca
on the left
smiling with the glasses and have them
for their standing on the right the
celebration of the opening of the early
ambien Ali and
I posted again of the book and a very
exciting looking opening of the show in
Rome couple years ago our drawings were
our project was was produced by this man
give ro ta who has already passed away I
think in 2011 but it was a project from
the 80s and it looked like this and the
project was to us very interesting of
course you know very playful but or
attitude towards it needed to be
articulated for us in some way that
makes sense for us to be able to make a
book so the idea of that of the project
is called the missing vegan the living
house was that the house could grow once
the family grows so in the beginning
there's a young child miss couple and I
was a small couple older they have
children the house gets bigger so in a
way a very provocative idea because on
the one hand it it proposes this kind of
legitimacy of architecture through
performance that is vital you know that
it's like nature
so so this instigate for instigated for
us the comparing the house with the
primeval hut you know the theoretical
premise of the ability Luigi in the 18th
century to to finally designation of
architecture that is grounded on the
first confrontation of people and nature
so far so good but but there are other
things that are interesting about the
house and it's one thing is if the house
grows with the family so that they have
the
has no reason to move if they have no
reason to move it they won't sell the
house if they don't sell the house they
don't need to worry about the exchange
value of the house in the market so then
it becomes an object of absolute useful
value and no exchange value very radical
if you like I don't know if intended or
not but a very radical anti-capitalist
architecture proposal on the one hand
you know these are like the good things
about the house the other good thing is
the house is impossible I don't see that
as a defect I think that's what
legitimizes the project if the house
were possible there will be no point
it'd already be done so this I think
illustrates the idea that you know
architecture is professional they
dissatisfied you know you you have to
try to make something because it's not
there and this idea that you could find
a building material that will grow at
its cellular level to make the house
bigger is is it's not what the house is
advocating if it's impossible then
that's not what's advocating what what
the house is advocating is a freedom or
architecture imagination and also we
have to say a kind of optimistic love of
Technology right because it's a
technological solution that is being
proposed that's okay neither here nor
there in terms of value of the critique
by that but I think they there are two
other rather negative this is all in the
book right you know how to read it but
is a way that we started I'm just
remembering but the other the other
aspects of the house that are not so
great
one is the the cementing or the idea
that the nuclear family should be the
basic nucleus of organization of society
which you know of course there's nothing
wrong with the family but it sets up a
condition by which all those that are
not so much into the idea of the family
are discriminated as other right as we
all know so it is a little bit
conservative in that sense and I think
the worst thing for the the worst aspect
of the project is the fact that it
presupposes is a suburban condition like
the house to grow needs space around it
so it cannot be our buddy you know and
you need expansion joints you know they
so then so then it presupposes again a
condition that we feel is rather
negative in the culture architecture you
know racism it's the origin of the
notion of the suburb live it is now the
case right now your honor you find a
house whatever you can whatever you can
afford but this it but is that the
implication of that relationship right
anyway so but after after doing on that
you know we what do we make of this
thing so we thought that by comparing it
with with no GA and the by realizing
that the project was in it wasn't a joke
it's a serious project but it's a
serious project because it proposes an
idea and there is no it's not just the
project its proposes and I critique of
society and it proposes an alternative
way of living so in some sense is very
interesting and then similar in it is so
how in the project you know this is not
a historian book it's not even an
academic book is just an architect's
book so you know if you read it maybe
you'll find historical errors or
theoretical inaccuracies but we in our
fancy we decided to assume that the
condition of the primitive heart is a
condition that extends that is present
along the entire history of architecture
and represents this attitude of kind of
ideal both idea was in as
and I deal as a critique I mean as a
mental critique to the architecture of
start of school and you know obviously
that could be the idea of the primitive
hub could be then applied both to text
and to projects as a way of finding that
aspect of architecture that arises when
architecture becomes aware of its
impossibility you know of what is you
know like in the MS on vivant
once you have an idea that it's not
doable the only reason to do it is
because you you have a different agenda
you know you have a an agenda that
attempts to to challenge the start of
school and then so the primitive huh
consider it that way does he have to be
big or small it doesn't have to be you
know it just has to contain an
architecture idea that is a kind of
challenge you know it might does have to
be a heroic challenge it could be a
hunger challenge you know it's just an
idea of wanting to change things but
what happens it's what I think that we
realized looking at their routine
building is that if it doesn't if it
doesn't advocate the content because by
definition the content is not there
right the growing house doesn't exist
and what does it what does it do is it
has no content you know philosophically
speaking the project has no content
because the content doesn't exist this
is why you're doing a project so the
project it has only form but the form
has a function which is propitiating the
appearance of the content the existence
of the content this is why you do the
project even if it's impossible if it's
impossible is even more important so in
any event so in the book you know we
travel a
now is partition busy looking for this
looking for this element of the
satisfaction that can express itself in
the project as form that wants to in a
kind of shamanic way evoke a reality
that could become content doesn't exist
yet so I'll show you two or three
projects in which you know some of them
are more interesting than others but we
did this and and in this case you know
in in our projects I think we don't
perceptibly also talked about a kind of
change or future production of what we
did before we have done before a lot of
projects that inhabit a mode of the
satisfaction that has to do with
existing in the gap between sink
thinking and I don't know so their
pretensions work but being or if you
like you know feeling or existing right
so there's always the kind of thing that
you know architecture requires as we
remarked a lot of knowledge a lot of
things you have to do and you have to
think and that it requires that you know
intellectual effort to keep that
rational armature together but outside
of that there's always something that is
left over right you know the way you
feel in the morning when you have to put
your socks on
where you feel when you say goodbye to
someone and you think that you're never
gonna see them again all this sort of
sappy stuff you have to talk about it
because it you know it's silly but it's
there so it in a lot of projects we did
early on we focus on that this is for
example house with it and in in Mongolia
no 20 2008 and and the and the thing
about the house was okay what could what
could be a qualitative objective for the
house and it was a place in when you you
know you think the house is the place
where you spend your life and your life
has a cycle of day and night you come in
and out of consciousness
you know you dream you are lucid in the
morning tired and somewhat brain-dead in
the evening and then the old sequel
cycle repeats itself so we thought okay
what about a house that has a very
simple kind of transposition or
translation two kinds of room cubicle
rooms and curve room the curves rooms
are too scary to inhabit at night
because you don't see the end of the
room you you know someone might be
hiding there it's dark so the and those
rooms are animated by the light during
the day and then at night you take
refuge in the cubicle rooms at the end
of the curve room just an idea silly
idea but you know it made an
architectural project another project
such as a competition and successful
competition for a church in Tana Peru
600 kilometers north of the Arctic
Circle in Norway near the border with
Russia and Finland and the idea of the
church was how to find a way of making
people feel that they were up north I
mean it's not enough that it's freezing
and it's dark you know they all the time
but in a way that the architecture would
react to that and you know obviously God
has been forever identify with light you
know
so we kind of created something that was
maybe perhaps based on the typology of
the Pantheon but that was inclined with
the five degrees of the average light
that comes into the comes into the space
through an oculus you know they are
advantage over the Pantheon is that
because the oculus is on the side you
know how to the problem the classical
problems you put the author in the
middle of the room they put their altar
to one size or the people so it's Joe
but that was and there's another one and
then this is the project that we don't
mention for Fears one in which we kind
of creep try to create a kind of place
of emotional gathering for people in the
weekends the had its own sort of very
subtle but I think clear reference to
the Roman Baths because people you know
one of water is hot is a gathering place
but we can't afford Roman baths anymore
we don't have slaves so we just use wood
and plastic another quick this was a
project the Tarot embody a country
hypocracy of the mouth diplomacy this
was the how they wrestles for the
Ambassador from Switzerland in Korea and
it was planning to volumes one that
housed the Chancellery and one the House
of the ambassador and the honesty of the
relationship depended on the fact that
the front of the building was being
offered publicly was if you like
projecting from the house of a real
Swiss person which was in the back the
ambassador's house anyway another silly
idea of it and then this the last one
I'll show you was a for going back to
the book is a student dormitory in boson
or for high school students in which we
felt that
the spaces of being together needed to
be different than the spaces of being
alone because you know that is kind of a
basic destiny of being a teenager being
insecure by yourself and then the space
of public sharing if you like a space of
meeting new people and falling in love
and all that was somewhat inflated the
architecture was kind of blown out
magnifico
specific gravity of that space was you
know metaphorically speaking of course
more this is a house for friend who's an
architect also in a vineyard in
Argentina that was to be built and was
never built but it was to be built in an
orchard where there were some very old
trees and the idea was very simple to
make to save the trees and build a house
around them and then how the tree the
the courtyard severe warriors become the
somewhat very definition of rooms have
no beginning or no end and articulated
the spaces in a in a less hierarchical
way that you
your spaces that are designed for a
family so so going back to to the idea
of oh you know this desire and
dissatisfaction there is you know very
well known apparently
pareo least a periodization of thinking
that it that goes from the Renaissance
to now that goes from resemblance to
representation to desire right and one
thing that was interesting about the
roti a project was that going from
loggia to roti a is like going from the
point of inflexion between resemblance
and representation to a point of
absolutely crazy insane desire so if if
resemblance just wanted to imitate what
happened before you know the very signal
supposedly official intention of the
Renaissance
then the Classical period if you like
when legit lived I wanted to represent
an explained thing so in a way the
primeval hut is nothing but taking the
architecture orders and explaining them
in a way that is memorable and
persuasive of course roti Rondo's all
that and she just wants what he doesn't
have right he wants the world to be what
it's not so there's a this is their
projects that
that we look as projects of
representation of this condition of
desire most interesting ones have
happening between the wars you know like
this one by the builders by the
Courvoisier or the high-rise city by the
cyma or maybe the magneto wars linear
city by Leonid of there are all projects
that have a component of not so much the
sort of meditative melancholic wondering
about why life is different than reason
but I have abandoned that sort of kind
of indulgent attitude and think about
what needs to happen for us to live
together better this is a project that
we don't mention in Mexico is in Bonn a
quatrain and old estancia an old old
ranch that is very hilly and dry the
vegetation is meagre because other word
rains a lot the water skips in the in
the soil that has a lot of clay content
so our idea was to organize two kinds of
housing having individual family houses
at the side of the of the hill and the
slopes of the hill and then having big
apartment buildings in the valleys and
then designed the roofs of the houses to
collect water as a kind of communal act
of collaborative living and that water
isn't directed to the underground
cisterns that are you know happening
logically under the main classes of the
spaces and then the aqueducts themselves
you know have that kind of obvious
functional quality but also then acquire
another other qualities have become
places of gathering where you know you
come by tacos
from you know ladies in the weekends so
there is that
I think attempt to abandon through the
individual and focus on the object as a
potentially more interesting or only
poetic result only architecture but
useful for everybody you know Marxist
the famous definition of commodity
fetishism that is kind of at the core of
this way of thinking that is I think a
very nice turn of phrase and it says
commodity fetishism is is social
relationships between things and
material relationships between people so
people treat each other like you know
whatever they can get from each other
you know it's like a kind of transaction
but objects have a value that he defined
as socially necessary labour-time in
other words every object embodies
someone's effort in its creation so it's
interesting to think of the project's as
as less less preoccupied with your
personal condition you know the face of
death loneliness or whatever and then
try to find in a less explicit way of
talking about that in useful objects it
could be maybe
change things in its an also personal
poetic way but more coming aware this is
a project with it
in Oskaloosa channel and market in Italy
for reconnecting the periphery of the
old city Renaissance a medieval city
with the Civic mountains that are nearby
it is separated by a very ugly illegal
so-called quota for illegal spontaneous
Italians called a booze evil
neighborhood and our idea was to to sort
of pick up this kind of typological
presence from the town or that much a
much larger scale - and then open up the
town through to nature by accommodating
people in a you know maybe a little bit
more efficient way anyways this was
still a poetic project that we did with
the artist friend of ours in Rome but I
still like it a lot and then they the
area is earthquake areas we know from
recent events but the idea of the towers
which were 100 meters tall was that they
would have this tubes inside that will
work like tree trunks and give them kind
of structural resilience and they will
be used also for the circulation of you
know fluids and people up and down and
all the apartments will be organized in
three levels like that you know with
social level in the middle private level
on the top and then kind of eating more
bedroom level in the bottom
so anyways back to the book so this is
you know the front cover of the book
which Stanley chose a photo image of a
letter that we sent to Luca and the book
is so this you know directionless
theorizing about the primeval heart and
the origins of architecture and then
figuring out what they hope to do based
on on roti is missin Pavan and then in
sync with that paradigm shift of from
trying to go from melancholia to social
service we thought that the primeval had
to have a kind of urban dimension and
and we thought of Venice because you
know Venice is it's a kind of paralyzed
city you know you might know Joseph
Brodsky the Russian artist we loved
Venice and he he he said about Venice is
that Venice had no time or had a
particular form of time because he you
know American poetic when I shall do
this but he said that that it may sense
says to think that God was time or at
least his spirit was time and that God
looked over the water so so the water
became the reflection of time and for
him Venice was that and the funny thing
is that beyond such a high wake you know
subject subjective rearmed in Venice and
the Renaissance month relative foodie
talks about Venice being stuck between
two
kinds of time being paralyzed by the
presence of the mythical time of its
creation and the Venice of the
mercantile Renaissance and talks about
actually one of the early visionary
projects for Venice if you like you can
say or at least we like to think that
when the city becomes self-conscious
start thinking about itself through you
know poets or architects to not only to
explain itself but to think itself
bigger and make itself bigger here the
projects by 1700
in this you know we've had a lot of
conversations with Guido who is of
course an expert in Venice project by
Sabatino
and @vc Cornaro there have been many
theoretical projects about Venice you
know and of course here with Cooper
Union we are at the heart of the lion's
den of some of the architects that were
authors of these projects you know the
first Jon Heder countryman Abraham and
Peter Iseman but they have been also
other projects so we we thought of by
virtue of the fact of considering rotis
and we felt a kind of obligation respect
for our curators to kind of have a very
sort of infantile a explain sequence for
the narrative of the book but we felt
that we could go from something as
different as proteus house consider not
as an artistic project but as a as a
theoretical proposition as a kind of
provocation for
imagination and architectural thinking
go to the very large
you know like likova she is Sanjoy Bay
Hospital in Venice and then and then the
urban condition equally of course loved
Venice you see him in a gondola this
other row see below but and he forget
what year was this maybe one of the
historians will help me I think is 20 I
mean 19 figure but this was a it was a
study of Venice of the perfect urban
machine and the Courvoisier theorized
that the bridge the fundamenta they
canal de campo the monuments of venice
and even they the gondola were part of a
system that had fine-tuned itself over
time to make the perfect urban system he
says you know I take Venice as my
witness and then at the end of his life
he made his last last project was a
sanyo a hospital near the train station
in Venice that was unfortunately never
built
that is absolutely I think fabulous
project here is a section of the of the
hospital credit rooms and you see how
you know that it's funny right I got
that is irrational it's totally rational
this he has a mixed record but architect
like the Courvoisier meets broadsky and
this idea that God is light and liquor
which is fixated in bringing the
particularly Venice kind of life in
light into the
of ailing and dying people into his
hospital these are some of the other
projects I already mentioned jon heder
company and then once I got built in the
bottom is partly built a little ceasars
company mark the housing project in that
you take a very very simple project but
radical project in the sense that
anything that you can build in Venice is
already particularly so humble project
for working-class people it's already
quite a provocative achievement and we
thought of you know the problems are
only getting bigger right
[Music]
so we thought that you know perhaps that
condition of spaces that Venice offers
and the obvious political and ecological
[Music]
problems that is that the city has yes
real yeah this is what you see when you
Little Venice on
I think Massimo got Charlie had a plan
to scare tourists away from Venice
wasn't it when he was mayor of Venice
yeah that's fantastic project I wonder
how you do it in any event but obviously
you scare the tourists away from Venice
nobody has anything to eat this is
ongoing project for us we we presented
together this is a project in which we
also collaborated with widow with compo
and with the architecture gallery in
Berlin for a to do what's called in
Venice a collateral event is an event
that they choose you and then if you've
managed to produce it you can be part of
the Biennale
so we got chosen but we decided not to
even attempt to try to produce it but it
was the idea that you know this idea of
the continuity or the sort of the
repetition of the things that are
important in time have kind of stopped
in Venice at the end of the 20th century
they have been no more primitive Hut so
call them projects since the projects I
think I mean maybe after the Cooper
Union architects and after our Caesars
project it's the only construction I
guess that works but there was a project
for the cemetery by enigma Dyess
that I think was rejected but that's
hardly a kind of visionary project I
think so we thought our application for
the Biennale was the idea of continuing
that tradition and organizing a show
around projects that would be elicited
from random architects that we choose to
re-envision Venice along the line so the
same if you like primitive Hut tradition
so what's accepted by the Analia we
decided not to do it because we can do
it better without some other way
anyways so so the book
the book needed to end with a project we
felt that the needed to lead to a
project needed to be the fifth day all
this sort of random wondering about the
history of architecture and risky ideas
needed to finish with a project so we
proposed what we call the poly
productive units which are more than
more of more than architectural projects
there are fragments of the city and they
are located on the south side of LA
Judaica so we took the liberty of
including ourselves in this map although
it's a little bit embarrassing but the
little upside down new shapes you see at
the bottom of the screen are you know
theoretical locations of of these things
with with a lot of irreverence someone
in our team put one right in front of
John hadix cemetery all the ashes
thought but I guess your forgiveness for
that you want to read the text with a
text
there was a text about the intentions of
the project that is we are detailing
with projects we're doing in the u.s. at
the beginning of the 20th century the
fordist motor production enabled the
creation of none precedent and amount of
wealth bringing into the middle class
the whole generation of manual workers
considered less optimistically we should
also acknowledge of the fundamental
dependent premise on which the
productive revolution brought about my
fort ISM was based on the division of
labor of the assembly line separated
people from the pride of making as a
fundamental source of joy and
self-respect of life with the rise of
the Asian pallet area became the
decadence of manufacturing in the West a
protracted eclipse that is now about to
reach favorite pitch with the
implementation of automated
manufacturing and labor it is estimated
that robots will replace 800 million
jobs in the world
30 labor time has been since the 16th
century the source of the creation of
value materialized in consumer goods of
the world economy labor was also the
main engine of the construction of a
consumer himself how builds the Librium
between production and consumption to be
sustained
once machines replaced producers and
consumers was the salaries that allowed
the purchase of lost city is a project
that proposes to cut the possibility of
rethinking of the city not articulated
in two separate specialized areas for
work live Commerce and so on speculating
that perhaps the imperatives of the
upcoming crisis of effective demand in
the economy will foster the possibility
of different types of Urban Development
it proposes that buildings are designed
as large as possible the proposed
projects to the extent afforded by the
limitations imposed by the dimensions of
the site and the provisions contemplated
in building regulations attempt to leave
behind the building size category in
reached out of City fragmented instead
the strategy is predicated on new
technological potential for a
miniaturization of the
and consequently the possibility for
individuals not to be forced to have to
improve vast sums of money to start new
new businesses through the help of
public finds politically lubricated by
the upcoming crisis of employment and
technically enabled by the economy of
scale of the large size of project lower
rents and therefore a fighting chance
can be offered to a new generation of
small-time entrepreneurs and small
business owners the poly productive unit
urban development strategy does not stop
at the consideration of large scale as
the only enabler of a new opportunity
for the economy but it also aspires to
tests and deployed qualitative
innovations in urban development it
proposes the development of mixed income
residential light manufacturing and
commercial urban fragments contemplating
that the businesses will operate both
locally and online the firing in that
way a wider plateau and also that the
apartment will be designed in such a way
as to attract people at different income
levels and can then enter into
economical interaction and support each
other issues of the proper scale and
architectural character the projects in
order to foster both economic permit and
a domestic sense of belonging
ensure the social success of the project
the carefully calibrated architecture
mixing the economic benefits of
repetitive construction to make the
whole project possible and the
construction of a series of individuated
places that would make them attractive
place to live need both because they
thank you
[Applause]
any question comment reaction
what's your about shape sir my fairytale
how would that work anywhere well the
idea would be that given the unique
geographic location of Venice it has
some shipping advantage you know to cut
cost of transportation if you could
create the same place in the same place
the creation of goods the port of
shipping for the goods the place where
the people live and the place where the
people meet each other and you know
start partnerships so this is that they
did the idea of trying to fit within one
building everything that happens in the
city you know to the extent of that's
possible of course is an ongoing
development of an idea that could be
grouped in terms of character the idea
is of course equalitarian in the sense
that - just like the routier project you
know trying to separate exchange value
of the commodity with the use value of
the commodity in other words creating
the kind of perfect perfect object of
use one that you've never need to resell
right the the source of exchange value
is also the source of a lot of
architectural posturing right because
you need to I mean all you need to do is
go look at the buildings are being built
on the other side of the shades you know
they all have they're all different and
funky on the outside and they're all the
same on the inside the idea here is that
the buildings would share you
under a different political disposition
course dispensation I mean the buildings
will share the need to advertise
themselves as consumer goods and
therefore could be you know maybe in the
beginning strictly utilitarian but maybe
in time as we get used to living in a
different kind of society they were a
different architectural way of
expression would arise it is all a dream
of course you know this is all
theoretical is it book
thanks moment this is a partisan
practice so and it goes back to an
earlier maybe an earlier part of the
talk when you were talking about seeking
out architectural projects that proposed
an idea and sort of looking for projects
that might propose that idea but you you
use this term about a project and its
content so there were a couple times
when you said well that projects just an
idea and sometimes you would say it's a
silly idea but it's just an idea it has
no content since it doesn't exist yet
you may not have used the word yet and
so I guess my question for you is when
do you what is the moment in the making
of an architectural project where it
does take on content and it's not just
form but I guess it embodies its idea
fully and becomes that idea and where
does that happen in the context of your
practice there were some projects that
seem to be projects that stayed in the
arena of a project and then some that
had gotten ill yeah and us building the
project have anything to do with that
condition of acquiring content yeah yeah
that you know the distinction that we
make between content and form I remember
a conversation we had with Tony weather
with his team at his office in which he
made a kind of strong defense for form
and its need to differentiate it from
shape emphasizing that form is
structured in other words content only
acquires the form that its structure
allows it to acquire so the only you
know following that logic you can argue
that the only that the only way of
really changing content is providing a
structure in which it can take a
different form so your question is very
good because you know on the one hand
we're like daydreaming about Realty and
on the other hand we have a client that
once the project we're doing for her or
him to have content right but but the
content I think is never provided by the
architect the I think the architect can
only fiddle with the form and the hope
that the content will appear in a way
you know that so what role I think is
more humble that we and we'd like to
think you know obviously you know we
serve indirectly we try to influence
events in such a way as a content
somehow materialized thanks to our but I
think I think it's a much larger than us
the appearance of new content you know
mark man once told me that there would
not be an you know mark is that old
architect from San Francisco he's kind
of retired Copley retired and - I don't
know he's known he'd post a lot online
but he was you know in the 90s he was a
contender Jeff and I once had dinner
with him in Venice California he said
that there would be no new architecture
until there's a new function which I
mean to be a new content so we are sort
of dependent on many things right
depending on type of technological
transformation dependent on collective
awareness you know visit why so
important try to you know put the book
out or you know not that will change the
world but you know the more that that is
done the more that I think the
collective intelligence of architecture
can be friendlier to
not only from an architecture befriended
two architects yes don't think what
they're doing but also be better you
know for its own sake you know like it's
just like it's important to understand
film or books or you know what other
people are saying since you're touching
upon the relationship between what
structures architecture really right
like you were mentioning about you know
systems of production labor things that
usually architects kind of thing texas
regard a very interesting the you know
we don't mention the objectification of
technology and the current radical
separation specially i find it in in the
u.s. in academia the radical separation
between if you want the kind of
objectified understanding of technology
different from for instance are known
take this example of the serum right you
will never be able to dish and right the
technology of steel or what is this
celestial of the system of production of
steel relative to what the serum is
architectural in right so and i always
remember the way that you you to to
think about the model they model as a
construction embedded with a certain
kind of discourse of Technology and the
I haven't seen so much this particular
presentation that because Jimmy would
that I'm kind of attracted me hello to
your work the kind of understanding that
the premises of of kind of technology
and construction were not objective but
there was a movement
in technology and architecture which
today is totally so still cannot believe
how people understand technology even in
terms of high technology and robots and
so on because you know you can claim
that you know the way that you are
articulate in business building that the
technology production even automatized
can also be part of an expansion of
authorship right that you can design the
same way that there would be no
separation between technology and
architecture that you could also design
the technology that would be somehow
producing certain discourse in terms of
new radical technology such as robots
right so I just wanted to ask you if you
are still thinking in that relationship
between the model as a kind of
technological device to open up
questions a annek relationship to a
typological problem because it seems to
me like for instance this this model the
form of the model seems not to be too
much related to the to the construction
but thinking of the whether the u.s. is
to do owners it was a close relation
between the technology and the
construction are you guys
shifting directions or or is it
something that is not so problematic now
how do you understand that relationship
now I think we are you know shift in
direction all the time I mean hopefully
right but I understand what you're
saying I think for this particular
project there's an imperative of
anonymity that that pervades the project
because it's based on this is this
project was made for this book in other
words it's not you know it was way of
finishing the book it was a book
demanded project like many of the other
books were
romantic cool a book here at the end
those guys from Oslo are friends and
they the building building book in the
middle I wrote books about projects in a
way different approaches right but books
about projects so I think that somehow
was implied and still buy them by the
brief of the invitation but in the
context of this great thing about ro ta
you know and the house that cannot be
sold or the house that you don't need to
sell you know if you if you remove that
premise from the premise of from the
location of the suburb then it implies
that the primitive hot ideas are really
find their their condition of maximum
fruition in the city and in there and
they kind of collective rather than
their private right so our main critique
I would say to rotate is the fact that
the house is for family right and here
the house is for no one or for everyone
as for you know it's for anybody so it
was a kind of imperative of anonymity
that became but that becomes a kind of I
mean it's not only that there I've been
since the Roman times people been using
the rapid repetitive nature of voids to
give integrity or you know tension to a
facade right
but the the desire was to design a
project that would kind of relay or pose
the grote notion so it wasn't but it but
you're right it was it was a much more
abstract project because it didn't it
was not its elaboration was not the
usual elaboration of running back and
forth between the desk and the model
shop to see what the model looks like
and they changed the drawings there was
no I mean we were not even here you know
the model got made and it was based on
the drawings and it was it was a you
know involves zero experimentation from
the model making point of view or there
was like one preliminary model and that
was it but there was no I think it was
also I kind of see the other thing is I
think that you know to step outside of
the book for a minute and talk about
something more general will be to say
that the condition of architecture as a
commodity which is in itself inevitable
right if you like but it's inevitable
under the conditions that we live now
right and and the conditions that we
live now are the conditions that we have
but as a commodity it demands a kind of
alienation of a strange of strange form
of you know when I'm talking about
facades design for no other purpose then
they had to be different that the other
facades so someone comes and say oh you
know I want my friends to know that I
live in this building you know with the
weird thing sticking out on the
balconies full of plan not that I'm ever
gonna go in the battery but it looks
expensive
I know it is
you know I get a better job I get my
girlfriend that I want and so on you
know like the typical thing in China
that guys cannot date because they don't
have a car or don't have a house this is
part of life this is a very real thing
right in a way this capacity to be
successful in life is mediated in our
society by the way that these buildings
express the possibility of success if
you like right so but but what if but
the system potentially is what we're
talking about here what we were reading
about you know the upcoming 800 million
jobs are gonna be lost
robot ization the system is about to
implode
you know I mean I don't know what is
going to happen there's several theories
about that but the the issue of the
expression of the architecture is
related to a desire of critiquing the
possibility of expression at all right
so then there's another project within
show that follows this visit project
that we're trying to develop in
Argentina that has a similar intention
that they kind of the specificity of of
the conditions of the site the size of
the apartments and the size of the site
and the requirements for the apartments
etc are keeping our keeping hidden
inside the building in other words
inside the building you're confronted
with all the limitations of the
situation outside the building none of
that is visible so there's a kind of
radical much more than this building
because this building is regular on the
inside on the outside you know it's a
kind of abstract demonstration you're
building on the water basically you can
do whatever you want there's no you know
there's only this you know thing of
having creating a public space that
cannot never be occupied having a place
for the reflection of the light but if
you like all those things to some point
that become luxuries you know this
little light architectural leftovers
from a previous way of singing that kind
of beauty that derives from a kind of
situation of luxury right if you can
create a situation of like the Seagram
building you know the serum building is
a beautiful building but it's a luxury
in a way it's inevitable that they you
know the Seagram building becomes a way
of a weapon in class war if you want a
way of differentiating it with people I
think this is the problem that it's
going to become real when everybody
loses their jobs right because it the
way that it is staying now is everybody
makes enough to participate to some
humble extent in the consumption game
when they don't have that capacity what
what is the tool of persuasion that
we're going to use anyway so this was
you know as I said it struck me in in
two ways that is the and what you were
just talking about and the text editor
Jennifer read share some liner is this
this process used to be very anti over
in in a way that this location is
peripheral this detach is open if like
it says it's like mooring there from
some other things is self-sufficient in
a way and part of being detached
rather than maybe a fragment of the city
it is a mini city in itself and this is
one side the other side is a if
interesting because it opens up to think
some possible reflection about the city
and that has inside all the things that
you were talking about but also about
Venice and this is part of the project
and and here's the fact that in fact
these objects are maybe consider Ontario
but in fact exactly because
the radical restructuring of the
industrial production it devaluated the
sense of city that has been developing
for the last two hundred and twenty
maybe even four hundred years as the
scenario of production and consumption
of the cycle of the capitalistic system
in its infantry infancy and happy to
know it so then there is a big issue
about what are the city for and what are
the city for what other city war team I
don't like it in that sense and so the
on earnest of his object in terms all
the city has its beat the entire vanity
of this object then opens up this other
kind of consideration and and and
another thing is that is maybe more
ambiguous is the relation with venice
venice that in spite of being one of the
center of the emerging form all
capitalism in terms of financial
initiator even in fact it never really
became efficiently are capable by
modernity understood has eight offices
and so on in fact in all this issue of
bringing that the road bringing the
train line in with absolutely the
nearest project reading
train station voyage of Samarco etc and
so that just an observation and that I
think is raised by very good damaging
anti-gun nature in essentially sheep the
sheep industry is not reactive and
things like building ships they don't
they don't know yes they do it in in on
the east near Trieste and on the West in
general something they don't think this
chain and Russia to the Container but
they are container essentially in
menaces passenger so this being
gigantically assemble the two bishops
they know which is a to absorb one of
those big passions or crews are going
through a knees from in silence it is an
absolutely shocked again and Soviet
experience because you you feel yourself
in the city probably because of those
the fertility everything absolutely no
scope but also it's the atmosphere they
were are these places and yes the mill
yeah in fact any big problem that's the
biggest art to me so I like to the to
think about this idea that suppose untie
your vanity you know it might be a
little bit honest algea for the pre-war
projects of rethinking the city you know
do you like all the pre-war projects of
rethink in the city the classic ones
like the ones i sho are no anti urban if
you like if you want to define anti
urban as the proposition of an
alternative city right I mean the the
Raymond's project in the middle of
Venice you know how no no I'm not ready
to
like that for me because it's at the
thought of I have it but I will not call
them that actually the hospital is
outside the city floating over the water
no but I mean yet the outside my
so-called ease option has to do also
with the camisole sufficient condition
if you want you know the way in which
the ask me the courtesy is hospital is
in a really fancy elaborately
sophisticated and refined way attach or
walk to the ground floor circulation
which include land and water under it I
will not call it separated or it is an
object that has a scale it certainly
would have been eternal condition a lot
of restore textural fabric but I would I
would no I'm not I don't know if I would
call it acted as something to and I
think you know for me that they
definitely represent a unique approach
to the urban environment the innocence
that is beyond or under need all the
appearance that are as through many
contextual between project at the Cooper
factor today for this area that the
error can endanger our our our very
urban are almost contextual in a way
which they engage in specific site in
the though necessary presented an
alternative city as would be no
negotiate for euros or something like
that but actually describing in read
types in the line or between the line or
under the line see but in a way also
those cry mean in a way or other way of
thinking about the break in the in the
intent of the projects for Venice and
put it and maybe put in the context of
larger thinking about you know desire an
architectural visionary architecture or
our silly notion of a primitive Hut
there's a the the projects in Venice
become much more preoccupied with
relationship between architecture and
the personal in a way than the larger
visions of the pre-war projects that are
more for trying to transform the way
that we live in the city or to or to
mall the city to a kind of ideological
conception so if you like I think a
Cooper projects are much more poetic be
like or aesthetic
in the case of we're gonna be right
Peter okay Peter
yeah okay thank you thank you will
matter
[Applause]
