this first little walk to right right to
left center that's right okay so out of
those three names I'm the one that's
James lager and so there you go
different program okay so for me I guess
for me this coefficient up fabrication
really is to deal with the sort of I'm
coming from someone who's most of my
teachings been revolving around geometry
and teaching descriptive geometry here
for a long time and to put also teaching
sort of digital electives which have
been dabbling with this notion of
fabrication and what that means today
and so one of the things I think for me
it's always been important to sort of
the relationship between geometry and
matter right that's somehow architecture
really kind of is born out of the sort
of how does one begin to discipline
matter through geometry right and so and
that in and of itself is not only a sort
of technical problem but also a
representational problem so I and I
would argue that for a big portion of
architectures as a disciplines life
representation has always been sort of
the driving force so this is actually
some unrolled elevations of the original
World Trade Center towers and showing
that in actuality all those different
colors are actually the different steel
grades in the building so even though
there's a sort of homogenious formal
organizations of assad's there's
actually a lots of heavy lifting done by
different alloys and different gradients
of materiality just to basically make
that legible a more extreme case of that
even though we aren't likely to argue at
the beginning right this or the
primitive high the the
the raw material 'ti of wood itself is
somehow even though it's so explicit
it's trying to be suppressed in favor of
the sort of the organization of geometry
right and even it's something like this
where nice immense work early work this
notion of cardboard architecture where
form is something that is that basically
ideally for him the building reads as
cardboard there's zero material
expression that form is purely
notational right so somehow that
materiality is something that's
completely denied in the expression so I
think and again this is some of the
things that can for me I didn't think it
has been happening lately is that
there's been more of a sort of interest
and how do we kind of beat up form and
have enough control of reform that
there's been a sort of you need interest
in like what's the sort of expressive
range of materiality and so this is
actually two exercises we did in the
geometry postures everything began to
kind of touch from that one was
essentially how do I begin to develop a
surface through geometry where the
materiality is completely subservient to
the geometric logics versus something
like this which was the sort of cultic
graphic morphing model where the model
is they had a phone and operation was
sanding so that submission was something
much more granular and there's a sort of
reciprocity between the act of making
the object and its material qualities
and drawing right so if I were to the
drawing of this was actually a very
different thing than the end result yes
yes I think for me when and then again
some things I think we've been trying to
do in the seminars because I think
unfortunately from well I kind of here
at Cooper we're just now starting to get
a lot of these new devices but I would
also argue that the technology and of
itself is not actually the driver of the
end of itself this or this change but
actually is this sort of actually allow
for certain change in thinking and how
we begin to think materially so these
are actually two pieces where basically
says that you know
fabrication today there's a sort of idea
that material resists being you measure
the disciplined that's somehow there's
another mechanism the sort of the
wildness of the material somehow allowed
to be expressed and made thematic in the
work artoo is a material transformation
that the material sort of act upon in a
way in a very disciplined manner to
reveal a different range of properties
that may be ordinarily would not be
considered to be good or three hacking
into the material processes to discover
reveal other psyche possibilities this
is actually someone who went to a glass
manufacturer who basically was asked
them how they kind of made this non
reflective glass and essentially in the
process of making the glass Smith super
hot they spray it air and argon gas in
there which uses with the glass which
makes it hyper transparents basically he
was like what if we did ten times the
amount of argon gas what would happen
and so on the left side basically is
what happens when you have ten times
about a glass becomes highly affected
and becomes purple this is what happens
you can't use the spray to at different
intervals and produce the different
levels of this these producers a
different range of material expression
so yeah for me that there's kind of
three things I'm putting on the table
for conversation
so that is material that exists being
she met with a bit disappointing
material that's disciplined in an
unconventional way
yeah
cool
so for fabrication I thought I'd start
with this image this is a drawing by
Henry Lee Bruce during the Mozart's era
and you could look at it as a
fabrication exercise from the 18th
century late 1950 and the the drawing is
called the the reconstitution of an old
ruin
and what LaRussa is doing here is is
imagining new possibilities out of the
foundation of an old and for for me
fabrication and I would say more
generally our our practice when I say us
my professional practice of Randall -
and I also some of the teaching builds
off this idea of how to treat history as
a as a generative device or history
itself with all these kind of cultural
baggage as something that you can work
with so whether that's a building this
is a commercial building
where we looked at Art Deco
as a historical device and how to
transform Art Deco in you know through
ideas of fabrication through ideas of
you know reinterpreting art deco what's
the different kind of rhythm it's
fabricated by using concrete but a very
kind of thin strong concrete that allows
you to make very large panels very large
pieces but when it goes back into the
site for for us this idea of dealing
with art deco dealing with history
became very interesting within the
context of Miami where the sunlight is
actually very strong and we realized
after the project was over that maybe
this whole idea in history was about
understanding this light in a different
way and basically rendering the Miami
Sun light in a certain way so say
history is generative I think also
working with with cultural tradition and
ritual this is a very long project in
our practice where we work with Native
American Indian basket Weaver's that
specifically the Tohono Oh No
Nation which produces traditionally
baskets that look like this on
lower-left and essentially the basket is
a is a coil so that means it's a it's a
strand of grass that you twist in a
spiral so it produces the kind of flat
disc
but our our our interest with them over
the years was taking that premise of the
coil and really over it's been 12 years
now working with the same weavers just
trying to even things out and in many
ways trying to release the coiling into
three dimensions and also into new
material possibilities so these are some
and you know we've done I would say
hundreds of these at this point with
them but some of them are successful and
some of them maybe not I think we we
really appreciate the ones that push the
the basket weaving medium we we we work
with them to use their materials so they
they walk through the desert find the
grasses and the bushes we provide the
kind of structure and some of the motifs
but it's very much within their language
of the tribe so the Tohono o odham weave
has certain certain signals that that
are definitely from them and they're
still present in even moments like this
where you can see the the spacing of the
of the bundling or how the how the
creosote grass hits this this little
woven weave here that's all very much
about the
and then finally so generative history
historical working with ritual and
finally working with material that is
culturally relevant so this is a project
that was a landscape project where we we
were asked to do something in Indiana
and we decided to make to use limestone
it's a very large circle that organizes
all of these activities in it Indiana
produces a lot of limestone that the
Empire State Building
it's made of Indiana limestone and
there's a lot of waste that comes out of
the process of producing limestone so in
fact tons of limestone an hour is is
wasted and it actually goes into these
landfills so we just you know we didn't
have much of a budget for this product
and we decided well let's talk to these
mills and see if we can get our hands on
some of this waste and we did so we had
a meta zero material on a budget
zero zero sorry zero dollar material
budget so the product was ultimately
about how do you organize trash how do
you organize refuse and and and how do
you do in a way that still still
organized his human activity
so we were able to define these areas
where people could do things gather sit
down rest and the the fabrication moment
of this exercise was how to how to
actually build this so we had a few
thousand pieces of rock and we converted
all these points into into GPS points so
so we we used you know the entire the
entire budget of the project basically
went towards these six individuals
professional contractors me
in India who know limestone very well
and essentially they had a they had a
little GPS emitter so something better
like more high-resolution and and they
said they walked around with this map
and their phone and and on this phone
they were given an exact coordinate
within a couple of inches and when they
got to that coordinate they were told
what to do essentially they were given
simple instructions like you know build
this high or put the put the rock at an
angle but they were only given those
instructions so I think the in terms of
fabrication exercise we really left it
up to them so they they had to follow
these very simple instructions which had
to do with location and height and
orientation but everything else was
really up to them and it really was this
moment where we relinquished a lot of
control like you usually equate
fabrication with controlling and you
usually equate digital fabrication with
higher degrees of control but this was
an important project for us because we
we we figured out a way to let go of a
lot of the expression of the project and
hand it over to the two to a builder and
let them get excited a balance have a
bit of this thing how to arrange it and
and so you know when we arrived on site
to look at the piece during its
construction was it was really a like a
surprise each and every time because
nothing nothing was known to us only a
little only location hike and
orientation so so history ritual and and
letting go of control in car
I don't have a particular thesis
statement or a central set of argument
that I'm pursuing with these slides but
rather I'm only to present five slides
and I'll use which one is a prompt to to
talk about a topic that has come up in
my research or the work that I've done
and some of these are both projects some
of these are research that's ongoing
so the first prom that I'll start with
is what's when a piece of bring
non-standard we if we think through
fabrication as a space a very high
degree of freedom there's a lot of
complexity in field versus the model are
dramatically different companions
fabrication large it builds itself of
time
[Music]
standard operating procedures which are
considered best practices and that leads
us to a kind of um material culture
that's very standardized oftentimes we
call it stock the term stocks seems like
as a political undertone what we've made
inert will be made into a four by eight
five three quarter inch piece of
material so one prompt in the notion of
fabrication that I'm interested in is
how to look at non-standard materials
and how those have a kind of integrity
or intelligence to them that can be
engaged which I think came up in Jim and
Ben's talk so one of the left is a small
piece I did called polymer that's cut on
a little bot arm all anything out of
party bowls do i source them from Party
City digitized the object and then treat
that as a stock and so it's a commodity
with its own history and sell you some
kind of social affordances but what does
it do when it's enlisted into the
fabrication comes and on the right is
blood compressed blood and exploring
with ways in which we have standard
casting materials but yet there's this
history and a long ritual one factor
people constructing architecture out of
earthen materials gathered together tamp
it down the chemistry and the structural
properties of material are very integral
to the ecosystem and the culture that
they're apartment so what is the nature
of non-standard and what are the
politics of stock relates in a bit to
Benz project next prompt I'm going to
call semi-auto
which is a question of fabrication where
it responds to a notion of automation or
a relinquish chain of control by human
designer or author towards a system
oftentimes those systems can be
cybernetic systems but I think that's a
forest and a lot of the tropes of
automation and fully automated luxury
fabrication is this kind of hyperbole so
this project was a workshop
I did with a collaborator gentium that
shame on University in Beijing where we
also use phones and it was a response in
some way conscientiously to the culture
of using robot arms to build brick walls
which is a very prevalent thing where we
build a digital model that gets
converted into g-code emotion control
code on the robot and and then it's
executed so what we do here is we build
a model of a wall in a digital
environment and then we're streaming
that over the Internet to a phone and
utilizing the phone's GPS and summer
monitor basically identify what the
orientation of each brick is and try to
align the phone itself towards what the
orientation of the model that it's
telling attitude so it's assisted in the
way that the phone is informing the hand
where'd it go but people inevitably put
it in a inaccurate position at least
according to the rigor or the precision
of the model so it's designed to the
inconsistencies and the orientation of
that are then designed to reconstruct
long so the model is trying to rebuild
itself in which case if a person were
the place of living a lot of place the
course on top of that would try to
respond to resolve it structurally and
to me that's kind of underlying this
interest in fabrication as a form of
interaction design where we're looking
at the feedback between ourselves and a
model and allowing it to be a kind of
loop a cybernetic loop and in the
process of designing a model and
relinquish in control over that there's
a level of improvisation which is
oftentimes tolerance or an absence of
precision how can that be an asset we're
gonna feature not a bug so I like the
notion of human-computer interaction
building with models because in certain
ways if they're designed in loops they
can inform each other it's kind of a
game dialogue between the grasshopper
model another props that I'm interested
in his choreography perfect on the left
is a there's a project that I build my
studio hello everything in collaboration
with Augustana in Kenya and on the right
is a workshop I did at the AIA a year
ago and oftentimes when we talk about
fabrication and constructing things we
talk about how people take material and
put it together construction workers
construct the building they acquire
orders the cement trucks etc and then
get to work laying it in its proper
place with the high level of surveying
precision instruments geotechnical
systems etc but part of the choreography
that I think is particularly interesting
is that in the process of fabricating
the materials fabricate us and us and we
have to dance or manipulate ourselves in
response to what we make and as much as
a person who swings an axe
all day every day their body will change
in a fundamental way and so part of the
curiosity for me in fabrication is
understanding the role of which these
material assemblages which we construct
go back and reconstitute us reconstitute
our behavior and our organization and I
think that's an interesting social
question and it gets us again away from
thinking in a unidirectional manner of
architect conceiving of the design and
construction or communicates
to make a thing but in fact we are
constantly being reassembled to
reformatted ourselves in the process of
building and that has profound effects
to describe perhaps fabrication more in
terms of a choreography of people less
about what parts go where
and elements contain details example
another question that I have related
fabrications this notion of appreciated
and I think that this is maybe a moment
to stop and say that the notion of the
sort of social practice of fabricating
the community identity in the
construction of culture who fabrication
I think is really integral to what we
understand fabrication to be and so
oftentimes I think of these material
systems as kind of as kind of a hardware
they're not very interesting to be
honest through their pipes and clamps
and bolts and nuts or foam but there's a
software running it that that is this
sort of informal or tactical kind of
communication between people and so as
as we look at fabrication as a kind of
material accretion in social dynamics
such that it's less an object in and of
itself but a sort of material index kind
of memory or a trace left behind by a
group by a conversation with people
the piece on the right said a mighty and
it's opened into a large public space a
lobby with five hundred stacks five
hundred individual units all debating
stacks with no operating instructions
and could pick them up and figure out
that they can interlock
to each other and across the course of
the day you watch the thing get digested
and then reconstructed continuously as
people pass through the space and it's
this kind of trace this artifact that's
imprinted by circulation in my people
the last one I'll say this is a
processed photo for a cooperative that I
co-founded in Brooklyn and it's
dedicated towards art technology and
architecture collaboration and research
and it's about 25 people and I'm one of
the main organizers of it and in this
place like New York just to speak
specifically about the dynamics of New
York I think there's been a really
strong economic de incentivization to
make things
owning could be eliminated
just pure economics 101 of the way the
city operates so to try to introduce
engineer of city fabrication I think
it's a challenging thing to do because
oftentimes the labor that's favored by
the kind of architecture of the spaces
that we find ourselves in is really
geared towards a kind of digital work or
a work that's not necessarily made for
production the Midwest and New Jersey is
the place where things get fabricated
not New York so it's a political act to
try to read inscribed fabrication back
into New York City and I want to say
that as part of the fabrication process
it's always a good effort it's very hard
to build something by yourself
and how is there a language constructing
something together is a means of kind of
brokering trust
I think material or fabricated systems
are a way of enabling trust amongst
other people that otherwise don't have
that and there's a mass in an inertia
materiality that allows people to have
more nuanced or more trusting social
interaction so how can that be designed
in a way to to to not just be a space
for making or researching but just for
living the fabrication is a life
practice and about how people meet each
other and live in each other that's five
open-ended prompts thanks that's great
guys thank you all right what do you
want what mine that somehow I just saw
between the three of you and then then I
guess I'll pass this if this has any
relatives already to see it having any
relevance to the arguments about the
fabrication John Ruskin's
English arts and crafts the idea that
the history was local for him that would
be the Gothic and the craftsman would be
in commerce should have
and that it would develop almost I don't
know if uses the word ritualistically
but it would develop as a social
practice over time that involved the
people making it the material that was
pushing back in this case so I guess the
question or just the thought is do we
see digital fabrication now in the kind
of continuity with the Arts and Crafts
movement are we moving at that place
that would bring that back in or if not
then is it different and how would it be
different and one of the ways in which
that becomes a continuity the reasoning
if there is a a tendency in the
historical crafts movement for people to
inscribe their own so the behavior of
the bank personality or a narrative into
the work that they do and kind of more
direct translation of human ingenuity to
material I think that that story is
largely formed by people told for people
or the products are used by people and
as soon as you introduce increasingly
complex machines into that narrative it
seems as though the audience or the
generators of the story become human and
also non-human in a really interesting
way so in the in the notion of the kind
of locality of production in crafts I
think it's fascinating because the
creators of I see I see this kind of
craft movement as strongly narrative
oriented in the sense of in the sense of
say a Potter or a ceramicist spinning a
pot on a wheel wouldn't describe reliefs
on to it that would tell a story or in
their glazing about a particular event
etc so in the relation of craft to
narrative I think it's a it's a more
it's a really lost and interesting
narrative because it's not all being
told about people in a way the machines
are authors too and maybe also audience
and and that kind of dialogue back and
forth
I think definitely has strong tethers
back to link Ruskin's like Arts and
Crafts movement but the generators of
the work and the audience of the work is
now an assemblage of people and
technology new kind of leaders
that's the interesting question I'm Alan
I can't really speak for the for the
workers at that point in time but
certainly for myself I think coming out
of the 90s and
early knots there was a real frustration
with
with what we were given as these tools
and methodologies and I think you know
I'm part of the generation that really
wanted to hack like their way through
what we were given and and you know
maybe the arts and craftsmen had a
similar idea of finding their own agency
or mothers of empowerment but I think
specifically to my to work to my
generation or just relatedness
autobiographically the idea of
computation was just totally changed now
in the last I would say since 2016 a
little earlier maybe 2012 before the
housing crisis computation was used in
this discipline as a way of undermining
ideas of not really what to build but
even how to build and why you would
build in the first place there was this
idea that you could really use
sophisticated modes of fabrication to to
tell a different story and to you know
really to not just find your voice but
really really question things
fundamentally and and propose new
outcomes I think since honestly since
the housing crisis that view of
technology has really shifted so you
know this idea of relating things back
to be able to craft movement you know I
would I would I guess I would wonder if
you know what sort of crisis they ran
into you along the way what kind of
economy forced kind of rewriting of
of their of their moment in time just as
much as we're you know we're being
forced to rethink ours I mean certainly
you you cannot bring up comp like that
like a conversation about fabrication
right now cannot be had in in purely
like teleological terms right we can't
just bible thump here and say like
fabrication is is amazing as you know a
an amazing tomorrow there's no problems
with it it's it's rife with problems and
we are you know we're sort of dealing
with that now i think with what's
happening in society at large so you
know one undercurrent that I noticed in
the presentation is this idea of like
how do you like how do you walk that
line where you know that the discipline
is deeply engaged in pushing the methods
of fabrication because you have to get
underneath the hood you have to be
critical of how you're building
something but how do you do in the way
that is aware of a social agency of you
know that I think a big one that you
mentioned for me is like how do you
unleash the power of my collective
construction and we're all walking
around with this thing we all have
problems with how our voices are either
being heard in though in in the wrong
way or or being not hurt at all and you
know we we do want to figure out a way
to to get it right and and I think it's
it's like a collective endeavor and I
think you're right to point out that one
of the great things about architecture
is that it still offers society a chance
for a large-scale very large-scale
assemble of collective effort to put
something together
and you know that's think you know
research and application it's like this
idea that we can we can do it in a way
that addresses some of some of some of
the things that aren't going right
yeah and I think that's that order for
me the what's going on now is the best
of us order interns at arts and crafts
or I think it's a different model
together so I think I think the that's
more akin to the modernization the to
the Arts and Crafts movement okay
there's a sort of other I think we agree
I think the past five years I think
we've seen this sort of what we used to
copy fur to this digital culture has
actually transformed so radically and I
think it's social control political
effects have been so in some senses
devastating another way it's enabling
that I think for me some in the one hand
it is like you know how do we as
architects begin to think it's had this
have an agency within that and how does
that's a huge untapped resource and do
we know how to engage it at another hand
yeah and I think I did another hand it's
also like how does one begin to not only
like but it's also what we do is I kind
of want to begin to find a hold of their
aesthetic range than thought and so on
the one hand so that aesthetic range is
sort of expression is for one thing the
how does one begin to do one's own
discipline you begin to find those
expression that speak to a larger
cultural push
I have connect I think that's always the
you know architectures one hand yes is
paradoxically autonomous and has its own
element problems as a discipline but
also as always we has to be confronted
with the larger social cultural problems
at that time otherwise it's it ceases to
be meaningful order so yeah I think for
me like I think the underlying under the
world underlying the topics are
dangerous like this notion of control
and I think how does one begin to I
think that I think the push towards
frustrating that control is something I
is super interesting for me and I'm not
sure why we I feel the need to do that
but it deftly it was it air so yeah I
I think this was a larger question also
like how does it now create a sort of a
different social condition is right I
think also they think that there's
something for me also this was an
interplay between the human and
non-human also I think I think the
unless the arts and crafts were that
wasn't a local it somehow reinforced a
local culture somehow in local ecology
this somehow expresses the notion of
another nough stat is both somehow
fascinating but also kind of terrifying
but somehow we're engaging it something
for me it's been like I've been thinking
about a lot is how someone was talking
about how they were watching the
artificial intelligence play did it go
or chess with computer and how it never
lost how basically it either beat the
computer coordinate got a hundred games
beat the computer like 22 times or tied
it 70 another time and basically it's
like watching that thing play chess was
the closest thing I could imagine to
having like an alien race coming and
playing a chess and watching the house
something else things and so I think for
me that's also like part of the deals
like how does that begin to I don't know
what that what that means for us for
sure as a discipline and the sort of the
culture but yeah makes me think like the
classic Alan Turing formulated that a
machine could pass the Turing test if
you could not discern if it was a human
being or a machine and there's still
this bias inside I don't know we might
be leaning a little bit towards
computation and not fabrication for
saying this but there's this assumption
that intelligences like is human-like
right and so embedding the Turing test
logic is the assumption that that it is
intelligent if it looks intelligent like
us and and as we as designers
increasingly
advocate increasingly complex
apparatuses and infrastructures of
Technology Joseph's social systems I
think it's an interesting question too
just to unravel unravel the ways in
which there there's intelligence in the
systems that were working within that we
can't even perceive per se because it's
not our own as you said like alphago is
like the closest thing we might get to
an alien object and there is
intelligence in the systems that that we
use that I I think this might sound a
little far-fetched but it is intelligent
in ways that we can't receive you know
because we've been initiated to think
that intelligence looks like human
intelligence so the extent to which like
there's a parallel and I feel like
there's an underlying conversation about
hacking and hacking happen happening
here and if there was a there's a system
that worked quite where there was a
technique which was in the first
Industrial Revolution
you know industrialized so that machines
were doing this process now a huge
amount of what we talked about with
fabrication is hacking into these
existing systems that are now made to
have them have an alternate set of
outputs of an alternate sort of
consequence and it's less about making
something in authenticity or of an
original flora per se but but finding
room inside of existing infrastructures
and technical systems to redirect it
towards an alternate end and that's I
think quite different than a culture of
just producing something purely on its
own two feet as if it was sort of made
this is more like modifying or tweaking
the systems in the way that they control
things to help fabricate and it's
harnessing the power of this kind of
network infrastructure that were
apartment to to produce architecture and
alternate ways and not just high-rises
or condos with the next
etc and so that that that modification
question I think intercourse it to
fabrication now because they're selling
these systems are the autonomously
running that are making new things so
how do we insert our selves back into it
and it's three channel it or change it
its control the thumbs is a good example
of that I feel like everybody has the
friends in our hands and they have so
much capability and capability to do
really interesting things
architecturally speaking and not just
via tethered to prevail every aspect of
the body towards it the cloud but how
how did that such a technical
infrastructure how can that be hacked
and we worked as a as a way to generate
a collective kind of fabrication and
those there's a lot of crafting
manipulating this
sorry that is but I'll see there is not
something very interesting that you said
I reversal of a process that I would
like use that machines now take in at
the same time humans are now the subject
of the transformations of those
processes cell fabrication and I'm
trying to come up with an example to
have that my I'm thinking of the work
maybe of a on Wiseman and in how a now
with drones and killer drones you could
assume that itself could be the
production of those images the
navigation of the drones through
previously programmed algorithms and the
subject of those killing machines being
no humans maybe that's one of the
experience that I could but I would like
you is possible that we person yeah to
start with an example from visual
culture haroon Farooqi has a term he
calls operational images which he made a
lot of documentaries about which are
fantastic if anyone hasn't seen them as
a German documentary filmmaker and he
was he was really fascinated by the
production of images
for people but the other machines so he
looked at a lot of that likes
surveillance monitor cameras and
factories quality control systems
computer vision and motion capture
systems that were images produced to not
be viewed by people but to be absorbed
by a machine and audience in a way and
now we just kind of gently referred to
that as data but in the end just to try
to take a chip away it you're really big
an interesting question if we think of
say a lot of the infrastructures in say
the global north or in the United States
as being networked to kind of cloud
platforms if we used to have
brick-and-mortar shops down Main Street
not to be romantic that are now
completely subsumed by Amazon and
fulfillment centers I would argue that
the audience or a data center is another
example those are examples of
architecture where the audience is not
people I think it's for forklifts and
for machine or like agents like kippa
roving floor robots or even just server
racks and so the the use case of the
audience not on the earth of these
things you know computationally
generated to be the most efficient or
optimal spatial layout possible with
climate control etc but in fact things
using the buildings aren't really people
will either and so that kind of question
of like cloud architecture and a lot
where we see this mass consolidation of
what used to be disaggregated
distributed world of shops run by people
is now consolidated into pieces of
infrastructural architectures and the
the audience and the architecture are
both and I think that that tendency will
continue to happen because it's just
it's it's an optimization game
can just process faster I thought shred
that answers your question but one
example of this sort of relationship of
authorship and audience with humans in
computers like humans
can I ask you guys a question now about
Senegal G or how each of you because you
teach teacher course and have taught
courses and just call it a little
fabrication and what I wanted to do to
prompt it is that a certain level let's
say when I was in small thinking is
strong and but I'm gonna set it up
anyway the model was actually an
extension of descriptive geometry it was
about gaining control of the
computational environment and trying to
master it to learn everything it could
possibly do to do it correctly so that
we wouldn't be doing old things with new
tools but we would try to understand the
right way to use computation in its in
its kind of environment but that was
really about control and one of the
things that's running through all of
your presentations is how do we really
push that control or subvert that
control or hack that control or give it
over to give it over
yeah I mean I think for me I mean for me
it's been a bit trickier so I think I've
been teaching here I think the longest
time our facilities weren't that robust
and allow for that much digital digital
fabrication so I think for me it was
much more about like what were the kind
of the larger questions at digital
fabrication allowed and changed ways of
thinking so I totally agree like so I
think I had the same exact experience
right a certain degree how and I
remember I was in school when there was
a sort of the shift from drawing by hand
to draw by basically between different
modeling right Tamiya and the kind of
things that we were interested in as
problems even when were drawing my hand
were kind of anticipated the things that
we were doing digitally right so I think
he gives a sort of gloss of brown how
does one begin to beat up there are
tagging ality right and even doing
things like you do a drawing for a
little bit then you turned the paper or
a piece of paper and then draw that was
like there was always kind of you know
how do you even like works solely a
physical model as a way to kind of beat
up that relationship or you know lofting
etc and I think I think a thing for me I
think a big part of us is saying like
that kind of got exhausted as a sort of
set of problems we end up getting all
the control we wanted we couldn't make
something squishy enough or bent enough
to where it was still a contour and so I
think one of the things for me is like
you know that that sort of interplay
became at locating another kind of math
geometry along with the issue
materiality and at me I got still
fabrication is that sort of the
dialectic between geometry materiality
materiality then did kind of produce a
holding to other set of range of
questions so happened all of a sudden so
I think you know even though the one of
my seminars was like you know how does
one begin to have a look at drawing as
not as a sort of representational
problem but as a sort of
problem by drawing us material practice
all of a sudden made it a different
thing and so how do we begin to even
like introduce you know I think we were
also looking at some craft based things
like you know even like paper marbling
had in a weird way to some effect really
highly digital operation where you kind
of me know that and at the end of the
day is actually where you don't have
there's this sort of like even like
breathing on the on the surface of the
water do some sort of pattern but the
same time you have like these grits and
needles that were kind of like coming in
and doing something so there was a sort
of larger that was like one of the sort
of the frameworks we kind of used like
had you had is one kind of hop over not
having a certain range of tools but has
one basically still think that way so I
think materiality and basically letting
Mattia that subverting material to a
geometric logic but having it sort of
resistive geometric logic to me was kind
of one of the ways that happened yeah I
would say the the objective of any
pedagogy is to see how it interfaces
with with the students and and and every
generation of students changes you know
I don't think that means that you you
know that you change everything with
every new year you know it's often quite
interesting how the fundamentals of say
drawing or more you know modeling
translating rotating multiplying things
in space it's fascinating how those are
are reinterpreted with with the
new class and and it's it's I mean
that's what I enjoy about you know
certainly the pedagogy has changed over
I say 15 years of you know digital kind
of work but but the ethic of teaching
fundamentals for me hasn't like the idea
that you need to build your own tools is
for me like fundamental like you have to
get under the hood you have to
intimately understand what you're
working with because those are the
revelatory moments does it mean that we
have to do it in the same way every time
no I mean maybe you know maybe it
certain things change maybe there is
more of interest in material production
but but I still stand that there are now
you can you can't let go of the the idea
of just running through the kind of
fundamentals yeah that's that that's
never gonna go no matter how
sophisticated the incoming student is
you know and they are getting more and
more sophisticated to have more more
experience with software as they come in
they certainly know how to use this
thing much better than any of this to
you but you know the Malir about it the
the the objective of using computers and
specifically of hacking into them it was
it was an effort in in in
decomposition it was in it was it was a
dismantling it was it was this idea that
you could break things down and and not
into like just smaller parts or pieces
but that you would break it down into
parts and language and and when and that
idea of being fundamental about you know
about this this kind of digital practice
that's that I think is still relevant
you know you you you you know maybe
different generations need to decide
what they need to break down but that
still remains as a kind of underlying
ethos in in this kind of effort so as we
navigate into this new era at Cooper I
would you know I was you know I would
hold on to that
I feel like there's a there's a kind of
in as much as fabrication relationship
technology or techniques just or more
broadly that there's always this
question of the control that one has
over there the kind of tool or the
technology and so maybe in the current
state it's just like an order of
magnitude more complicated just like
more buttons and more software packages
and more api's and things like that but
I think and it's undermine nature I
don't think all that much has changed in
a way but maybe it's become the quantity
of that of the number of mediations is
so much more that it has a qualitative
shift from the mentally with the way
people will think or work I think that I
think that oftentimes there's we when
people talk about thinking through
making you know this is a this is a
pedagogical imperative which i think is
extremely important and and it's
something that people do outside of
pedagogy all of the time craftspeople
those who have a skill particular kind
and think through making and how
fabrication particularly relates to
pedagogy in this case I think is is
still a kind of continuation of the fund
foundation suspensive it was had for a
long time but it I think it encourages
us to think as architects not so much as
though the design process starts in our
head and extends outwards and as though
we extend our mind into the environment
with which we're designing
shows that we design in but in fact the
materials the tools and the student oh
the learning process is all the kind of
thinking unit together rather than
thought happening inside of me and then
extending manipulating material and
trying to maintain control in certain
aspects and cede control in other ways I
think we understand that through these
fabrication processes that what a
student is or the basic nature what's
happening when we design is a
relationship between ourselves material
and geometry machines and that is that's
that's all kind of learned that's a unit
in another element and that's a really
exciting thing and happens been
happening for a long time but I I think
that often times the question of control
comes up under the presupposition that I
manipulate my environment so I must
exert some kind of control on it where
I'm the source and that's the things
that are receiving my learning but yeah
control is still there but but I'm
interested in the way that the student
or in teachers are not just individuals
with a brain and how they think in and
of their own right but they really are a
system of material geometry individuals
themselves and how do we cultivate that
as a kind of designer it's a really
interesting kind of question but you
know with the proliferation of new tools
and stone working or in carpentry or
metal you know the kind of loss the loss
of rigor or the loss of control that
happened and I think it's happened many
times before and I don't really
fundamentally think it's all that much
different I don't think it's
I can't mine argue that if architecture
is being machines and it's different
oh yeah yeah that's that was that was me
my father I think so but I don't I don't
know any architects who are designing
those pieces to be honest I mean those
are largely engineers bases so they're
not architected but it's amazing how
amazing they are
yeah I mean we're fascinated for city so
I'll see my
there are a lot of ways it's a very
particular part
and
maybe a lost an idea of history has
connected to a place other there's kind
of reaching for it with being connected
to your making but I guess I just I'm
skeptical of how much of that tradition
is actually retained once you start to
control it at all in a way it just kind
of seems like a more friendly control
that might be more hard to recognize and
more dangerous and I'm just wondering
what how why you think this is the right
thing to be doing today and in this time
when people seem to be losing the
ability to relate and really relate
their place that's a super interesting
question
you know what but what one way to look
at this idea of history is that it's
it's a it's a fabrication like that it
is a like an there and it's a fiction
you know it's a it's it's a it's a
fiction that's kind of built up over
time and yeah maybe that's a more apt
way of describing fabrication in my
presentation and I would say the
opportunity is how you enter like that
that fiction and how you you know how
you decide to be an author within it I
mean certainly like the basket weaving
is is is is highly ritualized but you
know part of the part of all risk or
part of our you know I guess this this
kind of this this mask of me being
friendly is is actually like a real risk
to put ourselves out there within this
community and you know one of the more
interesting parts of that story is that
being the person who was most open to us
is a is a fascinating individual who
doesn't fit really any of the kind of
norms of his tribe and but he knew that
you need to do something he needed to do
things that really
they made made a difference and one of
the things that he does on the side of
weaving there's a weaver but he also
runs a food cooperative where he looks
at indigenous food like beans and tries
to reintroduce them to the population
there's a huge problem of obesity and of
all you know all kinds of health
problems that come out of the food that
that at first people are including
they're eating a lot of you know high
fructose high fat food and there's a lot
of others that there's an epidemic of of
all sorts of malnutrition so so while he
means you know that's only one practice
of a kind of myriad of practices where
he's trying to bring history back into I
mean he's literally trying to make them
eat the history so that so that they
said they're healthier and he has to do
it in a way that's you know the food is
not it's not doesn't look the same as
the food that they used you know it has
to be delivered in a way that is you
know that's presented in a way that
don't eat so I think this idea of what
working with history is it's it's not
meant to be just about parts language
it's not meant to be like just about
kind of let's say games of logic or
chance it's meant to have a it's meant
to have a high degree of intentionality
to it it's meant to be a way of you know
maybe slipping you know within the
project you know some poke
for change
also interesting just in that sense the
the alternative meaning of fabrication
that we've never talked about as in like
a fabled yeah applicators stories like
he needed to what extent is history
fabricated we produce history it's
actively constructed in a way yeah and
that instructive in the present all the
time
absolutely I mean you could look at
definitely science art fabrication I
mean they're all to degree to the degree
to which they're Sciences is is is as
much true that they are open to a
narrative development I mean I've always
seen this problem of working with
fabrication as as as always dealing with
this kind of this unfolding horizon like
you never quite get there it's always
receding in the distance like you're
never gonna be a master of a certain
technology because it's always sort of
falling off but it's important that you
you know that you travel towards the
horizon because it's really this it's
this kind of journey and that journey is
really our belated stories
I think that idea Verizon is really
you're looking forward and backward at
the same time and so as you all were
talking about this notion of control our
speaking that you know it really feels
like the relinquish me if you are
looking at editing through the lens of
authorship but on the other hand if
you're looking at these distribution
centers from Amazon and you know their
climate control and their automated
control you're also just allowing
basically the man-made to produce this
totalizing environment right and it's
the totalizing of the man-made and you
can insert artificial intelligence into
that in a way which we're not
controlling sort of the individual
things they're happening in it but it
still is like a hundred percent man-made
environment so like is it really a real
English control in the end and I think
that there might still be the
possibility to have mice inherited
discourse of bending resources and
natural processes human will right so I
guess I'm just wondering as we're
thinking about our placement as is
horizon about the potential to look
forward into the radical potentials of
the technology but at the same time that
equally possible result of
like reifying and entrenching certain
assumptions yeah yeah I mean I would
argue that it's always a frustration of
of this kind of movement backwards and
forwards and and you know the more
interesting projects for us have been
the ones that that that reveal that you
know in in this discourse around
computation let's say the the the first
computer was you know as famously is the
loom like the jacquard loom it was the
first automated and binary mechanism
that could run on its own and binary
because it was moving it could move a
thread up and and down say you could you
could basically turn something on and
off I'd had like a warp and a weft and
so I would just remind be just a
reminder that that this this kind of
explosion of new forms of intelligence
spaces learning alien whatnot that it
they're also highly material processes
and you know the more we remind
ourselves of let's say their history
their their their their origins I think
the more were as architects were able to
find our agency within them because our
I think and it's my this is my bias but
I I I think architects are most powerful
when dealing with material not really I
mean we're we're great you know when we
handle
information algorithms processes all
logistics all that but how it gets
materialized is how it becomes cultural
like how it gets materializes how it how
it becomes part of this historicity and
and you know that's our that's our
responsibility I think is how do you
decide to like place something within
the world I mean that's how I've always
kind of seen it and you know this this
idea of kind of moving backwards and
forwards that the horizon it's it's all
a kind of fancy way of just standing for
something like now the other thing I
mean I do part of it too is like you
know well I think salsa fit would be
alignment of like what was humanist
values right to think to a certain
degree at the anywhere and area sort of
constructions on history there's always
a relationship with uh Turnus and so I
think humanism was response to the vast
other nests of reality that they had to
tell how contend with and now I think
there's those things are Selina there's
I think there's another ocean of other
nuts now that we basically are creating
enough to rich I think now is that gonna
push this off Center in a way which is
probably good yeah
[Music]
fabrication this week
the human the material and software
interface opposed to but how that bring
a distance from the kind of the liberty
of being able to take what works for
that discussion created kind of a
distance from a specific space decided
for an application of amore that
something that could work autonomously
from a place and then the liberty and
also being able to then play something
I think it breaks stuff up a distance
from
[Music]
more largely spoken language effectives
one one one thought that makes me think
of it it's reductive to what you're
saying but there's interesting how in
the wave of fabrication techniques that
have proliferated over the last say
fifty years a lot of them are pretty
similar to each other the rather generic
concern over maybe a four by eight CNC
here versus the four might seem teen
Brussels are kind of basically the same
thing the locality or the kind of index
of history and place miss is not it's
not tangible maybe it is in the kind of
skills and knowledge exchange between
people but a lot of the time we talk
about fabrication methods as generics
that methods G code doesn't care if it's
being run in Shenzhen or New York City
right and so I feel like there's a an
anxiety that architects have knowing
that's the case is this turn toward site
specificity but like lots of things are
going to be site-specific it's like
really trying to reorient itself back to
a place and I don't think that that's a
bad thing per se but I think there's a
kind of an awareness of like the
possibility of place lessness
that can happen is along
a lot of projects you know work
conscientiously and I think a lot of it
is good and some that maybe is virtuous
towards reconstructing a place and a
kind of context through which these
things happen because a lot of them
become proxies towards globalization in
Italy you know flat world that's the
same everywhere that's a really really
complex question but and I think that a
lot of the projects that wasn't you to
share it's like the conscientious
attention to place like Indiana produces
this normal particularly and it's like
it's all part of that application system
it's it's constructing place but it's
also upper taste in the first
with time for just another maybe one
more question that somebody's have
something that's burning in your mind
all right
[Laughter]
[Applause]
