[Music]
I was asked to introduce David this
evening so I'm going to say a few things
very briefly I know you'd want hear from
him more than me I'll say this he said
something the other morning at his talk
about considering himself a lucky duck
and he said that in reference to being
so fortunate to be able to graduate from
the Cooper Union and then be asked to
state and to grow to work
collaboratively within the school and
within with John Peter I'm also a fellow
of lucky dog Congress thinking about the
other morning and Ivy said it was just
that simple and very beautifully simple
and in talking were you thinking about
making an introduction I'm here to say a
few words about David who's been gonna
say a few words about John dduk and his
work and I thought I would start by
reflecting on something that happened
before another lecture that took place
in this room 30 years ago and that was
going to be a lecture by Colt himmelblau
and so it's 1985 I personally am a first
year student in the school of
architecture very new eighteen very
green and Dean Haida caught up to
introduce the talk but before he did he
began to tell a story and that story was
how he and his wife Gloria had spent the
night prior up in their attic looking at
UFOs out the window
and so I have to be clear that this was
not comical that was not meant in
sincerely it was a deep contemplation of
the coexistence of humans and the
extra-terrestrial John conveyed that
experience with almost a spiritual
understanding and you know you all call
this a WTF moment that's what the term
is now but I said to myself at that
moment where the hell am I and I learned
very quickly that I was in a sanctuary
of thought then a couple of years later
David and I met when we were both
students what he didn't really get into
the other day when he's talking about
that transition
he made into being a lucky duck was that
the detail of which is that when he was
Issa stood here class was given a site
the site measure was about I think a six
foot by seven foot in length a six by
five read each student in the class was
given a Sequoia site micro site within
that field
everyone built a model of that site and
the intention was that each person was
going to make a program and intervention
if I remember correctly within that
space David decided that he was going to
take over the whole site
in a rather fantastical journey of
envisioning what ultimately became a
forever house with numerous inhabitants
and numerous structures that those
impediments were going to occupy and in
order to be able to do that he had to
build himself a drafting table that was
almost vertical that was probably 10
foot by 10 foot that required a wooden
scaffolding for him to climb up on to
and draw from and I would say that that
act of expanding that realm of his
project resonated so powerfully with the
team that he took action and he
cultivated David's work and so for the
next couple of years probably longer
I observed as he after being a Cooper
Union student continued to clientÃ­s
baffled and made his drawings and
literally draw in every direction so
those were early moments in the
germination of what became what I
consider you know an ongoing dialogue
between them and the mechanization of a
relationship that led David to be the
associate dean of the school and then at
our moment of greatest lament the acting
dean at this point so what I would say
is that I served you now for a number of
ways over the years in your various
capacities
I kind of consider us Spears that travel
within the same orbit sometimes from a
distance sometimes almost at a tangent I
think sometimes we bump and push off and
then sometimes I think there are
confluence with
these that Omega less I would say that
in terms of what I observed about your
teaching I considered a need to be
someone who deeply understands the ethos
of this place and its immediate recent
and distant past and in that regard I
consider him to be a fierce protector of
that ethos and someone who in disty
chains ever mindful of the critical
importance of capturing the spirit of
the discipline and convey that
understanding to his needs and
fabricating with them collaborative
teaching examples of the social contract
year after year and now almost in the
vein forever house David is doing this
upstate at the middle with Arts and
Letters and members so I just want to
say I know how important the
significance of the social contract in
the act of capturing spirit work for
John and they were literally part of his
DNA so I really can't think of a more
meaningful person to introduce
Wow Wow
well thank you so much Steven for their
moving and beautiful introduction
amazing as I listen there's a number of
moments and resonance from exactly what
you've said that I've done to try to get
to tonight so I guess it was one of
those commingling moments and and I want
to thank you all for coming it's really
great to see you all I love this
community and also you know to the whole
school of architecture for what you do
in bringing this exhibition and the
pieces up front here bringing them and
building them there's a very important
moment creates a very important moment I
want to say a little something about
these two talks you know this talk is a
continuation of the part one from the
other day it's it's constructed a bit
differently than the other David talk is
called beta-amyloid and the ghost
promise
and that was you know kind of an art to
a very long trajectory of of works from
the Texas houses in the 1950s to the
dining houses in the 1960s through the
wall house in 1970s through the social
contract works of the eighties and
nineties to the house of the suicide and
house of the mother of suicide and of
course with some help from Hamlet and
Globe Theater for any of you who are
here this talk in this talk which is
called John Qaeda through the wall it is
being echo and conversation that all of
that with all those pieces which is why
I felt the need to do a two party talk
but tonight I I'd like to focus on
two words the victims project from the
late 1980s and the sanctuaries works and
in particularly the chapel for the
wedding of the Moon and Sun now these
sanctuaries workers are really from the
last years of John Peters life so
victims and sanctuaries are both
powerful and large works they're
mysterious and they're deeply moving and
they're also a good safe wonderfully
difficult to speak of the victims
project is a direct engagement with the
horrors of the Holocaust and the
profound loss of that time and are
embodied memory of loss and the work
speaks to in a way a social contract
that was perhaps contained that the
ghost promises that I was talking about
a lot but Tuesday point the sanctuaries
drawings John Haeger was literally
wrestling with life and death and with
the spaces that he was in during that
time that he was making those drawings
now these works are a deep meditation on
his own religiosity its spaces and
structures or as John said after we sat
with the sanctuaries drawings for a long
extended silence it was very good at
doing that and sometimes we mean five
ten minutes was well within reason to
sit in silence to look at something
sometimes it would become 20 minutes
he said if wrestling with the ancients
so these are important works they're
difficult
paid up in I had to work on and can
start this talk a bit differently than
the other day this is more in a way it's
its own a constellation I would say it's
a focused constellation but it
definitely requires peripheral vision I
think so the focus team a month it's two
words with a lot of peripheral vision
meaning all kinds of other key points
ideas moments gestures stories and
structures with the home of constructing
here a space within which we can share
these works together so I want to begin
with John cadets voice during a certain
season in Texas at dusk some tree trunks
seemed to be phosphorescent they give
off a dull crystalline light upon close
scrutiny it is found that the trunks of
the trees are completely covered with
discarded shells that once were the
outer bodies of certain insects the
startling fact is that the shell is
intact the form is exactly as it was
when its original inhabitant was inside
with one difference the inside has left
leaving the outer form which looks like
an x-ray producing the luminous effect
suddenly we hear a chorus of sound
coming from the dark leaves above it is
the sound of the insects hidden in the
tree in the new meta physical form what
is strange about the phenomena is that
we can see the insects shell forms
clinging to the tree
these empty shells a form that life has
abandoned while we fix our eyes on these
apparitions we hear the sound of the
insect in its new form hidden in the
trees we can hear it but we cannot see
it the sound we hear is a soul sound so
I want to share with you the first time
that I ever saw jungle it was 1984 I was
eating I just moved to New York City
from Albany New York and so people told
me that there was a symposium on
architecture and we should go and said
NYU there was a large hall that's sort
of you know the vertical theater seating
stage hello long table on the stage and
there were about six or seven architects
most of them were University corporate
architects s11 and they were talking
back and forth to each other anyway I
mean we'd be talking about it and it
seemed that they were making the kind of
jokes but there wasn't any punchlines of
the audience to keep up with but there
was this really large guy sitting there
at the table and he stood out and not
just because it was huge but he was not
participating in this back and forth
with the others so there's something
interesting on telling the audience
jumped up and they threw a notebook down
the stairs yelled out you know what the
hell is going on all these people are
here and you're not speaking about
anything and then another person
all that again and then people in the
audience started to yell at those people
who had done that and then some people
on the stage started you know the panel
started to yell at the audience I mean
it was so young Rafi's and I was
watching this Big Bang because she
wasn't saying a word he had this huge
magic marker and he was leaning over the
table and he was writing on the folders
and I couldn't see what he was writing
but I was totally focused on that and
people are yelling back and forth he's
not even looking up so then you know he
slowly stands up and then you realize
some gems
and his booming voice he says I've
written the word on this piece of paper
everybody froze and he's been felled
legally silent and then he holds it up
over his head it says enough huge
letters the room falls into total
silence now what happened this is what
I'm really looking for them Jon Heder
stood there in the silence inside speak
about other men other and being ethical
about space and voice and about the
social poetic dimensions of others and
the social time at some point he said
you can either impregnate the world with
me Nino with emptiness you can't do both
you have to choose I mean it was stunt
how he sat down and one of the other
Palestinians sarcastic
define other miss without missing a beat
John said the breath of Bacchus that's
other now if any started despite a stone
sculpture by Michelangelo and how it
seen this we're just poking just a part
just a tiny little bit and he said if
you move close and put your cheek up
close just in front of those lips you
can of Bacchus coming from within the
stone bond and if you very quiet and
listen you could hear the voice
contained in that breath he said that's
our business and that's what
architectures build done I mean this was
a remarkable experience you know get
from one thing I grew up in trucking I'd
seen plenty of raucous hits before but I
could never seen anything I've never
heard anybody speak like them and while
I didn't have much of an idea of what
awareness meant I could sense it I could
feel something about its gesture in fact
that was probably my first conscious
experience of others hurt himself was up
that room when bidding that ruins of
them as I thought about the breath that
voice Bacchus it seems so incredible but
also so simple in the sense that you
know we speak our breakfast does in fact
coming home with our language and that
does create our voice that's inevitable
when I thought about his voice in that
room in the silence and listening that
it created in that room
his voice was being listened to in the
room as closely as he had said we had to
listen to Marcus so something fell into
place about what he must have meant by
the social poetic dimension
the social culture also words I've never
heard now over the years I've come to
understand many other dimensions of
business but in that moment in that room
I had witnessed something I had
witnessed of master in the arts of
teaching anyway name was John Hayden I
learned that he had a school called the
Cooper Union and it's a quote John when
he told the story of how he found the
Cooper Union 1947 quote and thus began
my illicit affair the decree which would
profoundly affect how I would do things
in the future and quote I want to share
her home with you from John called the
breath of Bacchus your Cara Liz Hart
inhaling softly a whisper which
disappears into the great hollow of a
voided stone you're incised eyes are
bewildered by the hush within your mouth
the crates of your hair fall over your
forehead polished to a coldness your
creator made a miracle through the
surface of his hands and wrists the blue
air into your impenetrable white marble
producing the first inanimate inside
silencing all sound that's the end of
the poem and that was a quote from John
I aggrieved because it keeps me along
but there's a more important reason
because when I breathe the air in I
breathe in all the sounds from all the
voices
beginning of time all the voices that
have placed thoughts into the aim that
is thoughts escaping from the soul
through the voice into the air which I
breathe in sounds that cannot be heard
silent seconds filling the air that
generations have spoken into
consequently filling me with worlds that
are an invisible tempest an invisible
sounding text which mingles my thoughts
and that are invisible in essence an
eternal communication takes place giving
the sense of the solemnity of silence
transparencies and an invisible sounding
text which main evils my thoughts that
are invisible silent trance prices its
own space is literate speaks in silence
so I wants to try to mingle in our minds
to thoughts from John one I believe
because it keeps me alive but there's a
more important reason with the breath of
Bacchus coming from within the stone
body we begin to sense the question of
how is it that we've author silence when
your first babies our thoughts and
actually exceed by constructing these
spaces of participation and space itself
is a participant in our thoughts and
actions so imagined and remember to
dreamed of leaving spoken of worlds are
co-mingling with this hidden world out
here of substance of light rattling
sound our memories our imagination
language voice stories knowledge of
hopes our fears desires that all
participating in co-constructing this
experience and it's quite possible that
this continuous conversation through the
space and factors completing us it's the
other path offense allows us to
understand ourselves and others so in
the simplest sense I'm saying as we
build this room this room is moving us
good start spaces they're constructing
us and in this sense that social
contract is a form of participation
contribution among our fellow citizens
but it is also always a contract with
space itself as the contract will embody
the widest was nuanced spectrum of what
it is to be human into our reciprocal
spaces that's what our detection is
built
this is the victims project news
this book was published by the
architectural Association in 1986 and it
was published to coincide with the
construction of the collapse of time the
workers showed last but as stated in the
introduction to the book quote victims
contains 67 structures presented to the
city and to the citizens of Berlin a
place to be created over 230 year
periods a growing incremental place
incremental time that's the plan of
victims the 67 pieces the project is
cited on land that that formerly
contained the torture chambers used by
the Ghassan during World War two in the
middle of Berlin it actually a beckon
participle John Maeda considered this
plan to be one of his seminal works of
architecture he placed it with the wall
house and with his last book of poems
which is called Lonnie's no fire could
burn as one of the supposed important
inventions the introduction to the book
victims offers these enigmatic words
under the title thoughts of an architect
quote one that architectural traces are
apparitions Alan Watts big means they
are not diagrams but goes to tracings
are similar to x-rays they penetrate
internal three erasers implied former
existences for drawings and tracings are
like the hands of the blind touching the
surfaces of the face in order to
understand a sense of volume depth and
penetration 5 the lead of Architects
pencil disappears drawn away meta
morphosis and quote so like many people
I had always found this project to be
quite mysterious is a powerful creative
invention of both individual structures
and the collective idea of their spatial
relationships
the plan is piggyback its particular
tangency and placements are
extraordinary
they've always seemed to be speak to
speak to something unseen to some hidden
forces and it was not until a discovery
by two architecture students that I
began to grasp the true nature of
victims in 2006 served on I'm su
antara Rodriguez pesos they complete
their thesis in architecture at Pratt
their teachers were to Cooper Union
alumni Iran Iran and Anthony Chinese I
want to make sure to say all their names
because I believe they discovered
something
research that is a important
contribution understanding John the
expert well it was always clear that the
victims project was located on the site
of a former Gestapo torture chamber in
the middle of Berlin what is not stated
in the project is the manner in which
these victims were located to arrive as
such a report or plan when one overlay
is the plan of victims with the plans of
the now long gone buildings that had
previously inhabited the site the idea
comes into focus the dark parts are
showing the location of the previous
buildings each victim is located in a
specific tangency to the previously
existing structures each victim is
spatially geometrically instructionally
addressing the previous architectural
condition a past condition that has been
increased in both the drawings and the
physical landscape some of the victims
are touching the corners of the previous
structures others are unhinging corners
some victims sit back into open spaces
while others pass right through a space
from one side to the other some of the
some are bridging over previous
landscape situations such as small
creeks but no longer exist
others lower themselves down into waters
that no longer flow each starship is
located in the present site and in the
site was no longer
it's like an eclipse the presence of one
time takes the form of a shadow within
another time each victim inhabits both
worlds at the same time for me this was
a profound revelation understanding this
fact one recognizes the words at the
beginning of the book as hints
indications of an ideal quote ratios
imply former existences they are not
diagrams but ghosts and quote now these
ideas of the transformation of racing
and eclipsing came much earlier to jump
it up we we heard an early echo of them
in what he said about the wall us that I
should be in the day quote the
hypotenuse of the diamond became the
wall in plan one could he race the
peripheral vestiges of the diamond
outline wall house one was a new
discovery and without a doubt victims
was a new discovery one rooted in the
revelations of the wall house and I
believe that the miraculous big Matic
plan of victims is an architectural
surgery one set of structures of
exacting precision cutting into and
inhabiting on another set of structures
of former existence now the state of
total unconsciousness one of happens
during surgery is cognitively described
as the cessation or suspension of the
time deep anesthesia brings the patient
to a place outside of time to the
patient the beginning and the end of
surgery are essentially the same moment
when a patient the corporeal struggle of
surgery occurs in a continuous
present of a surgeon the surgeon
inhabits both worlds the time and space
of the surgery room and of the patient
this is a quote from dr. Richard Selzer
a surgeon who spoke if they Cooper Union
in this room
many times Johnson who did if I think to
share incredible thoughts just cells
quote I have often felt while fighting
in the middle of the night to keep
drowning lungs afloat where to start a
flow of the blow that the room about me
was participating in the struggle how
more than once the walls gasps and then
stood still at the instant of death and
like many forms of surgery victims
required the cessation of time and this
suspension was not the result of
anesthesia
I believe the collapse of time required
for the victims project was born in the
transfixing condition of the still stop
jon heder discovered in the wall house
that we talked about on tuesday he
willed up his embodied knowledge of this
still stunned to confront the spaces of
terror of that previous time this
knowledge this ability to be transfixed
is essential to the final phase of the
victims architectural surgery the
erasers of the former starfish their
physical space disappears leaving just
the Magnificent plan of the victims
I looked at that vertical drawing bell
in drawing of Meis and I was transfixed
that a quality of transfixing one and my
focus but you know went to it I had
known it before and I was absolutely
staggered by because I had a
phenomenological experience car it was
like seeing a resurrection in other
words that drawing that glass tower
began to levitate there was a levitation
within the within the space and within
the room I guess within my own soul and
things began to drop off in other words
the architectural drawing room that I
was in dropped off and then the building
dropped off I mean the no mama dropped
off in other words all the actual
so-called reality physical space dropped
off and disappeared and what was only
left was that really magnificent
magnificent drawing and it made me
understand what the word mass the
architect or master builder meant
so in this in this film in addition to
describing the trans face the building
falling away so-called physical space
disappearing the end of the clip
gentlemen it says something quite
important he who makes those are very
conditions when he understood the words
master architect of Master to me I
believe this particular understanding of
building is the exact knowledge and
creative precision at work in the
construction of victims do a deep
internal process generally like
creatively and directly drop the roll
off and worked with the head within the
still life that it happens life he
entered into the suspended time that he
would call solid in space I operated
with great risk with the precision and
honesty and care and gentleness
I want to repeat a quote from John if
one gyrates rotates ellipses with
sufficient energies they become a
straight line moving from space to space
from time to time
the original curvature is unseen but
nonetheless felt end quote that was his
entire introduction to the book of
soundings the particular dynamics of the
victim plan contain a certain buoyancy a
rotating floating condition he says if
the hedge is surrounding the site
contained the great unseen flood lifting
the victims and erasing the previous
structures I've often imagined that the
arc that saved all the creatures from
the flow was Harding time arc is an
occurred slowly
if the Ark is a curve that slows time
then the creatures in it experienced a
flood in a whole different way if the
ark slows time aligning it with life
time the flood would not be a
destructive in fact it would be a place
that allowed life life the art victims
contains sufficient energies to be
common architectural hinge moving from
time to time from space to space the
last architecture before the flood the
first architecture after the soul
structures surviving that event francis
youths said quote what protects us
against delirium or hallucination
are not a critical powers the
destruction of our space and quote I
believe that John Hannah understood that
is left alone the spaces of that time
would continue to do harm to our present
tense situation in space even if the
previous spaces that are already been
erased from the physical their violent
impact on our memory and imagination on
our structure and space on the air we
breathe n continued across funny this is
why the victims is embodied
architectural surgery a reenactment of
space into space or structures into the
structure and from within the suspended
time the rotating victim structures are
operating on the space sublimely filling
life back into that air continuously
constructing an inverse perspective from
which to address that unspeakable loss
and so it's not it's not that victims
have been built or something will be
built they are building their always
built like Hamlet's a speak from the
Globe Theatre and having that
shakespeare's resurrection victims
exists in a
u.s. oppressive they're always telling
and every demon kissing at every given
moment each victim is Campostella Cree
calling us close calling us close to
whisper what holds up one holds up all
life is sacred
through this continuous retelling the
violent spaces of one time are
metamorphosized into spaces of life the
entire victims project is an
architectural ghost the shadow of one
world may present in another a here this
memory of lost being an inverse
perspectives of the house of a suicide
house the mother of suicide here it
becomes a total eclipse organically and
how chemically in metabolically and
neurological even startling spatially
and temporally victims are transforming
that forms of horror into life-giving
forms so in that sense victims is it's
quite literally a life-sustaining work
this this social contract is with space
itself
it speaks to be a good Vatika factors of
life itself as a continuous
communicative exchange between our
spirit of our spaces and these exchanges
may not only occur in this sort of
struggles of mortal consequence or the
instant of death that Celtic said our
communicative exchanges with space also
speaking whispers telling of our
fragility is embodying a great nuance
the material and the spatial empathy of
life I believe we find this in the
making the in that people present
throughout all of the works of jumping
and I'd like to now move
sexualize I want to share this project
it's 30 the Secretary's drawings are 32
drawings it started between 1999 and
2000 this is the year of John Hay
expensive these works are a deep
meditation on John's religiosity and on
the spaces and times that he was in when
he made him know John was always
concerned with structure and most
definitely that included the structures
of the sacred and the religious now this
is obviously a vast territory but as a
way of moving toward the sanctuaries
drawings on one of our just a few ideas
in a few moments so the the origin of
the word religion is religion as in to
retimed to connect communities the
origin of the word sacred comes from sac
as they see sac and it means us act like
a sack of the data something banging
into this world so the sacred is
understood is connected to another world
and the end to this world the religion
can be understood that religion can be
understood as here standing here and
working to reconnect or religion we tie
the Fallen sackers now it's very
interesting is that there's a structural
relationship here of tension and
compression hanging into this world or
lifting up in compression you can stick
with this tension and compression you
can look at the history of secret art
and architecture and religious art and
architecture you can do a structural
analysis of the transformations over the
centuries from Yoruba practices to the
pyramids to the flying buttresses of the
great cathedrals to Santiago de
Compostela with its hanging on a light
of tonight
Center there's about two Familia
obviously the chaplet Russia now one of
John's constant and great questions
often asked what was the joint in the
crucifix I mean how was it built the
wood type between the vertical and
horizontal wooden members of the
crucifix now for John this was a mystery
that we leave into the structures of
tension and compression and the question
of Christ meaning the idea of a body
that is a body that that is also
infinite infinite attention compression
vertical horizontal bodies wait John saw
the crucifix as a structural proposition
about this question try to imagine what
the joint was so I wanna share with you
a project done by a student that asked
this exact question rejected the
crucifix and unfortunately even though I
have not been able to identify the
students name but this is a work done
here at the cupola in 1995 as part of
the those are the thesis year that we
lovingly called the fruit here that year
we were looking very closely at fruit
and still lives we started the year with
John bringing in a right here a bowl of
fruit a bullet wax flute and a stays on
still life of fruit and said which one
tastes better
now you can test that led to a
conversation and at the end of that
conversation we asked the students that
wonderful difficult question to build a
piece of fruit the difficult part of the
simple right there's a lot of enigmas in
that they'd led to a kind of amazing
explosion let's say in the studio's of
creative searching to the enigmas of
fruit it's still like the life of the
still life apples being made of steel
heated to read lemons have became camera
Obscura's grapes that were tasked and
cut and painted still lives of
themselves as they were cut celery
bananas were slides over in my sanitary
the studio became a kind of microclimate
of its own life and imagination
one of the students worked with roses
these are wooden roses books now as they
were working of it they began to work
with the question of what was the joint
of the crucifix and something kind of
remarkable happened which was the idea
that the gathering of the roses
each of these stems that white spot is
the end cut of all the stems gathered
again
so when you stand up you have this
explosion credible structural
composition motive depth of the question
why don't we need uh two quotes versus
from Elizabeth stone she said quote
making the decision to have a child is
momentous it is to decide forever to
have your heart go walking around
outside your body
another quote which china it would often
are for the dresses favorite line of
poetry it's false alarm quote my my love
for you is such that it would have
thrown the lid off of my coffin were it
not for the weight of the rose that you
placed the heart walking around outside
the body the weight of the rose so
there's this liminal in between
pressurization like the weaker the rosed
pushing the condition of the sort of
emotive deaths still life in life deeply
human question of artifice rising it's
rising song of the Sun and that bitterly
difference between because says my love
for you is such it's not what my lovely
is such that it would have felt nor doth
my father were nothing for us that bear
difference of the weight both substance
one of the other thing is that John
would often look at her closely with
George Brock's Blackbird paintings
and this was one of this favorites and
he would often pass where's the bird is
the bird these are the bird that was
flying through the painting studio and
got caught got entangled in one of the
diesels these are the painting of a bird
resting on an easel as a paint in the
studio these are the bird caught in the
wallpaper in the back of the room where
is the painted bird flying through the
room that we're in what we're looking at
the painting it was of course all of
these at the same time the bird is
caught between all of these
entanglements and these questions were
truly crucial to jump he did a private
called the black bird chapel which had
to do with the bird being entangled
within a wall house now the black bird
chapel is on the cover of sanctuaries
the book of the sanctuary stones which I
think offers a hint of the kind of
structures and entanglements that John
was working on in the book ok so I want
to ask you to focal that in and as we
spend some time with the sanctuaries
drawings and listen to that
[Music]
[Music]
this is Christ chaplains from 1996 and
you can see that the question of the
vertical the horizontal and the diagonal
and it's in direct conversation between
the figure of Christ the Son and the
community the diagonal of the community
so it's building these linkages of
echoing with the solar system and our
living systems between the singular and
Manny between the first-person point of
view and the omniscient point of view
between the Sun and the Sun and the
witnesses
[Music]
[Music]
so
like the spaces of that so for contract
works the house the suicide has mother
suicide victims these sanctuaries are
speaking to us they're speaking to our
humanity silence
perhaps if space peace silent we to
containing assignments deep within us to
silence which is not the denial of
language where they speak good time but
the void which at once is please
forgiving and circumscribed and moving
through it could be that space contains
a silence that speaks to assignments
contained within us the silence of space
doesn't diminish the capacity of space
to be little bit moves in communicates
to our interior thought it informs an
internal literacy situating both are
individual imaginations and constructing
the spaces between us this is the key of
that social part the spaces between us
and our works between us and each other
between us and all time so it's not that
sanctuaries have been built there will
be building our office building like
omelette escape from the clothing
dinnertime that Shakespeare's
resurrection sanctuaries exist in a
continuous presence each of these spaces
is empathetically calling us close to
whisper
so not very long ago dr. Richard Selzer
great surgeon writer came to the
community spoke to the architecture
school in this room and he began his
talk by presenting to theatres one
carved in wood and one mean stuff he
went through them as a surgeon he talked
about the chisel as a scalpel and
prepared cutting the living substance of
the wood and the dead substance of the
song about the water held within the
fibers of Mary's wooden arms and the
veins held within Christ stone belly
then he put up a singular image
occlusive fiction carved in ivory I was
a powerful haunting crucifixion crisis
Peter cut into a single ivory tusk it
had no arms and was carved within the
curve of the toss and as the image
hovered on the screen find ourselves
organic described the scalpel plugging
into the ivory the careful attention to
the pressure of the hand the resistance
of the ivory he then began to excavate
as a surgeon the medical conditions
leading up to Christ's death the
dehydration of the preceding days the
loss of blood due to the functions and
lacerations I finally the collapse of
diaphragm and lungs from his bodily lead
I mean on the claws and then you know
rare a specific intelligence doctor
cells are turned his attention to the
hunted elephant and he went through the
medical conditions of the elephant's
death the punctures and blood loss
causing him to slow this weakened legs
finally giving way under is massive leap
the internal damage has rolled
horizontally the removal of Tasos and
the collapse of the lungs on the
elephant's own weight now looking up at
the image of the ivory
josephus I felt something deeply I saw
the elephant roaming through the lowland
Plains that the terror of a ruthless
slaughter tossing aside the life of the
elephants doing the only part of the
elephant's skeleton exposed during life
exposing with photo- precision the
internal structure of the elephant by
removing its only external teeth
I felt the distant figure of Christ all
of them in his language faith I'm
starting from Crete Oh
echoing through and collided into this
distant figure of the elephant this
powerful ivory a figure hovered between
these two accent figures whose
manifesting in our Cemetery their double
sacrifice dr. cells are ended the talk
without last theater and this one was
carved not in wood or stolen or ivory he
had discovered a Theatre in
Shakespeare's King Lear specifically Tim
we're holding Mary holding his dear dead
Cordelia I'm sorry to cheat the King
there as Mary holding his dear dead
Cordelia as Christ and imperfect
Shakespearean English dr. cells are
removed out into the audience
completing the lines of King Lear on one
knee his arms cradling the accent 14
when the lights came on he held the void
Christ between his arms and the image of
the ivory crucifix hovering over this
John turned to me and said oh the
sanctuaries
works of John Hannah are a continuous
shining moment within
and they speak to the English Matic fact
that life itself is a continuous
initiative exchange and these exchanges
do not only occur and struggle so the
consequence and there's a final word
that I want to share tonight which is
the chapel for the wedding of the moon
and the Sun and again like the other
ones I want to do that by you sharing a
few moments work stories to help us this
is a remarkable image captured by Jacob
Fortson he was a first year student here
who can artistically number usually you
can see the figure flying over the
horizon over the ocean for the Sun a
kind of Icarus spinning and it is there
and at the same time it's Jacob
painting is drawing on a wall in the
lobby the Sun over the horizon is a
light in the ceiling the specular
reflections of the Sun in the water are
speckles of paint reflecting the ceiling
light so it's part of this and then
we're in imagination of commingle in
these two horizons this is a project
that don't hang up did for Icarus
this is a project that's called the tomb
of the Sun moon and star when you think
about I want you to layer all the things
I'm putting the tool of the Sun Woman
stuff hey
so this is home Ashok ie one of my
dearest friends in the world and that's
me as you can see we were studio means
the ladies both cardigan
and homeless pieces really dealt with
empathy and light and vision and she was
looking very intensely at this question
I mentioned the other day of two faces
looking at each other in silence the
levy NOS proposition that the highest
state of the human condition is found in
the space between two faces looking at
each other in silence
pre-language Prix epistemology the
spatial sensation of thanketh she was
looking at that very closely in terms of
like the pupils and what's happened I
think where is the light how is it that
I see what is there anything first
perspectives going on inside of that and
then she started to bring that to lungs
graph that voiced the heart and the
breath of autism and she then arrived at
something rather remarkable which was
these pieces these are our cameras
heroes in a sentencer there's a there's
these spaces these little pinholes
the entire inside of that will become
was covered in negatives nice some photo
negatives of cameras here
it had eight holes alright so you see
the two eyes looking at each other but
what happens is when you pierce through
because there isn't internals in a photo
negative all around the inside so what
if the light to enter you have to fuse
the negative in all the holes and then
when you unfold all those negatives you
get these remarkable images so this is
all the pieces unfolded from them and
for her these were self portraits being
made by those pieces
each one of them is a self-portrait this
this now these were shot in the log
so you'll notice fragments of columns
that were being pulled in and the part
of it has to do with these sons these
stars that happen which are the piercing
let allowing an internal light between
the two pupils now home I presented her
architecture thesis here in the lobby
she constructed a remarkable wall and
this was like 10 by 30 feet of
astounding images you can imagine I only
showed you a few pieces the site that
Steven mentioned she filled that with
these and and these portraits were taken
in the lobby so they contained the light
of the lobby and they commingled it with
the self-portrait structures and then
these images were kind of there which
means there was remarkable echoes
between the light in the room and the
light and the photos because it was the
same light textured when she finished
her presentation there was this kind of
perfect
silence pregnant silence 150 people sort
of holding their breath and it wasn't a
short one and then finally Jonathan
Haidt began to speak and he said quote
in the 60s I went down into one of those
dens over there in the East Village and
there was a gentleman a serious
intelligent remarkable gentle gentle and
he had with him
but it's hard and he was doing things
with this guitar other things are their
worldly things and I knew that what I
was here the sounds that were in that
room had never Biggs's these sounds had
never been sounded before I mean in the
universe those sounds had never occurred
before that moment in that room it was
an epiphany that sound could happen that
it never happened and that man's name
was mr. James Hendricks in what I'm
saying today here in this room today I
know that this alight home was like this
light that we are looking at that is
hitting our eyes here in this room has
never existed has never been seen before
anywhere in the universe the universe
has never universe this life before
obviously I was
moment will from Jimmy sound homeless
live to John's voice words all
commingling mixing together that for me
is the deepest social company the
ineffable beauty of that room these at
once everything and nothing is funny
parentheses so when my son was Tom was
about three or four I showed him the
film with John telling their story that
I showed in the last talk and I asked if
he knew who that was
and he said yes that's John Hendricks
knew he was close
so the chapel the wedding of the moment
of the song emerging out of the
sanctuary stones
in this work jon heder was directly
engaged in a communicative exchange with
the sublimity of Sunland transferences
in the Miss chapel we witness the
compression of a lifetime of Jinan he
takes questions and it works into a work
that we started Mary the spiritual depth
all the way back to seeing through the
wall from the Texas houses through the
diamond house with its compressed spaces
through the walk of the wall houses and
to the social contract words victims
accentuate the body the body of Christ
is suspended within hollering hollering
within the light of the moon and the Sun
held up by their way by the still style
of their Eclipse an eclipse by
definition and habits to want the
presence of one sphere takes the form of
a shadow within another it goes and once
remaining from the beyond while becoming
a definitely present within the sphere
of life so making the decision to have a
child is momentous is to decide forever
to have your heart go walking outside of
your five in this Chapel the wedding of
the Moon and Sun creates a sustaining
light its suspended a continuous
ethylene Eclipse within which placed his
homeland commingling the worlds beyond
the Sun echoing through the wall through
the Sun levitating apart outside of time
held up rising the Moon and Sun
literally seen laterally through the
wall to luminous spheres eyes looking
inward inverting the focal points seeing
the Sun from a distance and this
zoetropic dance of moon and sun that
earth is turning and telling and
mirroring the animates the sun levitates
the heart outside the body is an
inverted on the animation all is still
within the chapel and the cosmos turns
turning the light of the solar system
through the wall animating a still life
a timeless anima animation a zoetrope
some miscellaneous life from its turning
life turning sunny a suspended time we
see this suspended moment in the early
questions of John Hale as the square of
the Texas houses becomes the diamond
house as the compression of the station
points of focal points creating the line
of the wall house this Chapel still
stops the time at the instant just
before collapsed just before the diamond
Husker comes the wall in in Matt Gant of
stillness the graph of Bacchus is called
stopped the long heated out of the time
through this continuous it clicks in
light of the Lord of the Sun
so how do we enter such a space for such
a time I'm gonna repeat the quote from
John beta on the Wallace this house had
to do with the idea of the present the
celebration of the two dimension it was
leading and condensing to a point it had
to do with the time we see the
three-dimensional izing of a
two-dimensional condition in an
habitation of the hypotenuse in the
solid space of that wall of that present
tense isn't a metaphor the wall
households open this space in the
hypotenuse preventing the collapse
ultimately within this Chapel of the
wedding of the moon and the Sun we are
transfixed by a continuous resurrection
the room drops off a limitation occurs
within the space and within our solace
in creating an architecture of such
great force of such intensity and
originality scope death I believe that
John here altered the discipline as
Shakespeare dismantled and we
constructed the structure of theatre
John made up transformed the very
structure of the discipline of
architecture I want to show the few less
I'm a product of 1908 2:38 that's my
time I can't help it I was born in 1929
and I don't go over into past 1938 no
generation from 38 to 68 or 68 to 98
there's two more generations after mine
that's the excitement each generation
has its structure and I gave you my
structure you want the other structures
yet they ask them what their structure
two more generations after me I mean
alive and kicking
that's the amount of movement that's the
amount of movement so this is of course
us my most crucially I would say you I
want to end with a few observations
about school the same as I admitted last
time I for one have been blessed with a
moment in education where I have had a
social contract and many of the people
sitting today in this audience have made
my life more understandable because of
their understanding of the social
contract
so this of course speaks to what the Jon
Heder was the most essential would be
Pacific contract the program that he
worked on and being his entire life the
program of school John here at least to
say I've been in school for 35 years he
lived a lifetime of creative exploration
probing and constant invention as I
mentioned every day these two talks
combined is maybe 15% of John's work
probably more like 10 I would have take
15 like this actually covered the
breakfast he never stopped and all of
this was within the sanctuaries of
school always working towards an
intimately knowing that education and
the discipline of architecture contains
something something deeply mysterious
and deeply human like we've heard in
their own proper beat and measure the
works and teachings of John Maeda offer
a deeply human Samet a soul sung as he
would say of space and structure of
ethics and poetics of breath and light
jaha gave us instruction and with it the
seeds of an eclipse with an instruction
of the discipline of architecture the
seeds of a new form of practice
and a new form of school quote to be
within the Cooper Union is to be for the
against no science and artist to be
within a spiritual place an authentic
place an institution that is loving held
in trust a place that believes one of
society's prime social responsibilities
these toys learning education
since it's a place that contributes to
spot-free thought thought that is
exploratory thought founded by Peter
Cooper a man with a vision that still
sustains and maintains the spirit of
place and cares for enlightenment I
don't think there are many things more
important than being a teacher and the
unit that to me is the deepest social
contract to understand the idea the
individual creativity within a willing
community is a profound social act the
privilege of being teachers and students
within this remarkable place to be
teachers in a place of spirit to be
teachers us and to be with spirit of
students all one can do is to celebrate
and discipline and quote so individual
creativity within a William community is
a profound social app education by
definition is a transformative pursuit
that's and in its most fundamental sense
school is not a means to a predetermined
end or an instrumental future school is
a community a place a place that
contributes to spot read for thought
that is exploratory fun a place for
tense though a place to create new ways
knowing pathways an understanding that
embody our best hopes and aspirations
school is a a sanctuary it's up for
searching into the foundations of our
disciplines into their structures for
excavating deep enough into our
questions and our structures that we
find the fragile fibers of the invisible
starters between us that make our lives
more understandable school is a place of
creative agency a place to create new
words works of empathy of ethics of
imagination works that include the
nuance of our personal imagination
within our shared stories and spaces
what's between us
school is a place to share thoughts
actions gestures that embody the widest
most nuanced spectrum of what it is to
be human into our reciprocal spaces and
there's one less story I don't want to
tell Steven touched on it Guinea and it
begins with this question which was
asked a question how spying thesis class
in 1990 the question was this table that
we built the thesis bison wouldn't steal
and it served as our site for the entire
thesis you and I said it went on to draw
right that site because if we do inhabit
it for almost 10 years I was working in
a few across the street in the big
structure from a writing that really is
was central to Gemini's conversations we
could do it I would visit these offices
and what he's in the form of 19 1990 so
10 years after we built that table and
was working on that's the John was
working on the sanctuary Jones I entered
the third floor allowed me to school and
to my complete surprise
I saw the table standing in the middle
of that space I mean literally almost 10
years after its construction
I had no notice that it was coming over
Europeans took my breath away
and John Hannah came into the lobby and
he said I I have to ask you I want to do
some
but I want to ask you first should I
tell you what I want to do I want to
paint the table black Oh everything
black after a brief pause I said okay
John smackwall blah now for the next few
weeks as the table stood in a lobby I
couldn't expect him to enter and see
what made it black it didn't happen
one of these days I entered John was
standing at the taking and when I had
Carlos do you looked up and he said
David I have a different idea it's not
ready to go into black yet what I really
want to do is paint it all white and
even wait for a time and then go to work
so like three weeks of white and then it
should go the very big good luck now
this began immediately within a day
thesis glass painting continued white
but clearly later I was teaching the
studio and John came in and asked if I
would join him in his office and I
didn't and he said he knew he had said
it was time to go to black it's at least
but he was wrong he now wanted to go
halfway and have and we should keep it
that way until he knew it was time to go
so the table was still painted half
white black and it stood like that in
the lobby for the entire semester and
the last week of school done thing to me
and with the most quiet and gentle voice
he said I just
can I ask you to do you will have to it
is for you to do and you will know when
you have to do it it must be done but
it's simply not for me to do so about
ten years after that I finally decided
to make the table plaque and a good
friend of mine Charles two-door he made
a suggestion that I do it as a
celebration so I did it with my with my
children it was kind of like a painting
fun we just have some running around
thank you party they're much older than
them
and then when I got back to New York
soon I realized one of those completely
spun explicable unexplainable amazing
things that without any conscious
knowledge intention no advance decision
didn't even know we painted the table on
July 19 2009 which was Johnny of
Stevie's birthday I had no idea I found
that out when I got back so I believe
that exploratory independent
uncontainable works will spark from the
pragmatics of the poetic imagination in
search of the ethical dimensions of the
human education must bear our globe as a
Hannity is must struggle to find a
largest being that transforms the crises
of understanding our world is becoming
perhaps the greatest source of this
largeness of the union is found in our
fragilities of media for impact of
embracing
these ethics finds its substance and its
space and if we listen closely you can
hear it's voice and I'm going to end
with John Hayden sports
I as a so-called administrator had a
number of objectives but one of the
objectives is to bring teachers let's
talk the teachers in to the a place this
place this place has a history at this
place
Peter Koopa there was a spirit Peter
Cooper spirit is still here so to bring
people into a place and leave them be so
the faculty buy over the years have you
ever looked at the list of faculty of
the last 30 years I mean it's a hundred
people or something like that by and
large they all were individual souls
independent Souls it doesn't make it
easy to be a so-called Dean's because of
their independence but I made it a
sacred vow that when somebody was here
that they released from committee work
and all this kind of nonsense so they
could come to do or they know how to do
I guess is the teacher how do you teach
architecture osmotically by osmosis I
never I never draw for the students you
know draw over with them and I never
tell them what to do I tried to fact
draw them out in other words draw what's
inside them out and just hit certain key
points and that they can then
you know develop their ideas I mean
that's what I'm I'm against that kind of
didactic teaching that you they told
exactly what to do all the time I mean
younger ones okay in the first year
perhaps but later on by you know by the
fit end of the fifth year these are
people in their mid-20s and I always say
you know what that the Darwin took the
the voyage the five-year voyage at the
age of twenty-two negai sea captain was
25 so we have to be cognizant that that
the time of life is more I think one of
the great creative periods maybe there's
a later on another great creative period
but that's one of them and that should
be gently really gently had gentleness
and I think the interesting part about
this place is that everybody comes down
thinking they're going to see what they
anticipate to see and they're shocked
because all of a sudden the student body
have moved into another realm of thought
and so that institution has a infected
in fact it affected not only
architectural schools but architectural
soft and ultimately architecture I enjoy
news because not that I'm like Dracula
you know that I can feed off their youth
but I do they feed off my age and I feed
off their youth it's a marvelous
relationship that goes on and but but on
the other hand they are the speculative
future I'm the speculative past but
they're the speculative future which is
fantastic I've been here thirty years
and if we graduate say twenty
students a year it would be 600 students
but it's not even that it might be a 400
students have graduated in the last 30
years and a great percentage of those
students are not only operable but
influential because I think that's the
point
the point is whatever they do they they
think and all consequently they're in
demand
it's a school
I like the idea I like being in school
because you take the real true nature of
a school it's it's a different it's a
the school thought thoughts that thought
thoughts and its objective is to study
Thanks
[Applause]
