first of all let me thank Cooper Union
and the Dare and Lorena for inviting us
and it's been incredible we just started
a couple into what four weeks ago we
have great group of students and it's
really fun so we're really appreciative
now I'm gonna read a little bit of this
introduction because I'm gonna try to
link together our our parallel cities
research with our practice and you would
think it was not congruent that they
don't really go together but we think
they do so I'll try to explain that our
PAC practice has largely followed two
paths research and design through a wide
range of architectural projects that
have led us to produce deliberately a
highly diverse portfolio of
architectural projects and we will be
showing them later in the lecture one of
the projects most important to the work
as a whole has been our 20 years of
research into the history and current
manifestations of multi-level urbanism
this project began in 1998 for the
Graham Foundation grant and ultimately
led as Lorena mentioned led to
publication of the book in 2016 it
transformed is they go back encourages
it transformed how we think about the
architects role in the process of urban
urbanization and the various forms of
agency that are available to us at
different levels of practice we also
learned that many of these questions are
essentially political and it is always
important to maintain a critical
relationship with the ideas
as they can change from utopian to
dystopian in a matter of years so when
we get into the multi-level urbanism
what we're saying be very critical
maintain both perspectives as you look
at the various ideas
okay although this may seem like an
unlikely pairing of topics we believe
that the issue is entailed in this
reciprocal contextualization are
indispensable to a more informed and
reflexive form of practice our research
project as well as our practice could be
described as something akin to ariadne's
thread which is a Greek myth if you know
a systematic survey of complex topics to
begin to identify the diversity of
issues contained within another way to
describe this project is as a as a
process of turning over stones to reveal
the extent of the terrain so we are not
asking that architects necessarily
remain obedient to any particular
context or condition that they encounter
on the contrary we are asking that the
full spectrum of contextual issues be
considered in the creative process this
is a view of contextualization that is
about broadening rather than narrowing
the scope of the architect
here we go
so this is the part I don't really need
to talk about this but I wanted to just
show this is the killer gallery of MIT
and Adair was kind enough to enable us
to mount an exhibition of the work when
it was really critical we were just
beginning to develop our ideas in our
research in this gallery exhibition
relief catalyzed our efforts now Jenny
will do the heavy lifting and so this is
an image of Constance its new Babylon
from the drawing Center exhibition 1999
I think we started our research in 97
but our Erin just began with our own
cities developed out of multi-level
concepts beginning in the late 50s and
culminating in the parallel Skyway
systems of Minneapolis and st. Paul one
public and one private but both
informally developed fascinated by the
system's of North American Asia how they
spread incrementally their ideological
origins and resemblances to the
seemingly disconnected work of Comstock
and team ten we began a process of
research into the origins of the systems
and working over 20 years concurrently
with our practice we attempted to trace
the trajectory of an idea at the multi
level city it has been endlessly
fascinating and completely baffling that
these continued to grow informally in
many cities but seemed invisible to
architects and Urbanists
aside from critics who focused on their
negative formations and simply suggested
that they be taken down in the 1980s and
90s the systems grew exponentially while
architects and Urbanists pretended they
weren't they're seen in the montage on
the Left Hunstanton neuen uses new
Babylon
and on the right the systems developed
in Minneapolis but also through North
America we were interested in why the
work of avant-garde artists and
architects from the 50s and 60s seemed
to contain an uncanny resemblance to the
ad-hoc and very banal systems we had
been studying so where did these ideas
come from in Minneapolis they came from
multiple charismatic figures Reyner
Banham at the Walker Art Center who also
published our parallel cities book
promoting concepts of the clip on the
plug-in and non-plan at a really
critical time Victor Bruins more
pragmatically driven ideas for fort
worth generated concurrently with his
work on the South Dale the first
enclosed shopping mall and planning for
downtown st. Paul which imported
European multi-level ideas ironically
these were initially idealistic and
supported by people like Jane Jane
Jacobs and lastly Buckminster Fuller
whose Minnesota experimental City
project provoked promoted a synthesized
make a structural version of the
multi-level city so in in that period of
time everybody became fascinated with
the multi-level city and it had all
these ways of propagating itself we were
particularly interested in
implementation how these mega structure
like systems began Minneapolis as's is
five miles eight miles and why and how
they grew the system really began with
ruins work on Southdale and then
migrated to Minneapolis ruin was
motivated by the idea that these
pedestrian systems and
shopping centers could become Civic
space an idea that was designed more
socially focused at first and then
became driven entirely by economic and
political interest and implemented
through bureaucratic processes what made
this system possible was that he
designed it as a kit of parts not as a
complete design plan but as a set of
elements to be used a la carte and over
time we observed in 2002 with the World
Trade Center competitions the
re-emergence of another kind of
multi-level urbanism this form with
interconnected rooftop enclaves is very
different than those open networks
following the date on parallel to the
street level we were also very
interested in the resemblance of these
projects to very particularly 20th
century avant-garde forms of urbanism
these are three Russian constructivist
projects by the Vesna brothers ABC
ciske at marks dam and melmac on our
understanding of this migration and
development of ideas began with the
interwar period of London while there is
much made about the importance of
modernism through the importation of
modernism through cm less is known about
the exportation of a distinctly British
set of ideas that develop prior to the
famous urban proposals of team ten and
Alison and Peter Smithson this is the
Mars groups plan to London ostensibly a
radical utopian set of ideas around the
multi-level city that was never
implemented but this project and its
authors were the origin of experiments
with multi-level circulation networks
that would influence the architectural
culture of London over the next thirty
years
directing the future forms of the
International multi-level city so our
research was kind of a lot in archives
and in obscure places trying to
understand the connections between
different figures and relationships so
following the work on the Mars plan and
the publication of Russian
constructivists multi-level projects in
architectural review and 37 which was
before modernism was even renewed
introduced to London there began a
period of rampant and experimentation
and inner London in a multi-level city
what was most interesting to us is that
it resulted in both speculative and
built ideas that grew out of an
international exchange of ideas this
very different version of the modern
multi-level city can be traced from its
origins in the reformist urban ideas of
social utopian thinkers around the
French Revolution Charles Boyer's
utopian fell and stair and the elevated
street gallery as a communal palace for
all are arguably the beginnings of the
ambition of the social project of the
city explored nearer than 20
three beginning its migration as a
social utopian prototype for future city
form which is very unlike its eventual
impact and form into the work of our
usuals borays aerodrome projects in
1850s visual Antoine Milan's utopian
city of the 1860s and Eugene and art
between 1889 T and 1910 Hilbert Schuyler
sectional proposal for an ideal city
where architecture and infrastructure
merged a city that eliminates
speculation and a half Hawk development
but maybe more important in the work
that was about rationalized in planning
the city was the fantastic work of the
constructivist reimagining the
multi-level city of Fourier this is a
concept of a floating city by Russian
constructivist laws are critical of 1925
elements of Soviet architecture began to
be excused tools of social changes or
social condensers and inevitably focused
on reimagining the social spatial
concepts proposed by the French social
utopians the government furthered this
experimented extremely large scale into
the social components that are promotion
through a series of international
competitions well much of this work was
never built it was integral to the
development of motion of new
architectural practices internationally
lecoeur bustiers time in Moscow and his
plan for Moscow began to in transform
his practice on the left his center of
Soyuz competition of 1928 and on the
right the plan for Rio de Janeiro in
1929 kind of the beginning of the
introduction of kind of a more lyrical
form of architecture shows some of this
more fantastic work that Malta
urban isms started to directly transform
his work this work is lyrical and
expressive but still a plan a closed
logic but prioritizes the pleasure and
experience of movement and social
interaction over it efficiency Berto
lavochkin a student at Baku Thomas and
former employee of both melnikov and
Luca Busia was very influential in
London in promoting the socially minded
lyricism of movement and the rights his
favorite penguin pool into London
architecture cultures the 30 mile plan
for London's pet way yes 30 miles of
elevated pedestrian systems was an
actual plan in the 1940s was the
earliest and most ambitious multi-level
Civic system and it was done secretly
but it was only built incremental II and
then they began taking it down and are
now speculating out a very different
form of it much like the World Trade
Center competitions at that time there
was a confluence of factors that made
the possibility of a radical new urban
form some tangible over time the closely
knit group of designers who created the
Mars group plan for London influenced
from within the London County Council
the ideas and implementation of numerous
urban projects including the South Bank
the Barbican premise town the idea of
social communication and expanding to
the scale of the city this led to the
subsequent appearance of spectacular and
experimental urban ideas in the 1950s
directly influencing the
subsequent widespread proliferation and
deployment of elevated pedestrian
systems of the 60s one of the key things
that was interesting is that after the
war there were jobs for architects so
they all worked for the government so
you had people like the Smithson's and
Cedric price in government ARCA Graham
Allison and Peter Smith Sims Wilton Lane
housing on the right in the pedway plan
which went they were part of working on
in the London County Council and their
idea of streets in the sky had it be
merged out of these ideas they're also
important overlaps between bureaucracies
in the avant-garde in addition this is
our programs work on the South Warren
chopped and as crumped and around here
and worked for the London County Council
for eight years working on very everyday
projects while Peter Cook worked for a
developer taylor-wood Ridge on shopping
malls on the right so a lot of the ideas
that they experimented with really came
out of this work and and went back and
forth between the speculative and the
everyday and London County Council
competitions promoted in love
multi-level forms and then implemented
this then this is Chamberlain Powell and
bomb the Barbican Centre in London
Cedric price who also worked with the
linen County Council and his non tech
plan concept which has been so
influential and his more temporal fund
palace
in post-war period thus Network extended
to Asia and through key figures like the
Smiths ins the most tab lists members of
the London County Council who also
worked in Hong Kong ARCA Graham and
Cedric price more prevalent ideas we
note today we're spread internationally
cities like Hong Kong have followed a
distinct trajectory since the 60s using
multi-level urban isms reactively to
accommodate increased density and reduce
congestion pollution and crime while
promoting economic development the same
planners for London advised on the
multi-level urbanism at the very
beginnings at Hong Kong despite the
differences in context and cultures the
framework and planning principles they
advocated were very similar due to the
government ownership of all lands and
Hong Kong's lack of a significant
historic conservation agenda the
implementation of the system would be
far more ambitious than it had been in
London
the other part of these systems is just
the diversity of technologies and all of
the different conditions that are
reacting to which is the central
escalator and the left one of the
bridges and connectors down on the right
in Hong Kong synthesizing the city what
is most interesting about the Asian
urban models is there diversity
adaptability and integration of larger
urban systems such as transportation as
architects we're also interested how
design experimentation has been
implemented into the city form in real
time one of the other trajectories that
we have been interested in is how ideas
are transferred from academic contexts
and academic research and
experimentation to the public and
private realm in Singapore ideas were
directly imported from the architectural
Association in Harvard through people
like William Lin and spur as well as the
metabolism King is an interesting
combination in China of plan and non
plan and a rapidly developing
synthesized city with very dramatic
forms of elevated systems that are both
transport and pedestrian other more
recent proposals like Steven halls link
hybrid explore the logic of the
buildings this prototype extended to the
City Hall and others use the term social
connectors or condensers as the
constructivists did to describe the link
bridges the success of Singapore's
competitions which promote multi-level
urbanism and begin to create templates
for future development also spurred this
kind of experimentation this is a
competition won by whoo-ha architects of
Singapore on the right on the left is
the the city's
template for elevated systems that then
generated the proposal from 2001 and
then this is their breathing cities
competition which is much later really
tired starting to speculate much as was
done in London on these kinds of systems
all Sheeran's
interlaced project which is a private
development picking up on the public
layering the initial attempt at planning
for the putative district and Gendron
other left and three different urban
typology zones the team ten influence
Skyway system in the south lucubra CA
influence podium level at the north and
the mid-level connector room rings the
extreme scale of podium conditions and
work are really interesting how they
tried to mediate between the two scales
om a won the competition for the
connector ring and this is the shinjin
creative centre of 2009 where this very
large kind of pedestrian infrastructure
'likes links started to mediate between
these two extreme scales another
competition at the south in the 1960s
shopping district the entry by envy rd
bees for 3d street idea and the idea was
to how do you get these systems to
touchdown again which is influenced a
lot of their works since on multi-level
urbanism were casey who won that
competition
with the local firm Zuko also
experimenting with ideas about
connecting up and down and inside and
outside and more complex circulation
paths and forms in chincin
there's the Hong Kong Shenzhen Biennale
where they exchange ideas and this kind
of speculation that's been ongoing
rocker Lang architects from the Biennale
in 2013-2014 on the right and a more
recent pavilion by herb anis a Chinese
firm on the Left based out of Shenzhen
so along with the global importation of
new forms there's ongoing
experimentation with the multi level
city so we developed a series of these
themes that have kind of come in and out
of our work because we've been doing
this for twenty years and it's been
compared to our practice and we were
kind of always talking about these
conditions so this is one of the more
important debates that da keep a the
urban isms is our paraphrasing of Luke
or bustiers critique of non planned
settlements or informally
grown city's traditional cities
so this is one of the more important
debates inherent in theories of practice
that attempt to bridge between the
scales of urban morphogenesis between
planning scales and architectural scales
you could even see a between fluid and
the granular and so we'll get into that
in a little bit of course donkey path
urbanism paraphrases liqueur pieces
critique of traditionally informed
traditional and informally developed
cities in favor of planning techniques
of the modern movement catherine
Ingram's critique of the Corbusier and
CM seems rational planning in
architecture and the burdens of linear
linearity revived this critique so
fast-forward to Patrick Schumacher's
paper on parametric urban isms and the
argument is ostensibly resolved through
the smooth effects of parametric design
so if you're familiar with this paper
this came out I think in 2009 or 10
where Patrick Schumacher is advocating
for the sort of the universal adoption
of parametric design including the
aesthetics of so like C ACM they had
their aesthetics the modernist movement
and Patrick is advocating parametric
urbanism and within the parametric tools
he believes that the the granular the
more fine scale characteristics of urban
development and design and development
can actually be integrated into these
kinds of smooth environments but the
question is if it's a smooth environment
if it's a kind of a plastic adaptation
of a particular style is that really an
open-ended urban process what happens in
five years can you change it there are a
whole lot of questions entailed in that
affect urbanization so we don't agree
with this and we believe that the
vitality of early environments depends
not solely on the smoothing of
differences through conformity but the
articulation of difference and coherence
through engagement through contextual
engagement at many scales we turn to
Frei Otto to find a conceptual frame to
address these questions that if you know
Frei Otto's studies of urban development
of traditional urban forms and they're
at their evolution through
time-dependent processes this is a way
of integrating both the large-scale
urban strategies and planning techniques
with granular more localized more active
socially active ways of building cities
so this last drawing this is basically a
little fragment from the video that
Jenny showed and this shows the
Minneapolis grid the rational planning
grid of the city block with the
superimposed with the Skyway system and
each of those little idiosyncratic knots
that you see in the plan is evidence of
this kind of local negotiation the the
building owners the developers the city
bureaucrats all working to resolve
certain things in very particular ways
so but we're not advocating this as
design but we're saying this is evidence
of that more granular scale interaction
that makes cities interesting as well as
the larger scale organizing principles
that that guide the larger program
so for the so the for the past 20 years
we have combined our designed research
teaching and practice following a set of
interests coming from coming out of
practice but informed by research our
teaching and creative research is an
important part of our work allowing us
to ask broader questions about practice
and to encourage more experimentation at
a range of scales and so I've already
talked about parametric urban isms and
I'd like to just start to talk about the
Walker Library in Minneapolis now this
is the this is a small project so you
say what does this have to do with
multi-level organisms well what it's got
to do with is an attitude about how you
interact with context this takes one
approach that we are are advocating so
the project is really about the street
creating civic space along with a series
of layers and through a series of
inflections our intent is to do
buildings that are innovative individual
but completely tied into their context
so that you take them out they don't
make sense
so it's both a way of advocating for
invention but also a contextualization
that makes them part of a larger field
and this is an example of that so you
see we've basically manipulated the
building form to respond to the general
street patterns and major monuments like
the Uptown Theater which is the most
prominent building in the area one of
the things it does is on the street in
Flex in order to make space for people
where it's needed
the upper portion that reacts to traffic
and movement on the street
right so here you see the scale of the
building conforms to the hennepin this
is Hannah Pan Avenue in Minneapolis I
didn't say that but it's important but
so this conforms to the general scale
but it's a building that is completely
different in character within that scale
one thing I should we should also
mention is that these are all public
projects that usually end up being very
banal because they're very low budget
and so these are projects that are not
they're not looking for design
architects so there's also a lot of
negotiation with that process and so
then just a series of sort of creating
the the living room for the community
space where people can see into the
building go into the building and look
back into the sin and relate to the city
street and these are the some of the
major spaces it's basically a big box
typology so if you think of the big box
suburban development this is a really
simple building with a large room and
support spaces attached to it
the clerestory elements basically orient
to different in different directions so
that they are lit up by the Sun at
different times of the day
changing the ambiance of the interior
so one of the things that's most this
has been embraced by the neighbourhood
then they have a large annual art
festival that takes place right on the
street in front of the building which is
exciting and it's been adopted and
people really really value its presence
in their community
so now this is st. John it's a B so this
this is basically a set of projects that
we did on a campus in central Minnesota
that was largely designed by Marcel
Breuer and we were asked to do three
different projects and each one of them
deals with circulation in its scale of a
building but there are three dimensional
conditions and a highly contextual and
nature so that's the main building on
the campus this was built in the 50s and
60s as part of the Vatican two very
beautiful church over a series of st.
John's of 10 projects that Porter did in
addition to the master planning and they
were all experimentations with
cast-in-place concrete but also very low
cost and so this that diagram shows the
three projects we worked on the larger
l-shaped building is the chapter house I
think excuse me the guest house in the
middle one is the chapter house and then
the chapel inside the church and this is
part of the chapter house the chapter
house is an original element in the
building complex where the monks this is
a Catholic
community where the monks would use the
chapter house as a gathering place and
exclude basically exclude the public
general public
but they wanted to change that so they
asked us to look at how could they
recharge this space and one of the
things we discovered was that we could
integrate a whole set of practical
circulation connections that needed to
be made with the church through a kind
of surgical intervention that extended
the form of the chapter house and made
it seamlessly part of the original
composition in fact the friar had
already planned an elongated building in
that shape so we were able to work
within that logic and then this shows
the three-dimensional connections that
were devised to basically bring
handicapped and elderly people into the
church into the lower level etc etc so
it's a kind of intricate circulation
problem
so these are just some of the
connections between upper and
and lower-level
this is a very small project now within
the church itself we modified a an
office basically on the side of the nave
of the church and and provided the
chapel we looked at this is an example
of some of the beautiful detailing in
the church itself that we were inspired
by but reluctant to just copy so we one
of the more interesting parts is the
concrete the formwork and the texture of
the concrete was made out of a very fine
slat at wood so you have this very fine
wood texture and lines fine lines all
over everything right so this is
basically cutting a new door into the
wall and then installing a wood lined
interior finish to the room that
provided a rare ghost wall so they could
put the Blessed Sacrament in the space
and have small services in the room so
this is basically an element that's lit
from behind so this one in this project
is really just about contextual response
on a very fine scale and then the the
guest house is a place where the laity
can go and have an experience somewhat
similar to what the monks do where they
can mix and congregate and gather
together and it's designed around the
idea that we would take closer and cut
it in half and then divide it into them
pull it apart so we would have three
levels so this splits what is typically
a enclosed space elsewhere in the
complex and makes it connect outward to
the landscape there's circulation very
simple concrete structural system but
it's similar in the Walker library and
that it it takes these patterns of
movement and treats them as figures to
kind of organize the building right so
here you see the upper residential
apartments or resident the rooms and
then the courtyard that's formed on the
edge of a lake with a forest some of the
common spaces again these are sandwiched
in between rooms on the upper level and
the lower level and then some decorative
screening these were a series of precast
blocks that are twisted to create the
complex patterning
so then another project that we thought
is interesting to talk about within this
context is the Minnesota Museum of
American Art and st. Paul we just
finished the first phase and the second
phase is starting construction right
about now what's interesting about this
is kind of where it came from so this is
these are images of the Palais Royale in
Paris arguably the beginnings of
multi-level urbanism which are actually
found at the site of museum and urban
space layered with theatricality complex
change between program and movement the
Palais Royale and the Paris arcades
Walter benjamine talked about the Palais
Royale is this kind of utopian idea that
it influenced the felons stare and the
arcades and these this kind of life of
the city and the layering and and all
the excitement the original building for
the Minnesota Museum of American Art is
an l-shaped commercial glass vaulted
arcade from the turn-of-the-century
importing the Paris arcades to downtown
st. Paul by Cass Gilbert
and it's wrapped around the city's first
tower with a 14-story glass atrium it's
been modified incrementally over time
and most significantly in the 1960s with
the introduction of the Skyway system in
downtown st. Paul the project is a new
Contemporary Art Museum in this historic
building complex and at the intersection
of the 66 system in the 1890s idealized
system on the lower level the project
became the idea of the art block
creating complex changing programming
knitted together through multi-level
circulation so a lot of these were about
kind of creating connectors the building
we really hadn't benefited over time the
entry to the Endicott was bricked off
and it had been modified so he opened up
this first level street so really
connecting inside the outside of the
street and bringing through what was
once a former bank space to the Skyway
level this is the new upper level entry
so there's significant entries on both
levels and this is the former bank space
and to the left to the right is the
street access to the left is the old
loading dock we we built custom
furniture and pieces to all of this this
is a brass kind of curved desk with flat
perforated black steel screen over it
and then this is the old alley which
originally served cold you know pulling
in cold loading to the whole complex but
then yeah it was in terrorized in the
1960s when the Skyway was inserted above
it so now this is interior space so we
restored it to go back to the old
alleyway and it connects to new art
galleries and the contemporary side but
we really like this idea of this ruin of
these layers of history that were
exposed yeah we should say that the
these Cass Gilbert
these are his earliest tall buildings
and they're really beautiful but they
over the years especially since the 50s
they've been just totally abused so
we're trying to find what's left in
these buildings that we can work with
and bring back to life so it's been a
kind of a remedial process trying to
resuscitate he's great this is the old
loading dock which had been layered with
a lot of layers of commercial space
totally closed off you couldn't see the
arches and so we're peeling off the
layers this is the bridge coming across
and a skylight that looks up onto this
kind of hidden facade of the building
the the spiderwebs that's Sheila Pepe's
work she's
ashle known artist based in New York
case in New York in she did this for the
opening so that's not part of the but
one of the qualities that this creates
are these kind of layered urban spaces
between the old and the new inside and
outside outside that's now been
interiorized that plays off of the
layering in the art and the curators use
those qualities so in these spaces I
mean what we found this you know the
when it's activated with with people
it's really a lot like what is described
in the Palais Royale by hue and later by
the favor so it's it's really kind of
exciting to see that kind of chemistry
happen in real life and this is the
commercial the glass vaulted arcade the
things that's career and I started
constructions tuned in to more galleries
what of this seems like an implausible
project for an architect to take on as a
rest stop but it's been one of our most
interesting in recent years and and it's
kind of how we played it out how it
connects back to our research is that
there was one of the early ideas that we
talked about that was very interesting
was what blocka bercier described as a
lyrical and tech for the city and its
circulation
after visiting Moscow in the 20s this is
kinetic constructive system by
moholy-nagy II - about the social and
aesthetic experience of movement in 1922
and 1923
lucubra see a central Surya's project in
Moscow and one of the many central
stairs on virtual Ovechkin's housing
complex it's less about efficiency and
more about social exchange and
experience and movement the existing
1971 this is what we saw when we went to
the first site visit in the upper right
corner the little witches hat and they
wanted to try to say that and we still
went after the project but it's an
awkward little round building with a
single entry no connection of site in a
series of matching picnic shelters it
also had an extremely low budget because
it's a Minnesota Department of
Transportation project but it's actually
one of the most public and heavily used
building topologies and this is the
gateway to one of the most beautiful
parts of Minnesota the the arrowhead
region the northern part of the state
the intersecting this is a site plan as
it develops the if you look at the
double yolk kind of structure one of
those the smaller smaller circle is the
original footprint of the original
structure so we used the intersection
elliptical circulation plan pass drawn
from the original rest stop to weave the
building into the site restored a lot of
those kind of circular structures we
liked the kind of organic 1960s and 70s
kind of master planning and and this is
the structure as it developed its
concrete British block wood clad and it
serves you know automobile and truck
travel promotes tourism and vehicular
safety which is where we really kind of
pulled out the agenda for movement so
one of the ideas is that they want
people to stop and slow down so instead
of the the direct path of the original
it was more like how can you elongate
and exaggerate and that became the
agenda for movement structural columns
defined seating areas and guys movement
from inside to out this is at night
which it's open 24 hours 365 days a year
the bathrooms MnDOT didn't want to deal
with artists so they let us do the art
which was great and they let us design
the play structures and so it's a really
fun kind of all integrated project so
the the metal the aluminum piece have
evolved by us
a bridge overlooking the creek which
hadn't been seen before it was kind of
the important part of the project that
we developed so the we really see this
as well it provides basic amenities
safety it's really an apparatus for
slowing people down so it instead of
directly going in and now it's as before
you create this loop that connects the
two entries and the bridge basically
overlooks the creek and encourages
people to stop and wonder the site
Corten steel railings for the retaining
wall then turn into the railings for the
ramp or the bridge as you move around
the play structures shading areas
so we have two more projects to show and
then we'll be done this is something you
may be familiar with the Charles Foster
Center but we wanted to show it because
it's essentially a building design it
comes out of the math building typology
if you think of projects like the Berlin
Free University by Ken deliciosa cat
woods you're familiar with these build
this building type that was developed in
the 50s and 60s and so we were we were
there was a lot of interest in these
kinds of forms a renewed interest when
we began the competition but we wanted
to look at developing and design for the
hostler Center the competition that was
much more environmentally responsive so
we're currently working on another
competition right now on the campus
against Oh a man yeah it's but it's fun
so this is a view from the corniche on
the Mediterranean it's very beautiful
sight and so what we did was we started
developing a kind of a strategy from the
original master planning block which is
basically a big massive massive building
we started to spread the program up
across the state site and then subtract
from that mass in order to create the
building complex one of the things that
also was part of this was the kind of
irregularities caused by context
insights the kind of hillside where
cooler air comes down in the morning sea
breezes coming across the rooftop at
night the idea that kind of shaped the
favorite streets of connecting that
those kind of air flows and cooling and
we were working with Matthias Schuler
Antron solar on this project which was a
wonderful collaboration learned a lot
from him so this is a model we did of
this kind of distributed program and
what we found was that in breaking the
building apart and basically reversing
the convention which is you know in the
books on Environmental Design like
designed with climate they'll tell you
in this latitude you orient the building
east and west as a elongated body
thinking solely of the building and if
it's just a building by itself yes that
makes sense but we found that if we
rotated that perpend to a big
perpendicular orientation we would
radically increase the shading of both
the courtyards and the buildings next to
our the other buildings so it turned out
to be a complete inversion of what
standard rule of thumb was so this shows
some of the thinking that we went
through to open the building up so it
wasn't just simply a response that was
based on like an arid climate but also
taking advantage of the Mediterranean
aspect of that region and then this is
the site plan of the project and then
here you see looking down on the
building complex a series of courtyards
the spaces that connect the various
parts of the program
the bridges connect to rooftop social
spaces and it's about this kind of
migration between day and night above
the below
and so our notion was that if we if we
actually create this this matte
condition we can actually improve
increase the usable space for the
building as a whole by activating the
full site you know and providing a wide
diversity of the environmental
conditions for people to occupy
and the buildings that I should mention
that the buildings are clad and stone
they're concrete structures clad in
stone with plaster on the interior is a
fairly inexpensive building system we
but the first cavity wall yeah this is
one of the first major cavity wall
applications in Lebanon also see water
cooling pre cooling for the system which
serves now serves the lower campus was
part of what trans silver helped develop
and radiant cooling for the major spaces
like the gymnasium so the ceiling is
chilled just down to above the dew point
so it doesn't condense on the ceiling it
just maintains the right temperature to
keep the room cool it makes it much more
comfortable and it's a heavily insulated
building system there's a swimming pool
the synthesized city now is this you or
me one of the things that we were
interested is some of the early
ambitions for the city this is Harley
white Milan corbeil in New York who
worked with you was influenced by
Eugenia nard and this kind of rationale
but you know visionary urban forms of
the capitalist city in America
integrating all of these future forms of
transportation so one of the things that
we've been interested is this
integration of what we call the
synthesize city of large scale
infrastructure and multi-level urbanism
this was the 1960s the second regional
plan for New York which was also
influenced by people from the London
County Council and people in New York
would work there and we're working with
the regional plan that was called access
trees and creating these urban webs and
this is a project by Neville Mars
looking at reappropriation kind of
abandoned infrastructure major pipeline
in Mumbai into kind of urban public
space so our students have already seen
this but we and I don't know if anybody
everyone's familiar with this but we
always start with this image because
this is from the movie by Micheal
Winterbottom Jude the Obscure it's a
beautiful example of the kind of spatial
dynamic of living beings and so we are
try to train ourselves to be aware of
that form as a complement to the
architectural forms that we also love to
design this is a bridge connection a
competition that we won in Minneapolis
at the University of Minnesota
it connects two sides of the campus
across the Mississippi River it was held
by the Weisman Art Museum who had just
finished the reason Gary in addition to
Mary Jo so the Gehry is the left circle
on the upper ends the upper building so
this is a multi-level connector and so
what we wanted to do was to activate it
as social space and give the Weisman
which is basically kind of an island
surrounded by circulation by traffic a
better connection to pedestrian and
multimodal movement across the bridge so
we proposed a various instead of another
form we proposed proposed a very open
programmable space that would connect
the two the main pieces that you see
here are kind of pulling back the glass
bridge creating this extended shade
canopy and then connections down and so
as part of that again to sort of
continue to continuously remind
ourselves at the the form of human
occupation we did an animation
a lot of the pieces that we felt that we
had inserted or modified we're about
changing these flows of movement and
kind of reconfiguring redirecting
creating spaces for activities and
program and spun spontaneous events so
you see this basically shows various
programs being activated to show the
diversity excuse phul is the before
version that we did but where did you
see this kind of congestion not out of
people moving every which way and no
place to go so just advocating that kind
of sensibility to human occupation so
and then be some of the interior
pictures this is the major space created
at the core of that the entry to the
Wiesmann and then the bridge itself
could be activated as programmable
exhibition space and for a diversity of
different activities a suspended
structure that provided shading and
protection over the main space the
details and finally we're going to show
the falls which is another
infrastructure related project that
we're currently working on in
Minneapolis and have been for four years
it involves the redevelopment of the
center of Minneapolis waterfront area
there's a major Falls the largest falls
on the Mississippi at the north end of
the Mississippi is right in the middle
of Minneapolis and so that's the
location of this lock system that was
built in the 60s and so we are it has
been now shut down by the Army Corps of
Engineers so we're working on
revitalizing it through a transformation
into a public amenity
they're basically by shutting it down
they're preventing invasive species from
going north but they're still using it
to control flood levels so it has some
functioning so here you see the Falls
that's the the man-made Falls the
original Falls was changed with the lock
and you're looking down on it here now
this project is really complex because
all the government agencies from the
federal level down to the city are
interested and have a stake and the
public is very keenly aware of it and
constantly monitoring it so we have been
developing multiple designs I'll show
you one of the earlier ones but here
you're looking down on the existing site
this is the proposed design which is to
create a large public space at the
center of the lock and stone arch bridge
which is a nineteenth-century artifact
the curved piece a really beautiful
element in the city
here you see the lock itself which is
powerful and dramatic and and if you've
been through it and about you know just
the experience of you know the doors
closing the water dropping and you
slowly sink was also something that we
wanted to capture that kind of interior
space and so we proposed they wanted
parking so we proposed two levels of
parking 140 cars and then a large
exhibition space and other functional
spaces that were below the plaza and
then we devised ways of getting down
into those levels and connecting into
spaces in the lock itself here's an
aerial view looking down on it at night
and this is the plaza side the sloping
green surface in a entry area and then
that we call it the gantry that's a
structural element that allows us to cut
a hole down to the exhibition level then
the connection to the north where
there's going to be a wide range of
activities available to people to use
the water this is the gantry element on
the interior well you'd be up against
the huge concrete wall of the block and
then down below the exhibition area
which is really I got a spectacular view
of the stone arch bridge
then spaces that carve into the lock
itself and penetrate through to see the
falls and the third Avenue bridge in the
background and views down river
that's a trestle that was built into the
stone arch bridge in the 60s and then if
you down inside end of the block people
actually this is the part of the
Mississippi where it's still somewhat
clean and so people actually use the
river a lot so that's the last of the
images and what we're trying to do is to
show that and if your peers to see what
you think about it but you know our work
on urbanism is actually something that
now guides much of what we think about
even doing these little projects and we
think they're that relationship of
understanding the larger forces at play
and your position in it is critical if
you're going to work effectively in
small scale projects and
we also don't want to see cities that
are governed simply by the large huge
developments in the overarching
infrastructural logic
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
