right book jacket it's a nice small
intimate crowd with a bunch of friends
so it used to be a rock musician right
so like you know about like taking the
new album out on the road a little bit
and working out the kinks and this is a
kind of a newish talk so I'm still
trying to work at work it out a little
bit the title is a little bit of a
mouthful you know and most of what I'm
gonna try to do here tonight this try to
make this weird title makes sense okay
so like any kind of substrata is what
you don't see
and but the substrata is the stuff that
ultimately has this profound influence
on what you do end up seeing so like if
we're talking about the soil that's
that's underground that then you end up
seeing it's plants and so on but I think
then the fictional realities that we
live in and I think that's a much easier
case to make these days that we're
living among fictional really realities
than it used to be that is post Trump
you know I think it's much easier claim
to me
but maybe the novelty here is underneath
we say the disgusting phenomena we see
every day in the media is picking rude
and something underneath which is
technological so this talk is primarily
that so some of you know what I've been
up to
last 18 20 years some of you don't so
I'm gonna just quickly go through some
of the early stuff so you could just get
a feel for why I and the planet so I'd
like starting with this picture you know
because it is a picture it's it's
something that's really burned into
everybody's head when I say Earth
you see this okay now the thing to
observe very closely I think is you're
actually when I say earth you're not
seeing the earth you're seeing a famous
photograph that's been published
everywhere for the past 50 years okay
that's what's burned into a photo of a
very particularly so this was a very
interesting moment when the first
machine was sent beyond the surface of
the earth and that's what allowed us to
be able to take a picture of it you see
so imagine that I'm living on this
planet when we actually did not know
what it looked like as a fogger many
ecologists point to this as a seminal
moment this photograph from the Gemini
mission as being this kind of a salient
moment that just kind of organized
ecological okay now I followed that up
with this one
because of it of how it does not matter
a well unto that those first okay so it
turns out NASA has been collecting
footage video footage for years from
satellites and around five years ago
they published it all in one loop and it
doesn't look like what you think the
earth looks like it's an utterly
electrified planet it's not that perfect
blue marble that you might imagine so
this is more going back to earlier
thinking I was fascinated by machines
like this because they're quite
surprising you know in day to day life
it's hard to actually imagine how such
things could be real and I'm not
surprised that there are conspiracy
theories that we've never done things
like this but this is all a hoax like we
never want to mean it because relative
to the representations that surround us
it seems unlikely that we can do things
like this now what is this this is a
building that we launched into space
it's it's it's an architecture that we
put into orbit okay and and what allows
this to happen is technological
advancement new machines that allows us
to do things like this one of the
crucial inventions that led to Skylab
was the solar panel so how many of us
actually know how a solar panel works no
it's kind of an elegant invention right
and then we end up doing things like
this and then they kind of trickle down
to us and architecture on planet Earth
and then we end up with like this
and for me this is like a very telling
photograph which situates what exactly
mission the general kind of banal
mission of building design what we call
architecture is generally a delivery of
a set of representations that dislocates
history
so it's grafting type of representation
that belongs to some previous time and
then it kind of comes into collision
with the reality of certain technologies
so just think of like a weird colonial
house that looks like it was built in
the 19th century with a nest thermostat
or Wi-Fi in every room there's something
utterly bizarre about the mismatch of
technology with representation then you
know you might think ok well then maybe
British high tech gets it right like we
got to express that technology but that
becomes even more absurd because then it
becomes a doubly complex removal from
reality because now it's a kind of
picture of technology that's different
from the actual technology that's in it
the biggest problem with technology as
its evolving and I think it's really
coming to a head now is it's becoming
less and less optical it's become more
and more difficult to see it's becoming
more and more sublimated so at least
back then this is already like 15 years
ago it then led to a lot of a kind of
never-ending series of studies and
experiments into fabrication and
modeling and remember when we were
looking at the weather modeling you know
what we were just fascinated by just
what we could do with technology but
still these were all technologies that
were still somewhat optical in nature it
was not as removed from physical reality
as things are now yeah so I'm going very
fast because for me this is like looking
at baby pictures
yeah but I just want you to get
communicate the kind of feel for this
kind of history of looking at the
virtualization of for making and then
the production in the real like a
digital fabrication as it's still called
where it's like kind of trying to move
the virtualized models into some sort of
you know sleeping keep in touch on and
on it was endless and and it was fun
things started changing a little bit
around the time I started getting sick
and tired of working with things like 3d
printers and milling machines and that
stuff I saw it this article in The New
York Times about a group of biologists
in Brooklyn
they call themselves gen space and they
describe themselves as a community
biotech lab I thought that's really
weird you know and it was right down the
street from Pratt's so I immediately
went there and just introduced myself to
them and we got into some interesting
conversations and it led to this project
which was a machine for depositing
tissue culture live tissue culture
essentially a 3d printer for printing
flesh
it's a story Alto just as a kind of
anecdote to this around this time I was
very interested in Henrietta Lacks
Henrietta Lacks
died in 1951 she wanted a doctor one day
with a tumor in her uterus the doctor
took a biopsy Henrietta Lacks never
returned it turned out she had died and
didn't have money to retire in fact much
later after she was already dead for a
year
the doctor was clearing out all the
tissue samples in the lab and discovered
one petri dish that had something in it
that he had never seen before the tissue
culture was still growing it was still
multiplying this should not be happening
it's something that had never been seen
before he knew immediately the
significance of it it was immortalized
cell culture all cells all biological
cells have a kind of pre-programmed that
this one had a strange mutation where it
just kept multiplying endlessly as long
as it had food that fast forward to
about ten years ago there was finally
some reporting on this the HeLa tissue
cultures about the hele hele is kind of
like they ain't a half by eleven ream of
blank paper of biological laboratories
it's an every medical research lab on
the planet it's the most basic staple of
genetic viral vaccine experiments it
turns out every single one of these
tissue cultures the HeLa tissue cultures
are traceable back to this original
tumor that was extracted from Henrietta
Lacks body so on some sense whatever we
want to frame as her biological reality
if it exists on a planetary scale now
the story gets even stranger the
children asked very strange questions
like for example the daughter asked does
this mean my mom is still alive in
something the older son wanted to get
paid
and so I tell the story because uh these
are kind of surprising stories that we
live with these technological realities
yes so initially just kind of speculated
what do you do with a flesh printer you
know so this kind of being stuck in kind
of previous ways of thinking all right
let's make some weird thing with it then
but then the reality of the tissue
culture is much stranger and during this
project I came to question Aloha
just a very distinction between medium
and contact that I operate with that
probably all of us operate with yeah
this is a little clip of that times
article I saw this is Oliver met vidiq
used science director of Djenne space
he's still there you could go visit them
if you want yeah they joke that it's
like having a gym membership so you pay
a fee and you can do bio experiments
there and Oliver brought on to the team
nina pandan who had done a dissertation
on heart tissues incubating heart tissue
so you could actually look her up she
has a video on youtube from our
dissertation where there's like a little
postage stamp heart tissue that's wired
up that's beading she since this project
has gone on to do a medical startup
called epi bone one day if you need a
bone graft they won't have to subject
you to this horribly painful process of
harvesting bone tissue from your femur
they'll be able to essentially print it
for you but through this all like I
started thinking more about what
doesn't mean the print no what is that
but so mundane like we print everyday
but what the hell is I know it's almost
like we're broadcasting mental images
through a medium it's utterly measurable
yeah this was my buddy Richard who was
running a very interesting experiment at
Pratt where it's no big deal now but it
was a pretty big deal eight years ago a
lot of 3d printing patents had just
become justjust expired so it gave birth
to MakerBot's and all this open sourcing
of 3d printing but he was very early to
this and what he did was he started
modifying Arduino boards to make
printers I would then print more
printers like the printers would print
parts of printers and then you check out
a printer like a library book and take
it to your desk it was pretty cool so
that was our team and we ended up
building this strange machine I brought
in my students from Pratt's architecture
school and we taught them how to
incubate cells there we are
and you know it's interesting to me it
turns out we can do this that's kind of
discipline we have whatever it is it's
kind of peculiar form of attention we
have them it matter can go into a lot of
different forms of practice it turns out
there's Nina in the autoclave this is a
machine that's constantly blowing air
out so that fungal spores can't invade
the tissue samples right this is the
recipe that Nina wrote out for us and it
may sound it may if you could read any
of these words it sounds a little
scientific and scary but it's quite
comprehensive and she explained it to us
and not like not unlike baking a cake
you it's step by step it's a recipe
there's the first successful one we
and some of them died yeah this is one
that died from a fungal infection and
what we did finally was we we couldn't
figure out what to do with this so what
we ended up with was we would incubate a
medium which was this little postage
stamp of immortalized Mouse cartilage
the way its incubated is the sample that
you order straight out of medical
catalog it's totally no big deal and you
got to soak the expensive material which
is a collagen foam and then you have to
kind of like my students called a
babysitter's you know for a couple of
weeks and then it slowly transforms into
this cartilage flesh and then the
machine would be injecting GFP cells
into this medium okay Green
phosphorescent protein and so you put it
on the blacklight and it does indeed
glow in the dark
my students started with hilarious while
I was traveling around in year to
monogram
get make a monogram for me so they
printed a letter B for me
yeah anyway but I spent some time on
this because for me I mean I lied that
at the exhibition because there's no way
to really explain this either the
machinist is the art or the things you
print with the machine is the art but
what you just saw in that fast-forward
thing that that's the art putting
together this network of people and
machines and technologies and knowledge
and to in order to produce I don't know
for lack of a better word just this
event where we could think and develop a
new language and very much this was very
contrary to how I had been thinking so
for me I didn't quite know what to make
of the things that I learned from this
but I think what I did learn from this
project has been playing out since
another project during this time
simultaneous with this was a student of
mine at pad came to me when he was
graduating and said I can't talk to you
about something you know now that I'm
leaving and I thought all right it's
gonna be another one of these talks
about can I come intern for you whatever
again this one was different
so he came to me and said my dad has
this company and they have patents to
generate electricity from tides and I
think there might be some some help
we might need from you so sure that
sounds pretty interesting so when I met
with them and this is the company title
lectures they have a very elegant idea
which is to build artificial lagoons
and to put gates on the lagoons and just
by regulating the water level changes
that the kinetic energy of the title and
her changes could be captured with
turbines it's a nearly limitless source
of electricity a kind of total
no-brainer to build right like that I
mean we should have one everywhere we
could build it you see they came to me
and they explained yeah we were very
close to building the first one in Wales
but we had this big community meeting
and it was a disaster and it got killed
and so what happened you know like this
seems like such a beautiful way of doing
things said well they were really upset
that we were going to change the
landscape you know you looked out onto
the ocean and now there's this machine
out there essentially a circle an
artificial again so their question to us
was can you help us figure out how to
make this more culturally acceptable yes
we can
so it's kind of like this you basically
have to make an enclosure it could be
really any shape the one they proposed
was a circle because there's a direct
relationship between volume of water in
the lagoon
and the electrical throughput so what's
maximum volume the minimum circumference
circle so this total engineering
thinking and it kind of works this way
where by gating it they can control the
water levels so as the water levels are
trying to equalize and water rushing in
and out there's a turbine there at the
gates to capture it's a pretty
straightforward thing to build you
basically stack geotextile tubes and
pump concrete through it and then you
pile rocks on top that's it and we do
this all the time it's just an example
of something that's built for some other
purpose so what we thought we could do
and and this is where the kind of
thinking about the 3d printing is or
printing in general it's a more abstract
operation came in quite handy because
immediately it occurred to me that yeah
these ships the geotextile tubes are on
giant spools they're on the backs of
gps-guided ships not unlike a printhead
so in principle you can really make any
shape you want there's no problem of how
can we get it precise it's all done
through GPS so it's automated not unlike
a printing head so we gave them images
like this and this was then in this
period where Michael and I were talking
a lot about realism and para fiction so
we presented them with this image and we
asked them to take two ideas away one we
want to make a form that is difficult to
recognize as being either artificial or
natural that's something in-between two
we want to give you images that look our
renderings of what the project will look
like
after it's already built and you look at
it on Google Earth so just kind of
completely jump over this whole kind of
problem of disbelief it used to be said
if it was printed in the New York Times
it's got to be true
I think our version of it today is if
it's on Google Earth that's got to be
real so it's a kind of straightforward
operation to say all right what does the
project look like on Google Earth
because the biggest problem culturally
is people can't imagine how this new
technology could possibly be real yeah
and and there's a lot of other little
complexities to it that we were thinking
through but in essence we were
incorporating a lot of ideas that have
been floating around since the 90s about
redundancy and emergence but it ends up
becoming very practical on some level
where instead of having one giant Lagoon
the idea was to have one large Lagoon
with many small lagoons on the inside
and the engineers found that fascinating
because it then immediately occurred to
them by having an array of batteries
they could then regulate the electrical
throughput depending on peak and low
consumption but on some level this is
utterly bizarre because you're taking a
10 square kilometer chunk of the water
landscape and wiring it up light as
though it was a battery and there's
something about that that I was
absolutely fascinated by so this was a
hypothetical site up in Bristol Bay
Alaska that were originally studying
this also fell apart they they're now on
their sixth try and apparently closed
to doing one in Mexico but we started
out with just kind of a yeah kind of
existing in the new but we're very
interested in this idea that you could
only see that there's something wrong
with it when you see it at the largest
scale as you start zooming into it and
inhabited closer and closer to human
scale it becomes progressively more
invisible yeah and here are just some
other versions so the version they're
going for is very modest you know but I
think the way they're thinking has
definitely changed quite a bit so we'll
see where this goes yeah this has
already been I think six years of
conversations with this company you know
so it will be at least six four perhaps
more so anyway this is what leads me to
the kind of main topic here for today
which is a technological substrate of
our fictional realities so I'm going to
talk about this now as hilarious and as
awful as Donald Trump appearing on a
wrestling show is I think it's not many
of us actually pause to think about the
fact that this is on television on cable
television
and it's being broadcast the scale at
which is disseminating there is an
infrastructure to this so I saw this a
few days ago
apparently there's a propaganda Twitter
account in China that mimics Donald
Trump's tweets as a kind of a know
counter information campaign and when I
read both of them it's really hard to
tell which one is authentic you know
whatever that or whatever the hell that
means but the
and I'm most fascinated by when you go
to and you could do this right now on
your phones again like we're just so
distracted by the idiocy of the actual
language we're not paying attention to
what I think is the most important part
of this which are the numbers so fifty
eight point four million followers now
forget about the fact that that's a
large number the fact that it's such a
precise number because you can pull this
out and get an exact count that's new
okay think about Nielsen ratings I don't
know if many of us are old enough here
in this room know what Nielsen ratings
were but there's like polling in general
like how many people just saw this TV
show we don't really know so we have to
use a statistical method random sampling
you know those annoying calls you get
did you watch the debate last night or
whatever and then mathematically we can
make a kind of estimate of exactly how
many people saw it and there's some
politics to that a politics become
attached to these practices of
statistical estimation because I've told
that's a technology too now we have this
other technology where we get it exact
count an exact headcount
there is no estimation we know exactly
where those people are in fact we in
fact can map it against who they are
what they bought an Amazon what other
Twitter feeds are they reading how long
did they stay here how many twit tweets
that they look at it's exact what new
politics come out of this the only
reason this possibility even exists is
due to a 100 year long build-out of what
called the telematic infrastructure I'm
going to spend a little time talking
about that coming up but you've seen
things like this we're investigating
Russian hacking etc you also saw things
like this happening in Charlottesville
but did you know what made this event
possible was and was a telematic device
that allowed all these people to
organize themselves there's an amazing
report you could look this up a New York
Times reporter had embedded himself in
the lead-up to the organization of the
Charlottesville event they were
organizing themselves on discord there
any of you know what this cord is this
cord is a free chat service for mostly
teenagers and young adults that played
video games it's a video game chat
service and and the reporter released
the records of the conversations that
took place and then at the end of this I
mean it's it's just quite striking that
it would happen through that that they
would organize through that but he makes
this astonishing observation at the end
of it well if these kinds of free chat
services which are actually very
advanced technology was not available
most likely this would not have happened
because they wouldn't have been able to
organize so this is the technological
substrata I'm talking in relationship to
this after those two projects I showed
Michael and I we were at this conference
at Yale and
we wanted to investigate the
relationship between aesthetics and
possible political practices and for
that I started looking into subculture
so something I've always been kind of
fascinated by and I had a couple of
assistants at SIA researching this for
me and I basically instructed them just
going document as many different
subjects subcultures as you can find so
this is kind of a wonderful one
you know like guys it's a kind of mix of
goth and sportiness you know like it's
called health cough and and it's already
over here but that was kind of a thing
here in Brooklyn and Crown Heights like
five years ago and this is quite funny
you know like yeah I was reading up on
it and somebody was interviewing one of
the founders of the health goth movement
and and accused of that isn't that a
contradiction to be into death but also
working out like oh no there's no
contradiction at all you just work out
to the point of death but what started
interesting and interested me through
this was and I specifically asked for
please document the name then some of
their language their keywords their
equipment a representation of a person
that participates and how they occupy
certain see okay so those are the
different columns when you go through
this after awhile it's quite just
captivating and just absurd you know
utterly absurd and almost sublime
because of how endless it is there are
so many of these it's not like you
the counterculture hippies or the punks
and that's it yet the normal people in a
group of Punk's now it's like it's like
a constellation of subcultures to the
point where I started wondering to
myself what what's normal
what is the culture you know if there's
nothing but counterculture at some point
is countered to nothing so I started
thinking a better term for this instead
of subculture is small constituency and
the conclusion that I've been moving
more and more to is there used to be a
culture and then like a big model of the
culture what is it well go to the museum
model art go to Harvard you know and go
to Cooper Union
that's culture right and and whatever is
subculture is that's not that's counter
to that you know that's kind of
protesting it but what do we call those
counter cultures when that big
monolithic culture just collapses and
it's gone yeah which i think is largely
the world we're living today and I think
we need to consider the politics of it
but more importantly I think we need to
be conscious of the technological
substrata
of what led to this so this is where and
this is some new material for you I
discovered that this study as I'm kind
of finding my way through this labyrinth
a 1976 study commissioned by the French
government
the French president of that time Valery
Giscard d'Estaing commissioned
Simone Nora and
to study the political implications of
france's participation in the american
hegemony of communications
infrastructure so the Americans built
out the infrastructure by which we
communicate what does it mean that we're
basically playing on America's turf what
are the dangers what are the limitations
on our future on our French future so
I'm gonna read a little bit
this was the piece I wrote for
architects newspaper yeah thank you you
read that and and that it's been kind of
ballooning system so bear with me while
I read you a little bit of this in 1976
simone nora and alan mink were asked by
france's President to issue a report on
the dangers and possibilities of a
computerized society astonishingly given
what's happening in the world today they
predicted a coming society where anyone
with access to that telematic
infrastructure could manufacture and
disseminate information leading to a
loss of trust in the veracity of
information and to an erosion of the
cultural coherence in the society they
warned that such a society might be
uncover noble this was nearly two
decades before the first internet
browser became available so it's
prophetic it is sobering them to
consider their recommendation for
addressing this looming danger they
proposed a socialization of information
what this means today what this might
mean in the 21st century remains unclear
pause for a second this work telematics
that was a neologism coined within this
report Minkin or a trace that there were
two very important technological regimes
our converge one was communications
technologies and the other was
computation technologies computers and
the telephone
etc computers telephone TV was merged
into one thing and to give a name to
this merger of these two technologies
they proposed two words one thankfully
didn't hold they proposed that term they
called compute occations for a word
hilarious word the other was telematics
and I think that remains I think a
relevant word and the word I want to
keep using a lot of good architectural
criticism I must say is being written
today but it gets completely lost in the
sea of information that is available you
know you all know this I'm talking about
like Instagram the dialectic of fact
versus fiction has melted into a flat
ontology of mere data the cynic today
would ask in boredom does it even matter
that the news is fake but this is true
for all criticism today there are only
two options I see in the face of the
contemporary situation we would either
have to completely rebuild the authority
of old institutions which i think is
utterly impossible or we would have to
understand that communication and as
politics will have to be hypothesized in
a completely new way outside of the
framework of criticism because after all
how can you have criticism why
we have no authority yes and I gotta
admit I'm sad about this wistful and
melancholy about this I like it
criticism when anyone can disseminate
information when anyone can like or
troll an idea when anyone can invent
news when the theatre of criticism
appears more important than the
criticism itself I'm talking about like
Fox versus CNN what role can any critic
play outside of the limited audience the
very small constituencies that consumes
critique primarily for reinforcing
existing opinion and that's important
because traditionally we have criticism
to change minds that's not how criticism
used is used today we use criticism to
build up what we already believe it may
be tempting to conceptualize some plus
criticism society but as Nora and mink
warned such a society might be uncover
noble it's battletram people nonetheless
I continue to think about Nora minks
proposal of socializing information I
consider it to be an important but
enigmatic problem if miraculously
something can be figured out and
implemented one day I think criticism
would certainly have some newfound
Authority but it is premature to dream
about the possible positive effects of
such a rebirth and the roles the critic
or the architectural critic might play
until we just think a little bit about
how to construct such a thing today what
does it mean to socialize information
I have no idea strangely and I think
you'll all agree with me I think every
small constituency thinks their opinion
is not being properly represented today
everyone I have my own complaints but
I'm pretty sure everybody has McClay and
feels underrepresented this is true
despite the irony that no matter how
marginal or bizarre or preposterous any
opinion and orientation in society can
be searched for online and criticism can
be found to support it with that said
speaking for well I'm gonna skip this
last part I think you get my drift here
now I just wanted to show you something
that is quickly being forgotten two
years after this report was given to the
French president French Telecom
instituted in two years this thing
called them the mini tell this was the
internet before the Internet the way
they rolled it out and this is what a
socialist government can do they said
that because French Telecom was part of
the government this year you can either
have a telephone book or a computer term
and everybody said what computer term so
you could pay your utility bills check
the grades of the State University check
the news that was even talk about voting
on this which never happened and it was
pervasive and something that the French
were extremely proud of for period about
30 years they were the most
technological
Society in the world but and that
endured until 2012 that's when the last
mini town was unplugged and why did it
fail it just can compete with this other
thing called the Internet this crappy
computer terminal where all you could do
was access the government ministry it
was kind of like a ghettoize version of
America online even remember what that
is yeah but I guess they could never
anticipate in 1978 the problem of
globalization a global competition so
bizarre I think sobering things to
consider relative to technological
reality we live in today I tell my
students so we're doing in the middle of
a desperate and so maybe you should
think a little bit about the Farnsworth
House and of course you know what they
say right what's the Farnsworth House so
if that happened to me in 1994 my
professor would tell me all right go
into the dungeons of avery library and
you're gonna come back with some Xeroxes
of it and then you're gonna tape it down
to your drafting table and you're gonna
trace this and ink it and you're you're
gonna torture the out of you and
you're gonna know that got them building
yeah yeah so you know get change you
know I'm gonna find the book you know
like to change for ten bucks and Xerox
there are zero it's you know that etc
it's like a week-long thing you know
what we did not write google it right
then in there and you know what happens
when you google it you get millions of
pictures of Farnsworth houses and some
weird ones that are not the Farnsworth
awesome and and we just kind of swim in
this kind of milieu of this ocean of
technologized images and there's a
politics to this you see
and I think we need to trace this a
little bit see how this telematic
infrastructure was built out over 100
years and think a little bit about oh
now we see what this battle is with 5g
and highway is anybody from China here
okay you know what highway is you know
what 5g is and you may have heard I hope
the US government is playing hardball
with those countries that initially
accepted the offer of China to come out
and build this communications
infrastructure for free why it's because
of the exact same concern France had in
1976
wherever controls the communications
infrastructure essentially has a leg up
on power globally the British had the
oceans the United States had the
highways and then the Internet what's
the cut there's there are other battles
that are being waged related to all this
is the recent work we're doing which is
with artificial intelligence this is the
final bit I'll talk about tonight so the
red herring here the distraction was
this was a show about aerial photography
in neutrality this was an investigation
of technologized images of the world
Google Earth for instance and and how
progressively the photograph thing of
external reality is becoming automated
this isn't just robotic picture taking
machines but it's also in the
interpretations of the photographs that
are taken that is the use of what we
call artificial intelligence to identify
what's in the pictures
we know a little bit about GIS and
pictures like this but do you think
about pictures like this like from video
games it's actually the very same
technology just branded differently it's
a very old desire I love this picture
from the Alpine Museum in Switzerland
this obsession we have of miniaturizing
the world of modeling and the power we
get from that it's not unrelated to
scenes like this or scenes like this
yeah so what we ended up doing was we
wrote some scripts to scrape GIS
databases to get access to a very
high-resolution photographs of the
planet's surface and then we started
doing all cut everything we could think
of to manipulate it everything from just
simple photoshopping to matte painting
and eventually to using convolutional
neural networks so we made a series of
kind of like Alpine museum-like terrain
models here are some of them we
collaborated with our new friends at
solid terrain modeling that makes stuff
like this for like the Natural History
Museum's really gigantic relief models
they have a very clever little
contraption which is a 3d inkjet
printing yes so they actually
custom-built this head where the same
data for milling is then used for having
the four colors of the inkjet head
travel up and down and it's kind of a 3d
photographic printing
and when you see it in 3ds i always a
model no it's actually a photograph
manipulated in 3d we also want that and
made a bunch of images like okay you've
jumped into that model this is what you
see so there are a lot of kind of side
interests and para fictional photography
and like people like Gursky and demand
and those all kind of in the back of the
mind
yeah that was all fun but the really
interesting stuff that became the next
thing was artificial intelligence so
what you see here we use this script
called style transfer the styles of
transfer script some people here know no
this really I brought a picture of one
of your projects what you see here is a
result of what the script does it uses a
neural network to identify form in one
image and what they call style in a
second image and then it blends the two
so this is the result of one of them
what you're seeing is an aerial
photograph of downtown LA which was
inputted as the forum image with a
photograph of an aerial photograph of
the Himalayan mountains which was
inputted as the style image so this is a
blend of downtown LA with the Himalayas
so you
there's about your stadium on the right
you know the freeways it's uncanny the
seamlessness you know so the kind of
interest we had in this kind of funny
problem of the seamless collage and the
para fictional works we were interested
in for me this was like the apotheosis
of that conceptual problem pixel by
pixel it reassembles a photograph is
that really a collage I wonder let me
show you more of this
yeah these are all blends from high-res
aerial photographs from different ends
of the world
so the fictional realities that are
being produced with this AI tool was
really the the heart of the inquiry yeah
and this the image I gave you for the
lecture website this is a uptown
Manhattan there's Yankee Stadium now
with an aerial photograph from the
Savannah Africa
yeah and this was just some shots from
the gallery how we put it up
hey there's Jeff trying to explain to
them what I'm doing I had a spring cool
you've seen some stuff about AI haven't
you like Google deep dream aren't you
curious how the stuff works aren't you a
little curious about what this means for
how we work as designers in the future
what is what's what's happening here
what is this leading to I started
thinking about older problems of
influence so here we have the Pantheon
villa rotunda the Chiswick house and
Monticello you're not going to tell me
all four of these masterpieces are
absolutely original influences pervasive
into it just gets in our head we're
constantly working on stuff we've seen
and that's how bloom says where did
masterpieces come from from old
masterpieces it's from creative
misinterpretation of great work I really
agree with them you don't think it's
happening anywhere look at that yeah
but beneath it all beyond just a problem
of how to train good human designers I
think we also have this problem
underneath it in the strata and the
substrate so you've done you've done
stuff like this right so you type in
kuboos these five points right and
before the internet like a Masshole
professor will name the five points and
and but this is how we do this no and
you know what we get right we get this
mess this debris field
okay the most interesting thing about
this uh it's a is cropped ears they'll
always be this little statistical
tabulation at the top something like
twelve million results in 3.5 seconds at
the end of every Google search that's
what I'm asking you to pay attention to
thank you just consider what that means
why is it so precise what does that
precision tell us about the reality of
our technology today it's not a library
you may not have seen this this is the
most wonderful thing I've seen recently
so Amazon a I designed to create phone
cases terribly meant malfunctions okay
so it's not clear if this was an art
project or somebody was really trying to
make money what it took sudden research
to figure out what what actually
happened here okay but it resulted in
stuff like this on Amazon so somebody
got access to some public domain
database related to healthcare which had
kind of slanted on senior healthcare and
wrote the I guess a bot and a I've
script to mind that database and to pull
images and words to recombine them into
new things that would then be printed
onto the iPhone cases and this was all
automated and then sent to Amazon
indexed on Amazon and then as soon as
somebody buys it it would return and
then bounce to a factory in Shenzhen
that would then make it and mail it to
you but I guess I was a little bit
unanticipated was the absolutely absurd
bizarre results talk about miss Frisian
you know this isn't an art project this
was on Amazon it was discovered on
Amazon and there were 31 thousand of
these some funnier than yeah it's the
very same kind of tool that I've been
using in our office and our studios at
CIBC both me and my partner Carol and
last year when we're running it Dan
Horowitz right there with my system and
to his right sank Tyne Lintner was a
student there both teaching at Rp I know
they're out in the world sank tide did
this okay
sank I very smartly selected an
orthographic elephant or orthographic
ish elevation thought oh by the best
years of these kind of industrial scenes
that they were famous for taking and
then something very different below it
taking us the style image and then you
get that so think back on you know
Pantheon the month cello Amazon weird
Amazon cases you know this kind of
automation of signifiers I find very
interesting scary this is I think dark
stuff but I'm also convinced this is the
next territory that needs to be
theorized a little bit my students
currently and you might be curious to
see what they're up to this year this
was some kind of I think it was milk
Cathedral blended with angor wat I can't
remember what this one was we're trying
to focus on more on the orthographic
t-shirt because of what we learned last
year this one's pretty cool do you
reckon Danny of you recognized that the
forum image it's a close-up of Lloyd's
in London Matt against the style of
something else I forget what that was
but I'm astonished and fascinated by the
precision it's not some like a van Gogh
filter and Photoshop this is some other
 this is something I've never seen
before
this year we're also experimenting with
a different AI we're now playing with
Gans generative adversarial networks and
it's it's it does something else so
we'll start with a picture like this
which is a kind of untouched area of
Argentina and then we'll train the
student and training it with a set of
hundred images of plaintiff can
photographs from favelas and it produces
things like this I can't do it here but
the really shocking thing is zooming in
on this you see cars in the streets
there are people next to the cars
industries
this is a little bit more abject but
again I'm fascinated by the precision of
this I wouldn't really say this is even
architecture yet you know it's just
these are just pictures
there are almost nonsensical pictures
but it's interesting to consider isn't
it like how do we see things meaning in
relationship to form versus how does the
statistical automated mcmechen eyes miss
prisions produce unexpected dark
sometimes nonsensical regimes of
signifiers that we don't quite know how
to read I'm I'm pretty certain and this
is again a little bit dark but I think
this is going to be more how cultures
produced in the future as much as we're
we would like to deny it disturbed by it
it's already happening there's a I
didn't bring a clip of this but on
YouTube this is quite shocking my
daughter
like many eight-year-old girls are
obsessed with these unboxing videos you
get a present let's see what's in the
box and it's just a video of unboxing
for the present and that's kind of cute
enough but they're tens of thousands of
these videos with millions of views and
then I find find out a significant
number of them now are being generated
artificially that there is no person
it's a manipulation of previous videos
by Al and some of them make absolutely
no sense whatsoever you don't even know
what you're watching but there's my
daughter just fascinated by it
entertained delighted
my brother-in-law has a tech startup in
Los Angeles right now called rival
theory he has three clients right now
Ray Dalio who's one of the largest hedge
fund and investors who wants a kind of
AI trading tool Tony Robbins that kind
of self-help who turns out have made
massive amounts of money in this career
and it's one of the most important angel
investors in California amazing and he
wants a Tony Robbins that you could talk
to in everybody's phone and the third
client is the Emir of Abu Dhabi and all
of these three clients want to
completely virtualize their their
expertise I'm not going to talk about
this but yeah so this is where I'm gonna
end here with just I want to make five
observations from my initial kind of
study of AI and this related to this
substrata that I'm interested in talking
to you about so that dream of artificial
intelligence is quite old you can find
the 17th century little automaton
machine or something exactly
some recent approaches to the problem
are very novel and producing some very
surprising results it has inspired a
massive reallocation of research funding
you have no idea the movement of capital
into this right and corporate investment
it's something you all need to keep an
eye on recently my partner Carol Klein
and I decided to study AI in a little
more detail at our office and with our
students we have been experimenting with
style transfer algorithms based on
convolutional neural networks it's just
the first step but the results of
surprised us there's a lot on our mind
as we do these first experiments but
here's some initial observation just
fine a on number one AI repositions the
problem of form versus content the
dichotomy is already fully articulated
in ancient Greece as we all know to
millennia it is the conceptual substrate
of religions for example body versus
soul art histories shape versus meaning
natural histories extensive versus
intensive phenomena etc etc what this
long history has always had as a maybe a
lesser notice decisive component is the
interpretive function of the human
observer for whatever action or event
emerges out of this dichotomy AI models
transforms the problem a form versus
content into a problem of numerical
modeling this the enacting of events can
then be automated
skipping the middleman so to speak that
is you the human beholder AI removes
meaning and value from this very old
dichotomy and it's Latin so number two
it is nonetheless important to observe
that AI models are abstractions AI
models are not concrete they're not
protein based neurological apparatuses
found inside the bodies of biological
entities that is your brains they are
not events in the evolution of
biological history there are numerically
based conceptual apparatus that can be
freely deployed on any platform that can
store and compute signaling events they
are not brains
there are abstractions of brains humans
are producing these abstractions the
significance of this is an important
open question number three in in future
versions of software say like you know
like Ryan a I will introduce metaphors
of action that will become more
important than the concept of undo even
consider the strange genius of the undo
function as you do your work all of your
decisions are being recorded you can
then freely move back and forth within
this linear event history of your labor
primitive attempts to embed the
knowledge of the expert into software
has given us things like autocorrect
right now this thing's like auto cracked
are nothing more than annoying reminders
to fix typos and
questionable grammatical suggestions or
formatting like put a comma there might
we see new software metaphors such as
show me other options or make it better
or tell me what you think or simply do
it for me and you think I'm kidding you
should see how much money Autodesk is
investing into AI you think it's hard to
automate the picking from a Revit
component library that's an easy problem
number four by the way have you heard
did you hear about this the first AI
things selling at an auction at
Christie's for a lot of money raised a
lot of questions about intellectual
property who's the one that gets paid
okay number four AI also problematizes
that 300 year old concept of the author
as a society we don't know how to solve
this problem yet from a legalistic point
of view at a recent auction at
Christie's a portrait generated by AI
sold for four hundred and thirty two
thousand dollars and five hundred it
raised some very difficult questions
about who the author is the important
questions pertain to ownership and
copyright now not anything to do with
the natural rights of authorship
despite critiques of the concept of the
author and we know this in post
modernist discourse some of you have
read part death of the author etc the
author still exists and remains a
powerful social and economic convention
by cop by virtue of copyright
legislation legislation and rights
management we're going to see an
acceleration of this
of these machine authors in the in
coming years that will produce a surplus
of new words from previous words think
about that weird Amazon thing I showed
you what kind of intellectual property
is this and who profits who owns it and
this is my last point AI is not about
replacing human intelligence you know
it's a total misnomer has nothing to do
with that
it is about replacing human labor
earlier this year in a New York Times
opinion piece Thomas Edsel and all of
you should try to follow Thomas ed CIL's
articles it's the best thing in the New
York Times Etzel wrote a piece entitled
robots can't vote but they helped elect
Trump he cites as evidence
a study by MIT that mapped the density a
kind of a population map of where
automation machines are located in the
United States it in an uncanny way
correlates precisely to those states
that flip from blue to red in the last
election the explanation is quite simple
automation that's putting a hell of a
lot of people outward automation doesn't
take place adjacent to human labor it
replaces it this is the flip side of
technological progress though we
initially thought that AI might be an
interesting collaborator in our work it
is more likely the thing that will
replace many aspects of our labor AI is
not collaborative labor it is slave
labor dystopian science fiction movies
books may have gotten that part right
you know this kind of robot rebellion
but unlike science fiction the important
conversation the real one it's not
whether or not machines have rights
that's a total red herring but the right
conversation is how do we redistribute
the wealth that is accumulated through
this automation in this respect
discussions about the possibility which
seemed so distant right now about
Universal income for instance I think
it's the right discussion to have
whether or not we'll be properly
enlightened to navigate this as remains
to be seen
do we want to do any questions or should
we call it in the sweep better
actually thinking about these images and
when when you say when you stop when
it's perfect yeah meaning which one do I
pick to show you the one I liked yeah
yeah which is why I say it's slave labor
the slave doesn't get to decide I decide
so that the part is and maybe an analogy
is like many years ago I might have had
underpaid interns in my office and I
give them an absurd instruction like why
don't you take Foster's Lloyds building
and put some more action on it I'll come
back later and see if you've done
something like I come back and go no I
don't like it
keep do it again and then eventually oh
I like that one okay then
that's mine okay okay so I don't and
then it took me a while to admit this
you know because when I started doing
this I kind of went into it with a kind
of romantic idea of collaborating with
the Machine and yeah I'd be cool to
become a cyborg and then after a while I
had to admit now it's not like that
there there's a problem of work you know
labor who does it what's my relationship
to it who owns it who makes the decides
who chooses that I don't think is going
away my phone but you know I could come
right on and say it the architectural
profession is I know saturated with a
lot of dumb labor
and you do this certain forms of this
work that's the am i doing this is
horrible I hate my life you know that
kind of joke about picking bathroom
tiles right but now it's not that
anymore it's really picking from
component libraries in Revit that are
there because all the deaths cut a deal
with the manufacturers and that's now
rationalized with a regime of
construction managers and client
representatives that progressively
brings efficiency he cannot be
efficiency right now I see absolutely no
reason why that can't be automated by
artificial intelligence and from my
conversations with engineers at Autodesk
off the record they can already do this
the problem is they don't want to be
responsible yet they don't know how to
ensure this just yet risk if you're the
one picking and you're working at the
architect's office the insurance policy
that covers the architecture office will
take care of them but if it's the
software it's the software company that
needs to be assured right
this is the real battle beneath the
surface here while the rest of us kind
of haggle over is it it's not okay for
machines to be designing they're
not deciding anything they're just doing
the things that are that are in
principle already automated but the
association with persons persons that
have rights
the Hat is where the real trickiness is
right now have you heard of robot wo e
bop you can download it on your iPhone
Slater to me it's the first impressive
significant AI therapy thought that's
been developed there are a lot of issues
here there's a lot of disclaimers you
gotta check off you know that I'm not
really taking their advice this
therapist advice because the company
does they get sued in case somebody like
does therapy with this robot and then
ends up committing suicide right I mean
but I tried it out it's like it's pretty
it's pretty impressive I mean it's not
like Eliza from the 70s you know some
decision tree it's this weird it's quite
weird uncanny
you know so it demystifies it a little
bit if you just investigate a little bit
what is what is the stuff that we're
calling a I for the most part these are
statistical transformations based on
pincers really lots of data three
coordinate blocks of data on spatial
locations and progressive
transformations on it I mean it's not
that smart you know it's so but its
producing results because the scale at
which it's being manipulated the massive
amount of numbers that are
yeah yeah very much until we
reconceptualize the nature of Rights
right now it's by a political we have a
kind of one-to-one correspondence
between biological entities and rights
of the individual but to me that seems
like a very simple policy judge
adjustment and it's a kind of policy
modeling that doesn't even exist in
China by the way and engineers are
saying it it's the the battles who are
do China is going to win this
technological war why because in order
to advance AI models you need data you
need to record behavior and there is no
privacy rights in China this just come
massive accumulation of data in China
taking place right so a lot of Silicon
Valley engineers are moving to China
because that's where - actually it
really makes you wonder you know what
politics emerge out of this a lot of
things that we consider to be written in
stone unchanging in alienable rights you
know I mean just look at our language
constitution temporary I don't think
it's there's any reason for why it would
last them it depends you know it really
depends you know so I think we have a
tendency in the West to separate the
technical from the political and when
clearly they're bound up in each other
and if anything the political emerge of
side of the technological if you
actually look at the history you know so
I hope we can have some frank
conversations and debates about this in
this country
we may want to hang on to some of these
ideas I would like to also judgment you
know we're empowered in a way the
machines are which is related to your
point just the fact that I get to choose
which one I like there's no reason why
then that can't also be automated where
the choices are made that that can
happen too but for now like we're you
know we we have policies and economies
of by political entities that as humans
that have rights that are mapped onto it
human authors humans have the
intellectual property that's why it's
very disturbing to see that an AI model
now here's a weird little instant and
and I hope it's just the novelty you
know where a machine had a copyright
because that's what you're selling when
you sell that paintings so like we might
want to you know pump the brake a little
bit right now
[Applause]
I remember the like first time I saw the
pencil icon and software thought that
that's pretty weird because I need a
thing or two about computation so and
you know the thing or two about graphing
right graphing lines through functions
and that's the reality of that line but
then what the hell this is pencil icon
doing here it's not a pencil all right
but we're gonna have other versions of
this maybe there's like a person icon
like that there's an icon that
represents some assistant then I guess
we already have it what's like the paper
clip with the eyes and jeeves them it's
just that they don't work very well yet
but but that's what was so captivating
to me about these results with the new
technology it's it's pretty good you
know when we did a review we just had
our mid review and the student will have
worked really hard to manipulate this
and then the some pretty smart people
injury it's that you made it worse you
had that just why'd you do more work
just do that make it exactly like that
because what you did in your
interpretation of it it actually meant
worse and it was profoundly disturbing
to the student because but that would
mean I didn't work on it I mean that's
pretty I don't know
superstitious don't you think that the
thing that makes that drawing worse is
how hard you worked on it's kind of
absurd
so I have a thought selection question
and it goes it goes to the you said you
weren't sure they were Colossians the
convolutional neural network we enough
pixel by pixel data into new seamless
images because I think one of the things
it comes up and this is either it's
either an issue we're going to find a
new way to think through or it's an
issue that we need to jettison because
part of part of what the argument leads
our power as architects us as cultural
designers is within aesthetics that
that's that's we who are able to choose
this one not that one are able to
construct arguments about this one over
that one is because of an of an
aesthetic engagement with what is being
produced
whether it's our labor or not as is
almost an ethical argument and so
whenever we look back over the last
hundred fifty years to these moments
where where what Rossier would call the
redistribution of the sensible through
an aesthetic crack burn aesthetic
recombination or aesthetic break
Courbet bashing into a genre that it
doesn't belong content and painting
styles from from a lower lesser regarded
genre or collage and montage
20th century rupturing scenes within the
the burgeoning chemical reproductions of
lithographs and photography or pop art
and 1960s all of them at one level or
another engage collage they're not all
the same columns
they're different forms of to life but
they have in there sort of genetic
desire to crack a certain dominant
aesthetic code to produce another
possible aesthetic this sort of issue of
appropriating from this to another
context or combining in a way that it is
as a relationship we haven't seen before
and so if these if the convolutional
neural networks are not a kind of
collage and as they seem to me like they
could be argued to be so but if they're
not then what is shifting and linking if
if there's something now outside of that
you know what I'm asked oh yeah totally
I don't know I have a picture yeah this
one
you know you know this photograph by
Gursky I have been thinking it that's
where it started for me like you I was
asking myself is this a collage and if
you don't know this work and how it's
made
you wouldn't know why I'm even asking
the question right
this was actually three different
photographs that were essentially
photoshopped together it's a kind of
impossible elevation view because the
photoshopping then eliminated the Sun of
parallax and the distortion so so
there's something a little bit uncanny
about it like if you look at it long
enough you begin thriller there's
something not right about it and he
worked extremely hard to eliminate any
trace of manipulation so for me it
raises a question like if it's not I is
what makes something at clutched mode in
which it's being received and
interpreted in other words if you read
it as collage it's a collage if you
don't read it as a collage it's not it
doesn't matter how it's actually made
but whether or not it's sampled or
cropped and pasted or blended I like the
techniques of collage maybe our
unimportant relative to the mode of
reception the effect is I mean your
argument about what it does to habits of
scene that might be dominant at the time
that's maybe an interesting one where
maybe it would argue this as a collage
does it then the gates certain habits of
seeing a photograph only a collage to do
that
not to interrupt because I wanna I want
that I want to hear your thoughts on the
accomplishments but I'm now you notice I
use this house used to be to share quite
often to you and there they are we
received them as photographs and we
that's how we we engage them as images
because they remove the traces of the
seam and or material tectonic of
assembly that pay tribute to collage as
a kind of rupture suture fracture that
allows us to have immediate knowledge of
the just positions of things that don't
go together coming together to form but
I think what's going on with both jerski
and fatigue Sharon and other ones this
is also within within actually there all
of the whole Dusseldorf school from from
the backers is they're not they're not
showing the collage at the level of the
technique or the material or even
evidentiary process but we know
something's wrong
and that that distancing from how we
normally understand photographs to work
presents a problem in that doubt is
almost like a conceptual luxury that
goes on within
which is why I'm fascinated by them and
I don't know if Kailash is the right
word for them they are technically
digital collages
but we we don't see them as that but we
do not see them either as completely
natural right so this is the other thing
that the collage was attempting to
rupture was the naturalism of the ways
in which so it's like of this super
fascinating terrain double bleeding I
mean the earlier argument was around the
photograph being under sort of perceived
as natural phenomenological organism
actually you don't see that third
removed I think we had an even crazier
scenario now where we're beginning to
observe that our very imagination like
that phenomenological subject you know
is actually there's nothing natural left
there because we're so saturated by
pictures we've seen that it's actually
substituted our imagination so when we
s'en that's why I start with the earth
like I mean what's more natural than the
earth but then when you think of the
earth all you can think of as a
photograph of an earth you've seen you
know it's completely substituted
whatever natural way of seeing you might
have coming out an optical legacy which
may be going away
knowing coming into all this material
hmm and it has something to do with with
what you spoke about and in terms of the
Google image search that we not do every
day at our desk where I've talked to my
students and we do in our office were
doing the thing formerly known as
research and and we are inundated with
this but there's these moments that
happened like the the Google inner
search for Malevich is white on white
which gives you anything except actually
hilarious that we need to like it more
which is I know that's weird but I
actually like it more than it's every
pastel tone of pinks and blues and mobs
and Sana's and and I'm like wow this is
a great work of art being disappointed
by originals mmm finally see logic under
in the flesh and it's limited fills the
universe my version of that was going to
a football game for the first time yeah
after seeing it on TV for years this
sucks
it's boring I want to go home and watch
it on TV yeah in the 90s like I
remembered the struggle towards
photorealism remember when we were first
doing renderings office um looks like
 it looks like something down a
computer and you know after the novelty
of stuff done on the computer where
sauce like can we make it look good and
you know like a and the struggles to
find the right textures because used to
off-the-shelf metal roof texture and it
looks like crap then you got a like do
weird two photographs of
you know yeah and then all right now it
looks right if noise yeah and I remember
you telling me about when you're
actually doing that manually for the
house of the collages your famous
collages at the house like you would
scuff up the black-and-white photograph
you would scissor out from magazine and
then you'd be like scuffing it up and
full it looked right until it looks like
metal or something in you know and and
then like a now it's just so easy I mean
it's like automatically it looks good
and automatically looks real you know
the thing that's most stunning to me
these days is the Unreal game engine and
these real-time injuries rendering
software like because you just buy stuff
and drop it into the sea you know so
like student looks like dropping plants
that are moving flames and rocks and and
everything looks perfect I think that's
that's just crazy oh and then so you
want to do it in the opposite direction
abut to make it look less good or maybe
a little more uncanny and so it's you
know I I think I I just
operate out of some superstitious belief
that like the real special ingredient
here I could bring to the table this
criticality and but that's fading very
quickly you know what
for any questions today of course
now instead of kind of a recent
observation about some of these images
it seems like these CNN images of the
catapult fashion don't worry because
they have this kind of they seamlessness
almost like over the classical
architecture Noah this is his hierarchy
of parts the contents seen together in
the very old-fashioned way and I was
wondering what you thought about that
because somehow were drawn to those kind
of curated is together we kind of
actually are drawn to this normal to
fashionable terms of
complexity architecture there very
different than kind of the current
architecture today thank you can make a
lot of different stuff you know like I
tend to choose things like that because
that's what looks good to me
you know but it can produce a lot of
weird abject that looks horrible
too you know so I don't think there's
anything necessarily in the AI model
that promotes certain forms of
composition unless I'm privileged in it
but why wouldn't I
why would I pick one side look like
feeling yeah I mean you know every time
I work you know every time I think I got
it now and I know what's gonna happen
I'm surprised that's why I know it's a
little bit different from the more
linear image filters that you find them
like Photoshop you know after a while
you know exactly what you're gonna get
it's not true you know I have no idea
still like why it's reading certain
things and not others and and it takes a
hell of a lot of trial and error you
know to get good results and also the
models can be continually tinkered with
- I mean you remember last year it's
just got a try for every one that's
decent there's probably like 30 that was
- you know but it's all the same
you know relative to the model I mean
none of them are
errors you know it's just an expression
of the way it's been delineated as
software you know the differences the
ones that somehow jump out at us as
being more meaningful or potentially
meaningful
that's why then I think there is a kind
of apathy Nia at work you know it's like
we'll see the Virgin Mary in that potato
chip but not that potato children why
and it has everything to do with us and
our culture and our ways of seeing and
histories of seeing so it is mapping
against our own visual histories so
that's why you can it can't ever
substitute the judgment it can
substitute the labor but it can't just
substitute the judgment
yeah I mean that's why I jumped on I
knew about the research since like 2002
when it was really primitive and it
looked horrible
kind of like a computer-generated music
you know like a you could search for
this like computer-generated like Mozart
and like 20 years ago think hmm
you know that's computer-generated crap
and thank God like it's never gonna be
as good as a human now I challenge you
to tell the difference it's scary good
and if and that's being generated in a
completely different way yes so I think
it's just kind of an old myth that
there's some special thing about us that
can't ever be mechanized but I
I think when I admit that's just not
true that's superstition maybe you see
the specific software engagement you
guys are trying is it evolving in its
knowledge or there's no judgment
mechanism before it to push it further
or differently well you know at that
CyArk like I had my buddy
Casey ream who's way more hardcore about
this and and he sees me as a kind of
nostalgic person by saying like I'm the
one picks and he's us we don't need
somebody to pick you can develop a
machine for that to get rid of everybody
but that in like when I see like what
happens it's go yeah I think the judging
part is stole very sorry
they get all sorts of choices make
formulas you could say that artificial
intelligence is pudding or Reddington
doesn't think AI is being used very
differently by companies like Google and
Amazon something that's very similar to
that is I've read that amazon has kind
of spectacular lis advanced logistical
system where they can have products
already moving towards you before before
you buy it I mean based on the kind of
record and kind of prediction of what
kind of stuff the way I've heard
explained to me by engineers since I'm
when the application is very finite
where there's clear criteria of success
like this correct search results came
out or better than before or that person
did end up buying that thing that we
already started moving in their
direction right and you can confirm this
because there are records of all of it
for every transaction like those kind of
problems like coming are actually very
easy when it's an actual application
it's very easy but with something like
this where like the kind of weird thing
we might do on a jury yeah this is a
better one than this one
it's it's a little more complex
say that I you know I think I think the
problem is what were you doing
politically yeah our politics when we're
picking one like together as a group we
said this one not that one
I think at its basis is irrational you
know and it's it's it's seen us a
significantly more difficult problem
because it's irrational
not because it's smarter but because
it's the opposite you see there's some
something weird about our politics I
think that's difficult to comprehend in
rational yeah
it was a liver review and they said well
why don't you just end it there what you
have to be tampered with the door and
it's a time come cause back to the
question of authorship
the same way the sculptors are valued
that has tools does in this town flip
everything around the final creators
kind of become superfluous in this whole
situation so the president create the
tool is much more valuable and what they
created the same way their works what is
it Adobe or alder that's help the person
decoding it or working on that behind in
a way to do much more value the critter
comes out because I couldn't tell if
you're taking a position who's more
you know I I think it's really helpful
if you think through in a very like like
a unfiltered way I just imagine getting
ripped off okay let's say you work for
two weeks on one goddamn drawing and
then somebody comes along and one day
you come in and you see that drawing
maybe photograph and print it somehow
not actually hand done on a wall and
somebody else's presentation right and
let's make it even worse you got trashed
for that drawing now they're getting
praised right do you feel bad why do you
feel bad do you feel like something was
stolen from me why do you feel like I I
think it's extremely illuminating to
just think through this and try to think
about like why you think you're right
okay and if it goes way back I'll tell
you one one little thing and you can
research this a little bit when you have
time John Locke in 17th century wrote
this thing about is referred to as the
labor theory of value it's one of the
most bizarre one pages I've ever read he
writes in a state of nature of course
nobody owns anything right like it's
kind of like I owned that atmosphere I
own the Pacific Ocean you know whatever
I own that frog like I mean in a state
of nature there is no property some
level all private property is some kind
of weird invention or even the form of
theft perhaps right so in this state of
nature in the Commons how do we turn
things into property that's what he
wanted to figure out so he says well who
would argue with this that we have
rights to our own person to our bodies
right all right nobody owns nature I
suppose but we all own ourselves don't
we you know slavery is unnatural
so if I go out and chop down that tree
and plane it and build a chair I'm
infusing it with the labor of my person
with my body like my body is being
poured into this thing that no one knows
but it's because I own my own body my
own labor I extract that tree from a
state of nature and thereby turn it into
my property yeah you actually want
assistance and you know it's it's really
bizarre when you read it but it's a
pretty interesting argument and and
guess what in within 50 years in the
early 18th century Queen and in England
uses this argument as the basis for the
very first copyright legislation called
the statutes of and it's really
interesting because before then right
what's like a poem or Shakespearean
plays nobody owns you know it's all
incumbent state of nature open source
right right it's like no no no no like a
this person worked really hard on it
it's their property all right once you
say that you can say
okay you if this is yours you could sell
that property to this person in exchange
for money why do they do this because
the publishers of Shakespearean plays
the first folios wanted to be able to
have exclusive rights so they so the
other competing publishers were would
not be allowed to publish it so the ones
I were buddies with Queen Anne should
get the monopoly so this whole business
of intellectual property it was a method
however Foucault goes even further and
said no no no no it has nothing to do
with money
the only reason and he pulls up
historical evidence for this the only
reason Queen and went for this and
invented at that moment the concept of
the author insofar as the author is the
owner of the authored work right in
exactly the way you're talking about
okay that's my drawing I worked hard
that's mine right
the only reason Queen Anne did this was
so that she could have the ability to
censor certain forms of right if I don't
know and this is Foucault saying this is
a Nick and I he's right Foucault so as
much as I hate it and saying we in order
to censor we need to know who wrote it
we need the person attached to the work
that's the flip silence so Foucault ends
that famous short essay what what is an
author by saying the concept of author
ends up being the evidence of how
frightened Western societies are about
the uncontrolled multiplication of mean
yeah it's like wow so like this kind of
 I wonder sometimes maybe maybe not
such a bad
that's pretty amazing
sorry this poor guy that's been trying
to get a question in I don't mean it
metaphorically I mean it literally
absolutely literally I mean precisely
that these machines of automation have
absolutely no rights to the work that's
all in flow is I'm not even using
negative connotations of the word slave
on a metaphorical basis I mean it quite
literally like dictionary definition no
rights
yeah they will eventually but it's it's
gonna be a battle because they can't
mate late too much claim because then no
one will use it so it's always been a
funny trade-off for software writers
about how to allow it to be adopted
while also preserving the interest so
this is why also software is protected
by copyright and not patents they argue
that software is a form of writing
that's not an invention for our
contraption machine but it's a form of
writing and so they get much longer
protection but then it then results in
the scenario of when I use software I'm
basically borrowing rights to that
software you know peruse but the
what I make with it is then not only by
it so I like if I write a novel in
Microsoft Word Microsoft doesn't own
right now you see but but because I
wrote my novel and I have a copyright to
that novel it doesn't mean I own
Microsoft Word - this is gonna be a lot
of fun stuff to sort out in the
community
[Applause]
