[Applause]
thanks Michael for the introduction I
think the feeling is mutual in terms of
influence and appreciation and also the
things to their the architecture school
for the invitation
Michael was showing me around a little
bit earlier and I familiar with some of
the history of this school but maybe was
not so familiar with the history
embedded clearly in the walls of the
school that we were looking at so it's
really great to be here I'm a fan of the
school and so to be able to come and
talk really means a lot thank you for
giving up a few hours on Friday night
only like three or four to listen to me
talk so the the talk tonight is divided
into three main parts really the
concentration will be on the last of
this triptych but I'll begin by evening
the kind of Mideast to introduce a few
protagonists of mine that come from
history but not necessarily
architectural history followed by a kind
of a bit of a rumination on the namesake
of the talk about what I call darlings
and what that means for me and then a
series of nine projects
all been produced in the office over the
last three years a relatively recent
sample in the work by means of
introduction I'll start the three
protagonists the first being buster
Keaton's film one week or maybe more
specifically the house built in buster
Keaton's film one week which for me has
always been sort of emblematic of how I
prefer to think about architecture to
the extent that we recognize this as a
house it's legible as a house and yet we
also discern that its composition of
elements and parts is either done in an
unskilful unskillful or an unintentional
way and so for me this produces a
quality of almost familiarity in this
quality of almost familiarity
termi produces or elicits things like
curiosity delight confusion and so forth
about the social cultural political
architectural experience all
circumstances around whatever we're
looking at and for me that happens
through typological manipulations in
part Department portable relationships
the second protagonist for me would be
the sort of unnameable non-canonical
architecture found at the margins of the
discipline which tend to elicit what I
call disciplinary whimsy or something
where with knowledge of the discipline
you can apply or abstract or an extract
from it certain knowledge however it
also has a kind of whimsical effect in
that it produces plural readings it
doesn't have any fixed messages to it
but rather it conjures multiple
associations and the third protagonist
for the work that I'll show would be
Louis magnets drawings called some
penetrations of solids which correspond
nicely to my affinity for primitive
geometries what I like about monoliths
drawings as they introduce architectural
problems of projection and figuration
but more specifically we can look at
them and we can only name them in their
parts so if you look at figure 210 you
might say cylinders and one not so skew
and one comic but if we try to name the
whole we can't do it we can only say
that it has associations like it has
antennas or something like that so the
visual oscillation between parts and
wholes I would say is the third
protagonist earlier work of mine this is
the I'll show two slides that fall
outside of the 3-year window this is the
first which took those on in a sort of
literal way about application of
compound figures through the kind of
directory reading of Monda and then
thinking about what we're really sort of
service deformation techniques about the
threshold of legibility and producing
sort of NMR anamorphic qualities where
you read distended bellies and torquing
torsos and things like this to sort of
suss out at what point does sphere no
longer becomes sphere between spherical
and so forth so what that is a kind of
introduction or maybe the protagonist to
the work it really manifests for me in
two ways in the office and then very
directly in the courses that I teach as
well and with regard to the practice
manifest McCann ongoing research project
that looks at history and then of course
directly in
the design work at the office I'm going
to dwell for maybe 10 or 15 slides on
the namesake of the talk which is called
darlings which for me is used as a term
to encapsulate a fancier ization or a
read conceptualization of architectural
typology that prioritizes parts rather
than holes maybe I apologize for the
reading there's not a lot but for the
sake of brevity I would say that there
are certain architectural forms and
elements that are beloved by both
architects and my broader cultures alike
these are what I call darlings
they exhibit both disciplinary and extra
disciplinary endearment so I think that
they are ex participant Aryan dear by
their evidencing in things like planning
and reservation code and I think that
they are disciplinary endeared evidenced
by their continual revisitation and
re-imagination by by successive
generations of architects and that these
elucidate relationships between broader
culture and architectural expression but
also the production of architectural
knowledge so some of our darlings I
claim would be things like gable roofs
chimneys Khamenei's porches turrets
domes or small form pipes that are
always encountered as a part within a
whole maybe except for the domes
otherwise they're encountered as a part
within the whole that they really focus
normal spatial material and
character-defining expressions that is
in contradiction to how we typically
think of artificial typology which I
call the bruise not as a not as a form
of
but simply that they're just more sort
of massive in their obligations to
program and they're gonna type
legibility or type function legibility
so you look at a school and you
recognize it as a school and so forth I
would say that probably the distinctions
between these for me at their origins
lie in around the mid 1700s and the
early work of De Quincey Fromm and
Blondell about character and typology
it's a kind of dividing line here split
somewhere around around that time this
is a excerpt of an ongoing list this is
a small sample of that collection that
looks at these different small horn
types but part of the point being to
dispel the legacy of division in
architecture or maybe to suspend the
idea of genre speciation and also a
generational speciation and instead look
for alternative corollaries and
connections and affinities that are
across genre and there are across
generational so that we actually find
relationships between architects that
otherwise have very different ideologies
formal agenda as representational
affinities and so forth so for example
if we take something like the column
it's impossible in a lecture like this
right now to do the to try to unpack the
entire history of the column so this for
now will be sufficient to say that is
through successive generations of
Architects sculptors craftsmen
technological
and so forth that we find the column is
a site of continual reimagine ation
decipher continual architectural and
cultural expression but while we might
say that on one hand it's not quite so
simple to say that it sort of just only
a form of expression and necessarily but
actually that what to call them like all
of the darlings as my argument actually
have a dramatic impact on the
programmatic types that we typically
understand about typology so if you take
Forbes mace on Domino problematizing the
location of the corner of the column
produced 50 plus years of debate around
the corner while also liberating things
of the sod and plan and so that by
working on problematizing the part and a
whole it actually produces new
architectural knowledge but it's back
into you the kind of larger programmatic
obligations jumping jumping ahead of
time we find just a small sample of
exhibition projects that we realize
there's no real shortage of attention to
the column still whether it's the sort
of inversion of its chronicle diagram to
becoming a group form by Heather ABARES
they're explosive exhibition on point or
reimagine reimagine ations of the
Caryatid through post digital
materiality or concentrating on ideas
about fluting and what that might mean
with regard to either industrial
extrusion or manufacturing technologies
about shade and shadow
and so forth similarly we could say the
same for its in the gable roof which of
course putting these two column and
roofing in a pair here we would
eventually traces back to shenzhen like
to primitive hot for now I would say
that one of the aspects of the darlings
if you think about something like work
AC would be that on the one hand the
gable roof satisfies particular
regulatory conditions while at the same
time helps to reinforce those regulatory
conditions and so it's not that they're
just a kind of a form of expression that
they actually begin to engage with the
kind of politics or is the bureaucracy
of code and planning in other instances
we might track particular histories that
has very strong signification so
something like the chimney in a
signification of house and while also
constructing sort of material energy and
metric shifts that move in from up to
writing this image move from aggregated
cylinders on a clinic cubic plan with
the surface deformed to kneecaps to sort
of post monitor an exclusive like very
exuberant embellishments on the chimney
and then back to a kind of referential
chimney without ever forgiving its
legibility and the production of
mindedness one of the things about the
darlings as I sort of presented them as
if they're all principle types in fact
all of them have a sort of subtype to
them maybe most evident would be
something like the vault where it has
many subtypes and
like the barrel vault so something like
pawns can bow art museum produces or is
it be directly correspond to the kind of
linear tangential arrangement to program
where is something with even though wu
house uses barrel wall profiles in the
occasional cylinder and sort of collided
projections through one another to
manipulate both where though it's going
to redistribution of organization and
plan as well as the planet elevation and
then something like the vault house
where there's a very immediate direct
correspondence between the vault and the
volume so these become important for me
an arranged in a range of conversations
in that they sort of remix or reshuffle
some of what we understand to be deeply
rooted histories while resurrecting sort
of past speculation some of which are
canonical some of which are not but
maybe more than anything that they're
because they become the character
defining features they also have the
potential or the capacity to shift the
art of political and social and cultural
as well as architectural attention and
so that for me is the kind of
relationship between the elucidation of
book knowledge and architecture and it's
sort of extra disciplinary or outside of
the discipline endearment as i walked as
i call it one of the things that's
important to me in these two that
Michael and I had a part of a
conversation last night that question
the idea of precedent in history I think
for me I'm deeply interested in the
received histories which may or may not
be about architecture that those receive
histories participate
in the sort of imagination of the
discipline I'm going to turn now to a
collection of nine projects this will be
the bulk of the talk if you're all
projects from the last three years the
the work of the office really divides
into these three categories
psychological legacy because in cultural
endearment and contextual industries not
all of the work in fact actually most of
the work on I'm showing this unbuilt
work some of it was initiated from
client projects some of it I'll conclude
with the constructed project but also
others of the marriages to sort of
ongoing maybe the self interest project
about architecture in the first category
of typological legacy I'm mostly
interested again in those received
histories and the sort of
reconsiderations of those histories and
the traditions and maybe possible
imaginations that use metal pipes and
their formulas racial identities to sort
of recast those with again a particular
emphasis on the darlings and our
protagonists from the beginning so this
is a this is the project the oldest
project in the in the top that was
completed for the architectural leak
prize in 2015 and those Ruiz was really
concentrating a lot on Monde it was one
is drawing some penetrations of solids
and I was interested in their
relationship to read ascribing things we
know from the canon of history in
particular with a concentration on domes
so something like san carlo where if we
look at the plan on the left we read
segmentations and Nisha
differentiations of parts and when we
look at the image on the right beautiful
as it is and there's a there's a whole
other conversation we can have about
this project of course for now I'll
simply use call attention to the kind of
fidelity between their drawing and the
built image or the constructed volume
and that there's not a lot of contrast
between the two especially now knowing
what we know of projection and so forth
we we can imagine the construct out of
the plan so I was interested in sort of
reimagining the economical domes so you
can see that in this drawing that san
carlo is redrawn in red now it's not an
exact redrawing two diagrammatic
redrawing but it's one that retains
enough fidelity to the original to be
recognized as such and then the kind of
resultant plan of dome that I proposed
drawn in black we're using only severus
cones and cylinders overlaid on San
Carlos dome with some manipulations in
the Z dimension you Iran I got a kind of
figure where you have no sort of direct
correspondence between plan and figure
and where things like initiated issues
and differentiation of parts and so
forth are absorbing to a form where you
might look at it and say I see a cone
but you can't actually ever distinguish
a part from the hole you can only draw
associations most often and then a
little chicken leg
which is a somewhat glowingly actually
the the second of the four I'm not going
to show all forums and they give two is
a sort of evidence of the other two is
Philip Johnson's roofless Church you can
see it's a centralized plan on the on
the left with seven circles six of which
arrayed around a center circle more
peculiar to me in this in this domes if
you look in the image on the right at
the middle of the dome you find a plinth
and a statue and that's a very strange
thing to do to me in a centralized plan
of dome in particular a dome that has an
oculus we're really you the whole point
is to occupy the center of the dome be
sort of directly below the eye so the
inclusion of that experience makes it a
kind of centrifugal plan that pushes
everything makes sense plans fuel that
pushes the experience of the exterior so
again the plan copy of Johnson's is
drawn at red my version is drawn in
black it doesn't look very extreme of
this compared to San Carlo we're really
only burying the diameter of the circles
and so in that variation and moves it
from a polar array to almost a biaxial
symmetry and when seeing frontally here
because they're not projecting the curve
through a hyperbolic the circle through
a hyperbolic curve becomes more taut and
you can also see the hill at the middle
all of the domes have hills which is a
response to Johnson's inclusion of this
of the two dimensional center the hill
would move would if built in real scale
would move one
about an hour typed your heading of the
centroid so kind of occupies a
three-dimensional center of the dome as
opposed to the kind of flatness of the
two-dimensional center and then the
effect of the variable sized circles is
registered most heavily in the shrimp or
C so the shingle coursing has to sort of
modulate and adjust to the different
diameters producing this kind of
wiggling or a sort of unstable effect of
the dome so you can see all for the
other two that I'm not showing the
patent unit and the striped one played
those same kind of plan games in the
reconstruction in Lewis Monda inspired
way I'm going to show four house
projects tonight five that are currently
designed in which will eventually become
a series of ten of the penthouses series
they don't go in sequential order I
start with number one and then I go to
four and then I think two and three the
person whose amount of cabin and I think
when you think of the mountain cabin
probably already conjures something in
your mind something of a timber frame
and deep eaves and the steep gable roof
and a porch and so forth this is sort of
just looking up on Google I'm just a
sort of verify that this seems to be a
kind of popular imagination but then
there is also a kind of mystique about
the American cabin this is an image from
a negative political campaign ad from
the 1800s that portrayed William Henry
Harrison as unworthy of presidential
to see because he lived in the cabin
it's a very soft sort of political
attack by today's standards but also
this is a bit linear in a way but the
the barrels of hard cider that occluded
the corner became a bit of a fascination
as well as the kind of received history
of the cabin the cabin changed because
of this ad this political ad actually
sparked the Harrison campaign used it as
a way to actually say that this is the
new American spirit it's about
independence it's about self sustenance
and so forth and he actually won the
presidency he then caught pneumonia and
died but before he finished the 30th
Davis his presidency but anyway so it
comes with this kind of mystique this is
mystique about living in the landscape
and so forth so we're trying to be some
of the darlings I was interested both in
the barrel and then the barrel ball that
they window in the scupper which is not
darling but it's functional purpose is
useful here and treating them almost in
a binary so the barrel vault in inverts
to become kind of negative form the bay
window inverse to exert anywhere
pressure and discovery elongates sort of
consuming the entirety of the roof so
here you see highlighted and copper will
be the inverted barrel vault and the
elongated scupper perhaps more important
in this project is the the series of
barrel vaults at the base of the cabin
that is they carve away this really
disrupt typical understanding of cabin
in the ground and it offered new spatial
informal possibilities namely which is
that is sort of under tux the porch so
moves that removes the obligation for a
front porch and almost in a kind of
Pilate in Villa or is kind of the
rotunda way no matter which way you
enter from you sort of arrive somehow
almost
Center though in this case your
underneath of the project
so while sort of fostering is more
continuous relationship with the
landscape and so here you see the comedy
operation of the front porch and the
removal of kind of explicit frontality
which will be a continued theme and
almost every project that I'll show as
is the the site of the front porches of
as a means for manipulation though each
of a saw has a kind of different
hierarchy to it in a different formal
composition it doesn't immediately
disclose and have idea about frontality
so this one this particular project in
terms of typological legacy is in
contrast i would say to the domes the
domes are much more about geometric
aggregation and primitive form
aggregation and compound figures this
has more of man Duras tendencies about
elongation and exaggeration and sort of
manipulation to known elements i'm going
to be less to do with aggregation those
two tendencies will reveal themselves
and all of the projects though I won't I
won't point them out explicitly figure
out the 2nd of the what is currently
five houses is the farmhouse farmhouses
our own farm house is a bit tricky as a
type I don't think I can't think of
another domestic type that's encountered
across such a wide range of
psychological and representational
trauma
is the farmhouse they often remind of
the the hardships and gore by real
living while simultaneously conjuring
ideas about it I'm a kind of simpler
time for a ton of time on mind
we see this in comparisons of a kind of
fictional family The Waltons of the 1970
of this sort of endearing time gone by
family juxtaposed by the utter
environmental and social decay of the
1930s Dust Bowl and of course both of
these are long past I don't know that
they are particularly material anymore
but they certainly seem to be sort of
habituated in the public imaginary of
the farmhouse maybe just add to this
becomes a bit more complicated because I
think that the farmhouse equally
represents the allure of the sublime and
the sort of anxiety of the horrific so
something like The Wizard of Oz where
Dorothy is dreamily upended by this act
of nature and it sort of disrupts or
undoes the tight net from the allele
structure of the farmhouse and only to
return her in this sort of enlightened
state I mean this sort of enchanted
voyage and so forth juxtaposed by
Hitchcock's repeated use of the
farmhouse in this case an Italian
farmhouse as a site of intrinsic fear
the site which sort of represents the
rupture and almost uncanny familial
space of horror and fright and anxiety
my suspicion or at least my claim that
this has something to do with noted was
known as perlu which is whose middle
english term used to describe land that
is partially cultivated but also
partially wild and it becomes this kind
of liminal space between a space of
comfort in a space of maybe discomfort
you see this in a lot of movies where
you know kids break at the threshold of
moving into the forest for example and
then you know when to come out of the
forest it appears safe again we find
that in a lot of literary and cinematic
enterprises I think with regarded the
farmhouse it it begins to I think
suggest an idea that for those
accustomed to its nearness it becomes a
space of enlightenment and enchantment
and so forth as Dorothy found but for
those out of remove it becomes a
scientist or an intrinsic fear more
space of too much mystery what Hitchcock
plays on I promise uh there's a project
in here in a minute but one more thing
about the farmhouse that I find really
odd or sort of difficult to work on is a
spacial spacial contextual contradiction
almost always a farmhouse will exhibit
frontality the root is a relationship of
its front porch and the visibility of
its door from either the access road or
the driveway I find this strange sort of
maybe born in a strange because it's a
it's a architectural type under no
pressure of address as no
public address it's a quick to central
object in the round and so I find that
it exhibits frontality odd begins even
more Hawkinson in traditional farmhouse
you enter the front door through the
porch which utilitarian space for
disrobing the do shooing after labor and
you've entered in the most formal space
of the hostages the part of the room
there's almost very rarely used only
used for weddings and funerals and so
forth so anyway these kind of
psychological and representational
dramas that characterize the farmhouse
and a spatial contextual contradiction
or of interest to me we're in penthouse
number four there is an attitude about
sort of recasting these dramas really by
unhinging the farmhouse from it's what I
call strange obligation to frontality
specifically through manipulations to
things like the porch and the facade on
its internal organization so it seemed
frontally sheared corners appear
chamfered corners maybe appear to
produce a kind of receiving flatness as
particular elements like windows remain
sort of oriented one way the chamfered
corners indicate an orientation towards
another the when we look at the facade
the driveway rather than stopping at the
porch continues through the house and
that little hole the left curtains
temporary temporarily occlude portions
of the front facade or the facade as a
sort of riff on or a reimagining of the
wraparound porch and then maybe most
specifically the elements the sort of
indication of a gambrel roof hybridize
with an exaggerated sort una form
intends to draw on a typological
influences notable in farm houses and
barns to approach
familiar quality wouldn't seen in plan
rather than the front to back ordering
from forks to parlor to living the
bathroom the kitchen here the kind of
inversion about to a side entry enters
one to a hall that has expended
vestigial grooves that encrust means the
inside liner of the house and produces
kinds of rooms within rooms of varying
scales and materials and you can see the
driveway they're actually splitting
they're dividing house from barn and
really it's on any approach matter which
way you sort of orient yourself to the
house there's always a face that sort of
orient towards you in an element that
Orient's away from you
so it becomes it tries to activate
itself is a kind of object in the ground
rather than the kind of explicit
attitude towards towards frontality
the last project in this category the
San Francisco Music Hall music halls are
typically what I would consider
programmatically bottom-heavy
meaning that they tend to produce a
figure-ground plan that has a robust
figure or shape to it and which clearly
delineates inside from outside I was
interested in disrupting some of those
inheritances the music hall so here you
can see people just know quickly
returned to Monda and the aggregation
problem of in this case nine cylinders
and sixteen Commons atop them where
these kind of Gothic like arches are cut
through them that produced these visual
and spatial layers where in plan rather
than
buster clean did your ground plan that
is notable to a music-hall here you get
kind of a confetti like plan that acts
to suspend or prolong the idea of the
threshold as you move through the
culminating pieces under the building
then prove I'm so here to being an under
and so the the project also sort of
draws influence from its context we're
in Golden Gate Park the fog the sort of
botanical and geographic and climactic
effects also produces produces different
visual and spatial areas of the project
contains disorder advance so producing
the sort of receding depths of shadows
and in really looking at a sort of
disruption of legibility between the
distinction of silhouette and mass front
and back object and feel inside outside
and so forth nor here as you begin to
approach we begin to move through the
through the park landscape under the
kind of first of these colonnade veils
and as you move through the project they
continue and plan and section really
through these men episodic staircases
and circulation sequences so there are
some photographs of the model currently
at Yale where a gig here you can see
there's an attitude about frontality
it's two and a half cubes two of them
fileted together and then just nine nine
cylinders and sixteen poems but in no
way does that ever sort of disclose
itself in terms of having a front which
again is a response to its
in the round qualities of Golden Gate
Park okay the second category I'm going
to pick up the pace a little bit here
for codes and cultural endearment this
work really began and I arrived in San
Francisco and almost immediately after
arriving and a couple who had just
bought a house
and they hired me to do a renovation for
them and in addition then I was
naturally very excited about this and it
turns out that the house was actually
built to be non compliance it was two
feet in the side yard the previous owner
had put in a bathroom and a bedroom in
the garage there's all kinds of problems
with it so at the end of the day we were
limited to only Bill of 44 square feet
so designed to sort of 44 square foot
entry Tower the the costs of
construction and so forth its cost
prohibitive to do this would've been
absurd actually build the project so
they bailed and I think instead they
bought like a new rug for the dining
room
so but what nevertheless it's sparking
interest in the kind of code regulations
of the Bay Area and of San Francisco
City and so shortly after that project I
was approached to do an exhibition at a
gallery in Los Angeles called the John
Jay gallery and I thought it would be
interesting to explore the topic of code
in a way that dealt with San Francisco
preservation maybe not as an upholding
of it but as a sort of first approach a
critiquing it and I noted that almost
exclusively what I call darlings the
city of San Francisco calls the
character defining features
it figures exclusively and commonly in
San Francisco code to the extent that
they well I'll get into this a little
bit more in a minute but everything that
I outlined is a darling exactly
correspond to almost everything in the
San Francisco code that's regulated as
preservation so I just moved there from
Ann Arbor Michigan and I became just
totally fascinated by these incredibly
weird corners I found them weird again
maybe sort of boring they weird that to
put a cylindrical Gorder like bloated
thing on a square house seemed very odd
to me it's really this rooms like here's
a corner problem that I care about
maybe not the reentrant corner of column
and arch from the Renaissance and the
problem of the detail of perpendicular
planes from modernism but instead
something that was like deeply spatial
sort of already odd and frankly was very
low as mom did putting footing limited
geometries together I mean even
introducing some of the complexities
about the construction of that you can
see is not not very easy or in that case
anyway so as also interesting to me
because these things became modifiers of
difference of course these are towers on
turrets but that by relating the turret
or the tower to the roof it became a way
to introduce difference to things that
are otherwise the same so just to say
that I realize that the corner is not a
fixed condition at the wall but actually
by introducing the turret where the
tower the corner becomes sort of
variable and its location and his
relationship is studied through how it
relates to the roof so on the Left it's
a line on the right is pushback from the
Gable and that sets in motion
formal readings as well as spatial
possibilities of the interior and so I
went about cataloging hundreds of these
and there's no very no short supply in
San Francisco and I encountered some
that were sort of conventional and rural
internet encountered some like this
which is one of my favorites because I
just don't know what we how we describe
this in the lexicon of architecture the
tower is literally bigger than the house
and they loved it so much that they put
another one as a cupola top and so you
quickly realize that these things are so
deeply endeared to Bay Area culture and
by the way this is also true there are
codes in New York that have this in
green as well as in Chicago and Atlanta
and it's a whole project that I'm
working on but this is interesting just
that they are so beloved that it doesn't
matter that the house looks sort of
quote-unquote ridiculous it has a tower
and therefore it's kind a sign of
participating in Bay Area culture so I
went about the process of sort of
redrawing all of the existing conditions
which you see on the left that were
encountered in the city and sort of
manner version of mine on the right
we're here of a shipboard sweep across
the facade which calls into question the
nature of the corner where does the
corner start and stop but also
introduces a problem of geometry of the
roof where you start to begin to
hybridize the little gable it with the
witch's cap to reveal this almost sort
of really strange mansard roof or in
other cases questioning the relationship
at the end of the corner so on the
left-hand side I would argue that that's
a compound figure because the turret
bottom attenuates to the corner of the
house I was interested in
kind of autonomous formalism docking
Eisenman sense but in the turret the
house sense so the legs of the tourists
were to spread away revealing itself as
a kind of its own context also evidenced
by the shift of the window up which of
course dislocates are reading the floor
overthrown is there's a bunch of them
merging elements together like combining
a chimney with the turret and so forth
or looking at conventional details on
the left of a flare detail and imagining
not a Gossard is sufficiently old that
it lost his hotness and became what I
call the flag detail on the right and
then for the gallery constructed three
turrets at 3/4 size and the pulse would
arrive just under 12 feet tall where
they adopt different spatial material
qualities that are learned from the code
so the sort of patinated thakkaral
turret presumably would be permissible
turret the one with the shingles uses
the six shingle patterns permitted by
code for preservation with manipulating
one to have an extruded or a distended
tip them and then they're put in the
kind of eight steps repeating forcing
pattern and then the
to kind of split legs but also that the
turret could convene new images
alternative responses to it so the that
well turret that looks patented and old
and soft and squishy the the shingle
turret sort of animates in the wind or
as people sort of flick it or jiggle to
the lid the channels are animate
themselves with the idea that then the
gallery became a kind of scene in itself
so you move between and around the
turrets as if they're they're kind of
themselves the context so speaking you
can see in the background the painted
houses are the painted 20 versions of
the different turret relationships to
roof that were encountered in San
Francisco read pre painted on the walls
of the gallery so about au I think I
think that this show is coming in its
second iteration to here in January
think drawn codes so drawing codes
version 2 will come here in January I
was part of drawn codes one which some
colleagues of mine at CCA asked people
to produce a drawing that was about code
with the implied intention that it was
more about maybe digital code or coding
or something like that I interpret it to
be more about planning and preservation
code so I began looking at this house
which is the hassle little info house in
San Francisco this is one of the
cornerstone houses of the preservation
code and not included in the
preservation code is the architect's
quote for what isn't for what he
imagined of the house which is that it
should represent every known and unknown
order of architecture should be so
heavily plastered with ornament
that it conceals his theory of
construction to be a restless uncertain
frightful collection of details giving
the effect of a nightmare about to
explode it's one of my favorite quotes
describing architecture that I've read
ever including Neeson Corbin so I wanted
to sort of take his his idea of the
house and cast it into a relationship of
what it had done in the planning and
preservation code of San Francisco which
had become very limiting and
conservative so he did a redrawing of
the house a little of the house i abided
almost by the rules set out for us which
is I could be no perspective so there's
three different orthographic projections
included which is why you get the weird
round line there's two parts that are in
perspective I couldn't resist breaking
one of their rules for the show
but it takes on the kind of attitude of
Peter Schmidt and his idea about
Victorian architecture and it sort of
critiques the code in a way where you
find things like sad gargoyles atop
rubble stairs when you find the
another version of that roll turret
lamps on the porch sort of incorrect
dormers that are in contrast to the code
and so forth and this sort of builds
into a larger narrative of the Victorian
architecture in San Francisco I don't
really want to give the idea that it's
all just sort of whimsy because it
actually has a very strange sort of
culture inversion in its history so in
the 1960s through the 1980s the
Victorian houses were incredibly cheap
to rent and of course today the most
expensive properties to rent or buy in
San Francisco but because they were
cheap in the 60s and 70s they really
became on a backdrop of San Francisco
counterculture to the extent that these
this is the katsu if you know
there's no psychedelic theater group a
drag theatre group who did performances
both in their own Street home and in
theaters around San Francisco or you
find on the left here image of the
Grateful Dead and where they lived in
that house for three years it's the
house that the famous drug bust in 1967
took place there there were the eagles
and so forth or Janis Joplin and the
kind of the the idea that the Victorian
houses are preserved as an aesthetic as
an aesthetic because odd when you
remember they're going to counter
cultural histories so here is another
Grateful Dead house and then on the
right is Charles Manson of course he's
not under he's not a musical artist but
the point I'm trying to make is that
they do very different
issues to culture in the 60s 70s and 80s
and they do now even to the extent that
during the gay rights movement the color
that we associate now with the Victorian
houses of San Francisco in postcards in
kitchen memorabilia and so forth and the
trinket shops around the city were the
result of a form of self-expression for
equal rights in the gay culture of San
Francisco of that time and so but it
becomes really strange because the code
then does something like this we're now
in 2018 it limits the color palette to
just a select number of colors if any
know whatever district your hand and so
all of a sudden you start to realize
that there's a really strange
relationship between what the code is
quote unquote preserving which students
have nothing to do the kind of cultural
transformation or of social
transformation or kind of political
unrest of the time and status or to
bracket a particular kind of aesthetic
image where everything from turrets
shapes and bay window sizes and so forth
are regulated this is not something
that's totally unique to San Francisco
it's unique to San Francisco is the kind
of countercultural movement becoming a
very conservative planning code and
preservation code so everything from
from porches and balconies and so forth
but what you find also is that the
regulations become increasingly
superficial meaning that they are really
only front facade regulations it's a
front facade City so you encounter
houses like this this is a series of
drawings I've been producing called the
ass bills which is the term appropriated
from the labor
contractor where a house burned down
revealed this side of the house we start
to understand a very different
compositional attitude about elements
that applies for the interior spaciality
x' that are very very distinct from the
front facade planning and preservation
regulations were here you find highly
illegal and in fact highly unsafe
additions built on the back of houses
that fall outside of the preservation
code or things like the kind of
commitments to the regulation of the
interior through electricity and so
forth as they start to aggregate on on
the sort of quote-unquote invisible side
of the house so it's interested in
taking all of that stuff for the
planning and preservation code that's
limiting and trying to identify sort of
ideal plan or maybe you would have just
called the average plan not even typical
just an average plan of the code so by
taking the planning and preservation
code diagrams and plan and recomposing
them into this image of a house of a
plan for a house that's something that
be permissible in any district or any
neighborhood in San Francisco and then I
won't walk you through this but there
are some tendencies in houses where
there's a sort of a studio rooms that
appeal from the exterior wall in this
case some of them sort of detach and
become any sort of Island like rooms
within rooms of the grooves maybe more
importantly as a sort of intentional
manipulations to things in the
nations so here in the front elevation
which to my knowledge would be a
permissible elevation or thinking about
in kind of some of the relationship
between parts this is the window and the
turret and doing some things that are
essentially wrong so you never really
will never find a flat smooth surface in
a Queen Anne home if you do it's on the
Queen at home so sort of questioning the
logic of how they're defining or
limiting certain house types and then
thinking about you know the manipulation
to certain things like dormers balconies
and so forth where again you started in
this case may be referring back to the
mountain cabin you be sort of one way
everything would be an inverted bay
window asymmetrical bay window which is
going just the form the inverted form of
the protruding balcony and dormer but
kind of again a way to sort to think
about the way that the darlings can
reimagine and reconstruct other possible
formal and spatial identities and the
last project I'm going to show it's
funny because most of the actual client
work I'm only showing one of the current
projects there's the warehouse project
that I'm not showing that has to do that
these scale up so then they have to do a
lot with what I call contextual
histories meaning that there are certain
you know zoning regulations and stuff
like that that sort to produce a
neighborhood of particular uses in this
case I'm referring to where I currently
teach the San Francisco
just about California College of the
Arts where a year and a half ago or so
the the current Dean at that time
Jonathan Massey had asked me to do an
exhibition design for an exhibition
who's curating on this two and a half
acre back lot this is known where Jeanne
gang is now going to be building a new
building back there but this is the
condition of it it's highly variegated
and it's used and in its color and its
functions as a kind of work yard for
students as well as everything to like
nav accreditation for the architecture
school and the trailer as there's a
whole there's a material reuse center of
welding Center and so forth so and it's
also positioned in this kind of light
industrial warehouse neighborhood it's a
very sort of peripheral urban campus and
so given the nature of the back lot all
already I really could not imagine the
sort of overriding unifying idea about
how to organize everything also noting
that the incoming five pavilions that
were carried if the show were vastly
different in my opinion about how to
sort of position them next to each other
so it sort of began with their rewriting
or a redefinition of confetti because
the backlot images it just felt like
confetti so sort of rewrote confetti is
a way to think about and organizing
principles I was loose and in family
Bochy couldn't easily accommodate change
they could accommodate new material
additions it could accommodate
subtractions which was good because one
of the pavilions wasn't finished on
comic and was also good because now
to new trailers to the backlot so it
became this kind of flexible way of
producing these different organizations
where by reorganizing the trailers is
the most kind of grid-like structure
than which are in the orange blocks it
produces these episodic views from the
perimeter of the site and so you sort of
get it's kind of the view corridors
through and across the site that frame
views of the pavilions so here you see
an image of the model this is the really
the one process image I'm showing and
which is the templating of the site and
then you can see here the finished
painted version before the pavilions
went in where the different splines and
they arcs in the circles I'll indicate
particular ways to sit to move to look
and so forth so the green splines
indicate where to walk through the
yellow bright yellow circles are the
kind of Kodak moment that are framing a
particular pavilion in the kind of urban
landscape and I shadow it looks like
modular a little bit so I like this and
I can slide so you can see the kind of
temporality of the of the the back block
becomes both the social space becomes a
work yard it's a space for displaying
the prototypes and so forth while
maintaining the functions of the
institution and the obligations it has
to you know its own its own operative
mode and you can see in the context of
this the idea was to sort of reauthorize
like industrial
context of all these we're very large
warehouses that read is really great may
have seen in one of those images there's
a highway so you can see you really have
a look down you do look down on this
site quite a bit and the highway to sort
of reauthorize the travel neighborhood
that's what I think use it as much let
me take any questions or insult sir
one thing that curiously absent from
your descriptions was the strange
materiality that creeps through all the
projects gendered ways just maybe you
could say something about your attitude
towards material articulations I mean it
it depends on the project in some way I
would say for example with the Victorian
house and then others you know things
like Bofur in plan and in elevation for
me that's a bit of a reclaiming of some
of the sort of effects of drag though
you know they were introduced to the
kind of Victoriana
culture of San Francisco through like
the call cats and stuff like that it's
also a way maybe to reclaim ideas about
clutter so and in particular with the
Victorians you know their interiors are
often very cluttered they were they were
they collected tchotchkes and things and
kind of Kitsch items so there is an idea
of replacing at least as an architect of
replacing the kind of found objects that
they might acquire
was something maybe already satisfying
within the home
so it's also you probably also noted
that the faux fur parts in plan are
typically the kind of room within a room
they're very intimate scale so there's a
bit of an attitude there that I have
about the disruption of sort of
universal space and an idea that rather
than universal space you can have these
sort of pockets that are I imagine to be
spaces for whatever arguing making love
having a phone conversation the sort of
domestic the implied domestic uses that
are not about anything happens in any
room but it's also being very conscious
to not sound deterministic and then with
other projects like the turrets for
example the materiality was a was a
learned sort of behavior out of the code
and the inherited material palette of
the city so that's that was a sort of
intentional manipulation so again so the
fat Walter that packetize patinated
appears old but it's swishy the shingles
come from the shingle patterns
yeah first of all thank you very much
for the thickness of the lecture and I
find that somehow if we could have had a
seminar for you in the round it might
have been a better forum to extend the
Q&A period because I just find too many
questions that I have and if you just
have the patience if we could make our
way through a series of discussions I'd
really appreciate it and some of them
are small details others are more you
know involved and some of them extent
Michael's question the first one I would
surprise is a very simple one but I
think you always go straight for a
detail like this one is it's just a
conceptual one because I was surprised
by it given the the comfort you've
demonstrated with a theoretical and
historical wrong but when you pair up
the darlings with the Brutes what I was
surprised by is that you you make
reference to typology but once you fall
into typology you make it a programmatic
argument and if my understanding is
correct if there's anything be inherited
in the 60s and 70s about the reading
vocation of Technology is that it was
independent of program because it is
precisely about the morphological and
the organizational aspects of tight and
not the programs that
am i misunderstanding something in your
argument or am i something about the
location of time I don't I really I
think that what I'm mostly arguing is
it's about a type function legibility so
that school looks as a school library
looks as a library and part of the part
of the interest I have is in the parts
that do that so whether it's a chimney
or a bay window or a turret that they
also construct their own genealogical
history so they have their own sort like
the transformation the trend the
translation of a turret of a military
thing to a Victorian house I find odd
and I'm interested in that history
you're yeah where I am present correctly
that your your preoccupation is
semantics and I can a graphic a great
car in the first instance and then
apparently by the end of the lecture you
you get deep into the spatial or for
long morphological implications it has
all the plans in the sections in this
correct yep so you managed also in a
very deft way to get through the entire
lecture without making any challenge to
nor a an explicit respect to complexity
and contradiction and yet somehow it's
lurking in the background and is there
is there any interest to have in that
conversation oh sure yeah absolutely I
mean there's in that conversation I
think that in particular I sort of
withhold that a little bit right now as
part of the larger should the for the
current five houses which will become
ten part should part of that is because
it's not fully fully played out across
that series of the houses in terms of
just a broader discussion for complexity
but I'm not so interested in is the kind
of signification necessarily mr. ney is
history so I've showed you know
victories around the beach house but I
do think that there's and also like I'm
encroaching on post-modernism too
because I'm talking about the kind of
you know double readings one for
architects one verb you know but it's I
don't think what I'm suggesting is that
it's a particular language that's meant
for you or you to read in one way and
you know are non architects to region in
another way instead anything is
approaching it more from the attitude
that these things are ingrained in the
kind of politics of the city already in
that by by using them and even in the
way that I work a see as an example I
sure there's in that roof it both sort
of adheres to while upholds the certain
zoning regulations about light in doing
so forth through the the triptych of
three feeble rooms and that's where I
think it becomes not so much about
signification in terms of the darlings
and things like that but it's actually a
way to shift the arc of that attention
span so explain to us then a shift in
thinking that happens between the
earlier projects and the latest and I
have my eyes fixated on one phenomena in
the beginning when you're talking about
intersecting geometries and volumes yeah
the operation that you perform on them
is to
and their legibility so that you can
read at once their difference and
sameness and the confluence of the two
but by the time that you come to the end
and you're reading the codes of San
Francisco what you're doing is you're
radicalizing the the differences of
fragmented parts in absolute heretical
dissonance without any regard to the
problem of synthesis or the moment of
reconciliation and that thing that all
architects in some way or another create
even artificially for themselves that's
what we call constraints like if they
don't provide codes we do it yes in
order to - if a ditch or to find their
way to you know create our own
orthodoxies and and so you shift from a
device that has to do with synthesis to
collage and I know and I just want to
know yeah what what is the line of is
this a trajectory or no this is just
another chapter in a range of other
different operations you're going to be
playing I'm sure it's a trajectory
I think the shift came from I mean I
touched on it just very briefly by
indicating the difference between the
domes and the cabin and if the ship
being from about the kind of compound
figure problem to one of the kind of
manners attitude about manipulation
elements and I think that that tendency
in the more recent work of a kind of
Mannerist attitudes about manipulation
exaggeration elongation inversion even
some of them that I didn't I didn't
dwell on at all in the line drawings of
the turrets borrow from kind of art
history mannerism in the projection of
impossible views so in many of those
like the one that has a kind of odd
mansard Rufus model three-dimensional
yeah but by the time you get to the end
it's not even about difficult synthesis
it's just wow yes so the so the the I
think that what happened intentionally
was that there became a moment some more
after the domes where the engagement
with the rules of the city were in such
discord ins with the attitude about
compound figures that I was exploring
with Spears cones and cylinders that it
was no longer particularly feasible as
an emotive critique of the things that
were the rules of the city but was what
was able to become a mode of critique
was the manipulation to those rules so
understanding the planning and
preservation code was one way of doing
that but it required a bit of a I mean I
read the projects as much of this in
again slippery but it's almost leave is
this syntax said carefully the rereading
of the code so that you could actually
rewrite the code as a version of the
manipulated form which just wasn't
possible with the compound figure
problem that I was previously working on
so the shift was a sort of attitude
about mannerism and careful to never
call it post-modernism for a variety of
reasons I guess but that that opened up
territory for me with regard to the
darlings that allowed a whole new range
of exploratory options
manipulation and through sort of
inventing the strange at the fat roll
detail or the the manipulations to
discover and things like that I promise
you this is my last question but you
bring it up and I I have a personal
affinity list and I have my own ways of
describing it but it's clear also that
your reading of the figurative escapes
the strictly architectural in the sense
that you know things that you happily
describe in the beginning as porches and
Gables and bay windows and sofa turrets
and so forth eventually end up as the
path of amorphic in the zoomorphic and
they end up in the armpit the crotch the
you know the the all of the other
ambiguous pieces that are seemingly
grafted into the scale of architecture
and we know of course that to some
degree that that shift in scale doesn't
always happen naturally it it comes with
an agenda and sometimes it has its own
technical feats in order to do that
because things at six feet are just not
the same as
but I I wonder if you could also and
this may be more personal or it may be
architect disciplinary we describe what
is your fascination with the human body
the zoomorphic body as a repository for
this kind of research I think what I
appreciate about it is the associative
qualities so that they opens up such a
wider territory of pluralism in my in my
mind anyway about the associative impact
of individuals so it's an explicit move
away from any sort of fixed meaning or a
message to be read which is a sort of
departure of much of the postmodern
which is why I try not to even invoke
that in some cases but I think that it's
it becomes increasingly associative in
its own subjectivity because we all any
one person who sees it will also
understand it to be somehow in relation
to them now it's also not this kind of
existential argument about humanism or
something like that it's simply that I
think it opens a territory that is
pluralistic its associative and I see it
as a way of sort of enrolling or
sponsoring wider audiences engagement
with the work if nothing else to visual
engagement maybe not exactly the spatial
experience show but certainly visual so
the sort of visual engagement is an
inroad to a conversation and I deeply
appreciate it so I sort of chuckle or
that's a shame the dome and people say
looks like a chicken leg you know and I
appreciate that it looks like a chicken
leg and yet it's a reconstruction of a
borrow me meat cannon of architecture so
it's I think it's just really about
plural associations
the person is each other
a gutter the thing about the darlings is
I try to avoid explicit functionality so
now I the scupper also is not a darling
which I think I believe I just said but
I try to avoid explicit functionality
and instead I favor things that have
formal and spacial a functioning
possibilities so what I also didn't show
but maybe you remember from the gallery
show in LA there's a collection of
dormers that have no windows
I mean you can't doesn't make any it
doesn't make any sense to have a dormer
without a window other than to uphold
some sort of cultural ideal right and so
so I guess I would say I wouldn't
include the gutter as a darling
particularly because it doesn't have its
2pi do a functional imperative
yeah I mean there there it is absolutely
the scupper becomes the kind of gutter
yes and to the extent that it maintains
its functioned of dispelling water
though it's also doing it without a
parapet I mean it's already kind of
unnecessary in a way but it's also doing
it in a way that it gets exaggerated so
much of it is just the roof and so I
think that I would say I would be closer
about so what I like about the darling
it's like maybe you could argue with a
certain degree of manipulation that
something could transgress its own
function I mean that the turret is maybe
an example to its its origins are
militaristic it was really for shooting
arrows out of you know and anybody
coming from this wall of the castle or
this wall and now we we built them where
you can even look out of them so there
is something about that kind of
transgression or the infidelity to an
intended use that is particular to the
darlings including things like bay
windows and gable rooms and so forth
you never know racism but it's you quite
interesting in terms of representation
the further along the word goes the more
difficult it becomes to understand in
order that they purposely bad visual but
we can't ever understand
the whole perspective and in some ways I
I'm reading that as you have a really
cute project and really pretty eat your
lines but we can't talk about it in
those terms it has to be a bit more
serious so I almost wonder if it's a
representation accomodates probably call
it kitsch necessarily um but I I
appreciate the idea that it was sort of
it seems like an easy thing like a sort
of engaging thing visually anyway that
people can see different things in it
and then I talked about it in a bit more
maybe even stoic way at times you know
we're like the house you're referencing
has a diametric projection a trimetric
and then there's two parts that are in
perspective and then the rest is just
elevation and their reconstruction of
the hasla loophole house but I like to
talk about it especially in a room of
Architects I'd much prefer to talk about
it in like very explicit as explicit
that can be architectural terms I avoid
venturi and topics like irony and all of
that for very specific reasons if this
were an audience of intially the
collection of anybody but architects I
would probably describe it differently
except for the parts that are the
received histories so talking about the
Victorians and the Victorian houses in
their relation
to the kind of sex drugs and rock'n'roll
culture of the 60s or the gay rights
movement in the 80s that's not an
architectural disciplinary problem it's
a broader cultural context so for me
like the fact that every sort of
chuckles when you see that turret that's
bigger than the house you know they've
got something that anybody can
understand is sort of odd if pointed out
but I would really I really prefer to
position the work in this room in a way
that is sort of pointed and focused on
the architectural merits but maybe huges
the disciplinary merits
and we were just as inventive
I thought that character
to me
feels like an American project because
you know
and changing it's a very astute read on
the one hand I can't overcome my
American yes I suppose put on the other
yeah I know I really appreciate home it
means a lot to me it's nice hearing
those things but it's also a student
read because the thing that went sort of
unmentioned that I haven't really
unpacked them tonight because the thin
house series is a revisiting of what we
presume to be quintessential sort of
Americana so that's where the received
history is even about the cabin the
farmhouse was so forth as part of a
larger kind of thing that I'm up to but
it is very much about a kind of
rereading this is where than Tori played
figures in again but it is very much
better rereading of those kinds of
domestic types but through the lens of
their quota but received histories so
the one that's also done that I'm not
showing yet is a ranch house and there's
a kind of argument about the receding
front door and the kind of removal of
the Foundation which was piers prior to
World War Two post World War two they
typically contain the during the the war
they use a lot of slab on grade there's
a military invention so all of a sudden
the houses appear more you know kind of
squinted and anyway so it's a very it's
definitely a very American kind of
revisiting and then followed by a kind
of re-imagination of those types
the old way of telling you it really
works well also with your associations
of Dorothy and psycho the transformation
into something the farm animal that come
up the building so it's a I think it
really works well in my opinion you
don't need them to Association is there
hey thank you
I appreciate that any other questions
[Applause]
