Thank You Bradley for inviting me to do
this it's really exciting and I'm also
just it's great to see young people
interested in the work and be talking to
students so thank you for having me I
also just wanted to so it is it was a
Brooklyn based practice now it's a
Buffalo based practice and that's where
I'm teaching this year and I wanted to
just also thank the University of
Buffalo School of Architecture for
hosting me and for allowing me to do
like some of the stuff that or to move
forward some of the stuff that I'm going
to talk to you about today so before I
start I was just thinking about how I
was planning this I was in a Starbucks
planning this this lecture in the slide
show and I was just like yeah it's gonna
be great I'm just gonna like just go
through my work like I've done so many
times with with different people and
it's always been like one-on-one and I
and I was there in that Starbucks
thinking to myself oh I've never
actually done this before with a group
so tonight it's like a bit of an
experiment where I'm just kind of gonna
take you through a lot of my projects
and if it becomes really tiring then
I'll stop if I get tired if you get
really bored or set to fall asleep then
we can stop but it is kind of an
experiment because all the times with a
few times I've talked in the past it's
been about a specific project or on a
specific topic never just like let me
open up my portfolio and like like show
you what I'm up to and in a weird way
it's like this is kind of like an odd
sort of job interview or something like
that that's that's kind of something I
haven't done in a while so just bear
with me on that and one other thing that
I was thinking was I should find a way
to kind of make this a little bit sort
of find some sort of element that can
tie things together and I couldn't think
of one so instead I'm gonna want to give
you a proposition right I'm gonna start
always right with it's good to start
with poetry and really famous poet that
you've probably heard of molana' room or
also known as Rumi and he has a very
famous poem Coleman barks is translated
and others as well and it's been
translated in a lot of different ways
but it's a school photo as I Aslam
baboon say here is Madhava Mian
as our food is I'm only saying it like
that so you think I'm really smart and I
know Farsi I don't but I'll do a sort of
a translation for you
mild translation it's that out beyond
the ideas of gopher and Islam out beyond
the ideas of what's right and what's
wrong
there's a stayer ah there's this
wilderness this like weird field right
and that's the place that weird
atmosphere is where you can find me and
at the end of that verse he says now
Kufa wanna Islam now on Jah Jah just
that in that field there's no right and
there's no wrong why because there is no
there is which i think is such an
amazing thing to think of right there's
something that's extra referential that
you can't refer to anything because
there's nothing to refer to you just
have to look and come up with your own
opinion and so just for the next 30
minutes hopefully 40 hopefully not an
hour I asked you to come and meet me in
that weird field but you don't don't ask
yourself is this architecture as an art
architecture is it heresy or is it faith
but just come and take a look at it and
look at it as if you're looking at
something for the first time without
somebody telling you their opinion about
it first so this is I've just titled
this four cross things and you'll see
why I love airplanes and trains and
travel there are things that I think are
fascinating because they're modern and
they go fast and they can kill you and
it's just and they're all how they're
designed and I so it's something I'm
really into and that's also like a
feeling that's in the morning so the
first crossing is one from JFK to Lahore
Pakistan and here are some of the
clients that we're working with for that
one project it's meant to be situated in
Terminal four jet way at JFK
International Airport most of you have
probably been to JFK and
it's actually dealing with a particular
it's a project that deals with a
specific flight it's a flight from
Kennedy Airport to Lahore Pakistan
that's what one of the planes used to
look like I've been on this flight many
times and Pakistan International
Airlines has been doing this flight
since about the 1970s although that's
changed very recently and I'll talk
about that at the end of this project
but the idea was that because air travel
has become so fast right and now we can
go from the east coast of the u.s. to
South Asia and fourteen hours non-stop
without having to stop when I was when
when I was like maybe four or five going
with my parents on this flight in the
1980s you went from New York
you went then you went to higher land
Amsterdam Zurich and all of these places
now you can just one shot but so and
travel has made ever made like these
distances so short but as a result like
we have to somehow find a way to deal
with these cultural different of time
right like there's not like a 25 hour
journey that you can sit there and be to
go from American Mustapha Jew Pakistani
American was the far Pakistani mustafar
secular mustafar - you know Hsieh Muslim
mustafar or whatever it is we have to
make these changes very very quickly so
we're thinking about installations that
we can put in an airport or in a jet way
that might make might mitigate these
sorts of changes or make them easier to
handle and so what I'm doing is looking
really really closely at that arrow and
I'm thinking about actually the
installations for this jet way in
between the terminal and the flight and
looking at it a little closer and so
here's the title sheet for this drawing
said you guys are probably making lots
of drawing sets right now so this would
be a language that's familiar to you so
I won't have to go in and explain this
too much and there's a key plan right so
we see the jet way up here that work
you've probably been in jet ways like
this and then you know there's the
flight and I have this I probably
wouldn't do this again I'm too lazy to
change it the flight is slowly changing
into a map of Pakistan right here but
what I'm trying to show right there is
that jet way is a really thick thick
space right where like all of these
chain
just the way think the way the languages
people are talking are starting to
change the way things smell are starting
to change it's a space of like a lot of
change and transition okay and so here's
one of the first installations for that
space this is what we call the adequate
anti-american rage detection scanner and
so what happens is we have the scanner
right here and it flashes to you these
American images and depending on how
filled your faces with rage that'll
determine whether or not you're allowed
on this flight so maybe you'll see like
the Statue of Liberty or apple pie or a
very American thing the Imperial system
right and so we'll see how how like
angry you are and if you have an
adequate amount of anti-american rage
you'll be allowed on this flight we're
also playing with this idea of the
there's two floors in these jet ways at
least at Terminal four so there's an up
and down and so we're imagining if
passengers are arriving from Pakistan
right they might not need their
photographs anymore so they can get up
like this and they'll be like a vacuum
and raise their hands like this and the
vacuum sucks up the photograph right and
then the person above who's departing
but it's the same it's the same aircraft
that brings in the brings in all the
people from Pakistan then it gets like
sort of cleaned up and it takes all the
people out right that's like it's not an
enormous fleet and so the people who are
leaving and boarding that flight they
can then collect that vodka this is a
pretty good one all right this is
something that like maybe if you're
going to puritanical Pakistan you might
not need all your extra condoms so what
can you do with them well we've
developed this condom spindle beard
maker where you enter all your condoms
into this little spindle right here and
it spins them up into a wonderful almost
Islamic style beard and then here's
another thing and this is something
that's actually maybe a bit local but a
lot of bacchus Pakistani aunts and
coal's repre mainly women but in
Pakistan India Pakistan or South Asia
they carry little wallet size photos of
their nieces and their nephews and then
when they meet someone else then that
person might have another photo of their
knee so their nephew and tho those sort
of unmarried nieces and nephews and
they'll put the two photos together
stranger they'll be like Oh today they
both kind of look good together and then
that can all sorts of really good or
really terrible things can start from
that and so here's something where you
can take your normal American photo and
you put it in this sort of this sort of
matchmaking photo development machine
put in the photo you pull the crank and
you there's two choices
there's the MD choice or the PhD choice
depending on how your photo should come
out right and we've there's there might
be a third one that's in development the
engineer choice right so you pull the
crank either way and then sort of you're
like matrimonial photo comes out over
here or your pre matrimonial like -
making photo comes out if you've been in
America for a while there's a chance
you've been ingesting a lot of pork or
alcohol and so we've developed this
thing right here it's a tea enema so you
can sort of just kind of purify yourself
before you get on this flight there's
another thing here this is acumen
fumigator so there's a little bit of
storage of cumin right here in the
flight or down here in this uh the hall
and then that'll sort of fumigate your
body with this cumin and that'll kind of
prepare you for like the smell that
you're about to you're about to be face
working for day there's also some more
serious issues right like when we're
loboc Astana American community in the
u.s. like you know it doesn't really we
don't really ask too many questions
about where you're from or like what
sect you are things like that because
you know a lot of times I went to a
school where I was the only brown kid in
the entire school except for my sister
right so we sort of like you know we
find safety in numbers however when most
when the more and more people get
together we start to sort of realize
like now there's not just ten of us
there's 300 of us or 200 of us boarding
this aircraft and now various groups do
start to splinter right so maybe all of
the Shia most
go towards one section they do I look
when jobbies go to the other section
maybe the kashmiri start going to the
other section and so this is a seeing
kind of a situation where this is for an
Airbus those new air buses that have two
floors and it's where we have the the
sort of the so many Muslims go up here
and maybe some other groups Shia Muslims
go up here it's basically people who
consider themselves faithful versus the
blasphemers and the faithful can sort of
gently stone with these little pellets
the people who they see as blasphemous
down here going into that just as an end
note this flight and this was a very
tragic moment for our parents not so
much for me because we don't have that
sentimentality attached to it but the
national airline of Pakistan is quickly
going broke like so many things and they
had to discontinue all of their flights
to the United States and so that's
something that I'm as this project moves
forward I'm thinking obviously it's now
been put on hold but as it moves forward
I'm thinking what is the future of it
and what happens to this because now we
have sort of the ghost of this flight
the actual flight doesn't exist anymore
and speaking of ghosts and this is a
true story the last flight left I think
at the end of October last year and
there were two bodies of Pakistani
people who had recently died and they
wanted to be repatriated and they wanted
to be buried in Pakistan unfortunately
the flight and the crew were in such
disarray on this last flight leaving
that they left the two bodies in New
York and it's kind of the sort of a dark
humor but I think in the end one of the
some other airline at tejada emirates
chipped in and bought the bodies back to
pakistan but that was sort of a sad end
to this route that sort of so many of us
have gone back and forth on and maybe
they'll bill restart it and there'll be
a continuation of that story and also
I'm thinking now so this is the second
crossing I should have put a number two
here this is not from JFK to Pakistan
this is a crossing from above to below
and this is a project for people who are
permanently
I'm married her alone and we all know
people like this they're complaining all
the time and bitching all the time and
no one wants to be around them and
obviously we're trying to figure out a
way to somehow deal with this group of
people in an effective way but also in a
way that they can still somehow be
productive and so the city of New York
the office of the mayor and the housing
for a lowness initiative has put out an
RFP design proposals for supportive
housing to shelter the unmarried unloved
unwanted or otherwise permanently alone
and I'm just gonna read everybody knows
what an RFP is right you're gonna be
dealing with those a lot so it's a
request for proposals I'm just gonna
read some text from the RFP right now so
you can get an idea of what's
instigating our design whereas the city
has foreseen the need for housing new
where all the single women and men can
go and off sue whereas aloneness
always is a sword to the eye we seek a
home for the alone to live in and
finally die whereas a local sorry
whereas sequester in their grief they
must somehow be fed we seek designs that
day-to-day give dwellers their daily
bread
whereas humiliation does demand to be
seen we we solicit the kind of schemes
that function as the vitrine whereas
this kind of housing scheme can only
come at cost we seek proposals that
recover the money that is lost whereas
of course whereas of course were in no
way [ __ ] beyond belief this housing
shouldn't minimum offer some relief and
that basically is what's guiding our
design so these are some diagrams that
we made about how to deal with people
who are permanently alone first isolate
provoke
collect and then distribute I'm going to
show you how we do that now of course we
always we always as architects we love
charts and graphs and so there's a
specific type of person that fits well
in this kind of housing scheme right
just like there's a specific type of
window pane that should go right there
right or a specific type of chair that
we should design for this auditorium and
so we've been looking a lot at a lot of
things like an isolation metric and then
sort of how much guilt and shame you
feel and we've sort of been graphing all
those things in this area right here
this is what this is sort of the optimal
area for somebody who might you know you
might actually prefer to live in this
type of dwelling that we're designing
again we've been thinking about like and
I think this line is really interesting
right here this is the the sort of the
human dignity quotient and it's the
pride over shame right so we can see
shame level increasing increasing
increasing sits P over s right so the
number is getting smaller shame level
increasing increasing increasing and
then right here there comes a point
where you just don't give a anymore
that people are isolating you and
humiliating you because of your
aloneness you stop caring and that's
this point right here where the shame
starts to go down very very quickly and
when the bottom number when that
denominator goes down the entire human
dignity quotient shoots up right and
this area right here this is what we're
saying is like the office that's the
optimal level room for someone to live
in this toilet here's a plan of the
dwelling right here it's a typical one
but I mean there's some changes this is
an elevation you can see right here this
is an area for services for food and
alcohol delivery does anybody know what
chatroulette is you do okay so we had
this idea
I'm dating myself a little bit we
discovered chatroulette in 2011 when I
was in school and it was just this thing
where like we would be sitting there in
studio and like the guys sitting next to
you it's just something that we would
laugh at look at this thing you go on it
and you just are like random
he connected with all these other people
like all around the world of course it
very quickly turned into like an avenue
for exhibitionists and all sorts of
strange people but at that point it was
something that was very new and so here
I had this idea that the person in this
dwelling down here right there connected
via these chatroulette screens to
everyone else and all the other
dwellings there always connected to
these people all the time they can
always see them and then look at them
the thing that's interesting though is
that up here at this Pavilion above
right visitors can come and look and see
what this person is watching like and
maybe you would think to yourself like
oh well like that really sucks for this
person their privacy is gone but keep in
mind this person is permanently
disconnected from these these people up
here right and imagine that like
someone's power to humiliate you to
shame you that only comes from them
being able to see you see yourself being
humiliated right imagine if that power
was taken away right that's like I see
this more I don't see this is a kind of
incarceration I see it almost as a kind
of liberation because you're taking away
the power of these people to humiliate
you anymore by sequestering yourself in
this thing you can watch whatever you
want no one has the power to ever
ridicule you again this is an alcohol
delivery system so we're thinking about
obviously the person in this dwelling is
going to need a lot of liquor and so
we're thinking about ways where somebody
could come and visit the dwelling and
maybe they pay a little bit of money and
then they you know there's like a
moonshine making system here where you
deliver the water and the yeast and then
it kind of ferments here for two weeks
and it's delivered down here to the
person so that the they can have that
alcohol obviously if there's gonna be
liquor there's gonna be hangovers and so
what we have here is these little kind
of devices where somebody above they can
visit they can pay a quarter or a dollar
or whatever and they can choose whether
they wanted to
like Advil or acetaminophen and they
just sort of pushed put in the money
push the liver the lever and the the
pill gets delivered down to the person
down here and this is also you've
probably seen this like loads of vaulted
sidewalks all over it particularly in
this neighborhood you guys know what a
vaulted sidewalk is it's like where
underneath the sidewalk you there's
actually like a little basement area and
a lot of sweatshops used to have things
like that a lot of times they have
little weird glass pebbles there that
allow interesting kinds of light to go
in so we could actually use some of
those vaulted sidewalks for dwelling
like this this actually isn't a vaulted
sidewalk one because it wouldn't be so
far underneath this is just sort of an
arch one here they usually wouldn't have
this much distance there another thing
that we were thinking of was the
instigation of tear droplets right how
can we use that teardrop lit water
instantly somebody this was a Parsons of
the exhibition there last year but
somebody told me that apparently Emperor
Nero of Rome used egg whenever he used
to cry I used to save his tears in some
kind of golden vial or vessel or
something like that and I didn't know
that but then that's actually very
related to this idea so there could be a
sentimental photo delivery Delivery Unit
as anybody been out to the suburbs are
from the suburbs where you have those
drive-thru banks and you go in and you
put in the check and go steal another
person gets it and then now there's so
much online banking but this is a memory
that I have a lot of that I think people
still do it people have stayed do
everything in cars but so here's one on
Richardson Street in Brooklyn where you
can drive by you can put in this this
photo that's of sentimental value to the
dweller and then the photo goes down to
the dwelling unit and maybe it could be
a photo of a former lover who's now
marrying someone else right that's not
gonna be a nice thing to see right and
that's the net that's obviously going to
oh here's a you kind of to turn your
head this way but this is a section of
it here's the dweller right here dressed
in a saree for some reason
and then basically the the photo comes
down in this unit like this and then
that's gonna then instigate the tears
okay and that also with the alcohol / I
mean if you've been drinking that
moonshine and looking at these photos
and you imagine that could be like a
quite of quite a volume of tears that
might get produced and so the tears come
down through here into this reservoir
and through capillary action they get
delivered up and they can be used for
other programs like for example a fire
hydrant and this is obviously collecting
loads of Tears from different dwellings
and then this is like maybe the fire
hydrant could have decorative thing on
the outside obviously still be
functional
tears can be used for other things
though do you know that if you I don't
know if you guys are familiar with this
but a different tradition that's more
it's a more common if you have a knot in
your shoelace you can if you pour water
on it the knot will come out it will
loosen and this is something that
actually gets used in a lot of this uh
it's not a metaphor it's like an
allegory almost but it's something that
gets used a lot in in poetry in South
Asia and the Middle East this idea of
water and it untying a knot and so
there's quite a famous a poem that
actually I translated here it's like
kind of a loose translation but it kind
of goes along with this drawing and a
lot of the drawings have little Biggie's
or poems or bollywood songs or other
things that kind of go along with them
in this case before I read it to you
I'll tell you what this program actually
is here's the tear water it's stored
right here and then let's just say
you're walking down Leonard Street in
Brooklyn and you realize you have you
know I'm not in your shoelace and you
don't want to bend down and take it
right maybe you're walking over one of
these dwellings and then this thing
appears and you can just sort of pay a
little bit of money and then put your
shoe on this lever right here which that
will then release the tear water and
untied knot in your shoe for all my
weeping scold me not each volunteer
isn't for not together they'll untie the
knot
the chokes the hearts blood and meat or
otherwise perhaps I'll meet someone to
me who'll mercy meat so why should I
these droplets hoard as they advance in
their wet horde so easily they can be
horde and that's you know basically the
idea that these tears are being used to
untie this knot and they're actually
having a financial value for the people
above this is like a little exuberant
this is the idea that maybe the tear
water could be used in this generator
that creates coriander chutney still in
development but basically up here here's
all the ingredients that you would pour
it out and then the tear water is coming
right through here and it's you know
hydraulically powered it gets these
gears moving and then the grinders thing
goes up and down and it grinds it and
then it well how wonderful that would be
right that you know you're you're eating
coriander chutney that's actually been
created through tears of somebody's
separation or grief or something like
that I mean maybe somebody could really
get a kick out of that we're thinking
about all sorts of fluids obviously not
just tear water and so here's another
prototype that we've been developing for
other effluence
that could then be sold at at ground
level for people who want to buy those
types of fluids this is an at a site on
Richardson Street and Reaper in Brooklyn
and along those lines we had this idea
that there could be you know dislike not
just for the effluent but there could be
this huge like if like the dweller
decides to masturbate there could be
this huge device like this up-and-down
device like this right this for this
one's only for men and so the person
sits there and there's the up and down
but that up and down motion it's
connected to this other thing right here
that actually can
used right to light somebody's cigarette
and there's a Hindi film song exactly
like this there's a hint it's all if you
look if you if you watch any Bollywood
movies or Hindi films it's ludicrous how
sort of lewd the lyrics are and so this
one says I can loosely translated it
from the Hindi but it says inside of me
there burns a fire flames like this are
hard to get if it's light that you
desire lean in a light your cigarette
the entire song is about like how I'm
gonna light your this woman and sort of
very sort of savea's clothings like I'm
gonna light your cigarette and it's so
obvious which is talking about but like
this is the kind of based off of that
idea that like that up and down motion
actually can be used to light a
cigarette there's the actual the up and
down device this one is thinking of a
different kind of idea it's this idea
and I'm just gonna read you the the
translation that I wrote of the poem
that this is from but it's about a piece
of the beloved's hair which I think in
all languages or at all all types of
poetry is something that causes people
sort of a lot of anxiety good or bad but
it's here it's a sanity peace and sleep
filled nights are where a strand of your
hair alights so give a hair and show you
care for those who fought 1000 fights
alone against demons dark and strong
they've clawed their way towards the
dawn and penned in those dim morning
lights a broken heart it's Bill of
Rights and the idea here is that
somebody can come and they can sit at
this on this hair givers chair and
there's even a spot for your i-pad right
here right and while they're sort of
maybe just on their iPad checking the
email there's a vacuum that collects the
hair and brings it down to the dweller
who's sleeping there and then that that
strand of hair appears on this honest
dwellers are
how are you gonna get into this there
has to be some ceremony right it's not
like you can just dump yourself into
this dwelling it's got to be good right
it's got to be good and we're thinking
these are people who are permanently
alone so maybe they're sort of entering
this this dwelling would be almost like
the kind of wedding day and it starts
here at this pickup spot for the dweller
we'll know it from the sign right next
to the no parking sign you'll come for
me one day soon we'll fly away to a
sunlit moon my prince his carriage and
his horse
any minute now of course and then it
appears like this thing that arrives and
picks you up to take you to this
dwelling that you're gonna live in for
the rest of your life and this thing
obviously it unpacks and unwinds and it
sort of starts in this place so you have
to go actually from right to left this
is how you get picked up and then it
kind of becomes the staircase this
really beautiful ceremonial kind of
processional staircase that leads you
down into this dwelling and here just
like obviously like an Indian wedding
here is like a little group of people
who are attending not your wedding but
they're actually saying goodbye to you
right in so many weddings there's like
there's the happiness but there's this
sadness because in a way particularly
from the bride's family I think it's the
idea that this person is leaving the
house forever this person is properly
leaving forever they're going down into
this dwelling and so there's kind of a
celebration but it's bittersweet I'm
here some details of that thing that
could be sort of temporarily put there
for this ceremony in here sort of the
stairs that lead down and you could have
whatever design you want it on this
right you could hire in an artist to
create some sort of interesting design
for each dwelling could be its own thing
and just ending it with this I know that
we have an English this expression if a
tree falls in the woods and nobody is
there to hear it does it make an a sound
have you heard that and people sort of
sit there and scratch their heads for
ages on about like war with achieve
that's like such a conundrum and let's
figure out so I think that there's that
there's one or the poem that's kind of
figured it out and so I've loosely
translated
here and it's the empty Gardens desolate
bird who says her agony goes unheard
behind his coloured veil obscured the
silent Rose hears every word don't ask
them please about the trees that if in
falling make a sound for each and every
sigh of grief beneath your feet
lives on interred and so the idea is
that like you know course if somebody's
crying in the middle of the woods does
anyone hear it of course because the the
tulip is there the rose is there and
behind their petals behind that veil all
of those tulips and all of those roses
are storing thousands of years of cries
and agony it's all there behind that
veil of the rose and so we've come up
then with this little thing based on
that which the dweller basically has
this really nice little kind of rose
shaped or tulip shaped helmet that they
wear and in it if you go to McCarren
Park in the wintertime where we've set
up this booth and you're feeling really
down and you're feeling really low and
you feel like God nobody cares about me
or my problems you can go and just speak
into this microphone right here right
obviously after paying a small fee
because these things have to be
supported you can speak into this
microphone and all of your grief and all
of your cries they will be heard by this
whole world of people of single people
living underneath the ground below all
of us so it's not the tree the falling
tree all that rubbish doesn't make a
sound it doesn't not make a sound of
course it makes a sound there's a whole
community of people ready to listen to
this grief I wanted to talk to you now
change tracks a little but this is
another crossing this is my crossing
from New York City to the great wild
west frontier of Buffalo New York where
I'm doing a one-year teaching fellowship
and this is a bit experimental and the
first time I'm showing any of this work
but needless to say I'm really
interested in drawing and I'm just going
to let's just see right here if we can I
am we're hooked up to the internet still
oh how lucky okay so here's the course
that I'm teaching there and it's called
my own
at Buffalo and the students are meant to
basically pick a site in Buffalo some of
them are architecture students some of
them are environmental design there's I
think a set designer so it's like a
mixed bag of kids and they pick a site
in Buffalo and then they just basically
expound upon that site by being inspired
by some precedents that we discuss and
so we have a cast of characters that
really here's some of their sites that
they've picked like one kid Ryan he's
picked the the electricity tower and
Buffalo another person picked the
Amherst theatre which is like an old Art
Deco theater there one person picked
Crosby Hall although he's dropped the
class since then so I should remove that
I know he hasn't dropped the class he's
resigned we use fancy words there but
about cool about dropping classes and
another person has picked a former
Children's Hospital that's about to
become I think a new condo development
and so here's our cast of characters
that we look at we look at all these all
these people and we try and be inspired
by them and sort of use the way that
they represent things to kind of think
about how we can represent our own sites
in Buffalo
by the way Ola Lika and I think he's
gonna be here next week or he already
was he already was he's like he's a
friend of mine a lot of these people are
people I know obviously I don't know
giovanni battista pierre and AC or WB
Dubois but some of them I do know and
that's why I've included them as well as
sort of a mixed it's a mixed bag of
people um but we're sort of look at
these people the way that they talk
about sight the way that they actually
I'll just show you one right here the
way that they talk about sight the way
that they talk about place and kind of
think about like you know how can we
talk about our site that way how can we
talk about a place the way John Denver
talks about West Virginia or about the
way or than the same way that Lauryn
Hill talks about Newark I'm so that's
kind of like what the what the class is
about and I'll just show you some of the
student work here
so one of the students is finita and
she's actually picked a temple the
tether she's breaking the rules because
this temple is not in Buffalo it's in
Rochester but it's important to her
because it as her father who I think
she's estranged from a little bit is
involved in the design of the temple and
so we were looking at Piron AC and so
she kind of created this view of the
temple all of these kids are actually a
lot of them aren't studying
architectures they're doing things by
hand but like in a really fascinating
way there's also Kevin he cooked a
really interesting site Kevin picked
this site that is they didn't send me
their photos so I just found
approximations of what they look like
online so Kevin his site is actually his
commute from North Buffalo or along the
Millers Ford expressway to the
architecture school and so when he
looked at Piranesi
he was thinking about this sort of these
these weird expressways and he made this
photo collage of like these bridges and
overpasses that sort of the experiences
on that commune s anybody familiar with
John Shakalaka look really cool crazy
encyclopedias draftsperson from 1700s
France and so he makes these like
mirrored itineraries encyclopedias and
so Kevin again he made this destroying
of kind of look who asked drawing of all
of the different parts that make up the
Starbucks that he goes to every morning
Charles is another student and his site
is really interesting it's an old
daylight factory which there's so many
of which Reyner Banham wrote about when
he was in Buffalo there's so many
daylight factories that are now being
converted into other things and so he
took each column type in that Factory
and kind of made like a little sort of
an itemization of that you must be
familiar with michael webb he's sort of
a character that's very much involved in
this school but he's not an alaska
michael spiderweb was my teacher in 1998
a long time ago and so he his was one of
his sort of seminal works Temple island
is something that we kind of read
through and we were inspired by that and
Charles took the daylight factory and
tried to imagine it through the lens of
temple Island one of the students Madera
she decided to make the site her car and
so this Dodge Intrepid that she sort of
has been in her family since I think she
was born she and now that she keeps with
her in Buffalo she's been thinking about
that and so when she was talking about
or you know sort of responding to temple
Island
you know temple Island is a book about
sort of as anybody who's read temple
Island or a little bit familiar with a
temperature it's an old library it's
also on my website and I'm probably
breaking multiple copyright violations
by having it there but Michael Webb is
actually talking about this island
called temple island but he describes it
as somebody who's in this submarine
speeding past it and so all the drawings
are like him kind of what does this
thing look like when you're speeding
past it and adhara responds by saying
well actually what if what does
something look like when you're speeding
not past it but into it and so she
imagined her Dodge Intrepid and all of
the experiences that she's had because
she because of that car because she sped
into all of these things all these these
new people that she met people in her
life so that was sort of an interesting
take on that again Kevin is looking at
his commute in relation to temple Island
in terms of views and what it feels like
to be driving something you know every
single day same way but like you know
whether the views are different or
whether they change this is another
and then there's one student Caitlin
she's a set designer and for her site
she picked her own desk
in her apartment and it was a desk that
her grandfather made for her and so
she's developing this really weird like
catalogue about this desk that's
inspired by all these different
architectural thinkers and so
architectural drafts people so here is
her desk sort of inspired by Jean
Jacques Lecoq and all the little things
that are on it sort of an encyclopedia
of that
here's her desk sort of she's trying
she's not an architect or a draftsperson
she's trying really hard about with
pencil to sort of recreate this kind of
work but here's the desk or a view of
the desk of a perspective looking up at
it maybe the way piranesi might draw it
if he was underneath her desk and he was
drawing the car Sarah prisons that way
and here's sort of a view of her desk
inspired by michael webb right pretty
good for an architect I think to kind of
create all this stuff and this is her
desk speeding through I think the
Buffalo library or another building um
so this is the last project that I
wanted to talk to you about and this is
a project that's crossing here is
crossing from heaven to earth and it's
something I've talked about before at
the Parsons lecture last year and it's
an ongoing thing I was so I was in the
Starbucks today and there's people who
just start talking to you and I mean
maybe for whatever reason out of
politeness or out of loneliness and this
one woman like she just started this
conversation with me she's like look at
this hilarious thing that I have on this
like Instagram group that I'm in and I'm
like oh like you know like I sort of
like I'm a little busy but it's it but
I'm glad she did it because that's how I
discovered this sort of funny image
that's related related to this project
and so one of our clients
it's okay one of our clients is named
gay but they're anonymous clients and
actually the project is an intake
facility for an anonymous client and one
of our our clients is named Gabriel and
this is a note from the head come don't
sit around and masturbate today is your
day to migrate angels come don't
hesitate to change your fate don't wait
till it's too late angels come you can
live forever and never ever even live
angels so come because if you don't it's
you yourself you'll never ever live to
forgive angels come you see the Knights
fight for the light of day that's the
fight of the Angels so come let's make
tonight the night we make right the
plight of the Angels come let God alone
in heaven yearn for the angels come let
heav'n lifeless and frozen burn for the
angels why is that there I don't know ok
so this is the the RFP it's an intake
facility for an anonymous client it's a
client that's in transit between heaven
and earth and it's located on Governors
Island at least that's the proposed site
anybody been to Governors Island what
would we have its a precedent for this
project is Ellis Island in New York it's
something that we've been looking at
closely and it's also something you can
see right from Governors Island and so
I'm just gonna take you very quickly
through some of the research that we've
been doing for this project I'm not
gonna take you through the entire thing
and we're still obviously it's still in
development working with different
agencies but here is obviously some
celestia metric considerations for this
client right we have to come up with a
new graphic language to deal with there
they have serious corporeal
considerations they have links right
like it's something we have to think
about their wing dip and their depth and
all of that so these are three of the
different clients they also apparently
land and take off right so how do you
design for this type of client right
that lands and takes off this is not
just like no fur this is a new kind of
different
that we have to deal with right now
simple things like furniture have to be
completely redesigned I said something
to think about these are to science
Michael and Raphael but there's also
we're looking at drawing in a more sort
of existential way right like how do we
draw for transmigration how do we draw
for a change in between states right we
architects it's our responsibility to to
delineate unseen worlds to show things
to people that don't exist but how do we
draw things that maybe people have never
even imagined and that's something that
we're kind of looking into in the office
and we're doing that using architectural
drawing and different types of
projection or perspective and combining
those recombining those and seeing if we
can get a different result so we all
know what this view is this is an
axonometric drawing right and it's the
one that goes 45 45 right it's the one
that's also called oblique this is the
isometric one that Rhino makes for you
quite easily now it didn't when I was a
kid that's a new thing right and now you
get in school I'm noticing this
happening all the time Rhino makes these
drawings for people and then we're
seeing kids put right here they're
putting like a scale or a scale bar this
is like a separate thing I'm veering off
axonometric drawings don't have scale
they only have scale along three axis
right here right so everybody get that
so this is just something that like I
had said with my students in Buffalo I'm
getting this all the time like
axonometric drawings with a little scale
there it's a there is no scale and if
you work in an office and you submit
this drawing you would put NTS at the
bottom what is NTS not to scale alright
axonometric drawings alright or they'll
put sketch at the bottom because these
drawings axonal metric ok now I'm
turning it to a crazy person right let's
go about axon o means axis and metric
means measurable axonometric needs only
measurable along specific axis in this
case it's this one so that line you can
measure I'll stop now okay and then this
is another one this is the diametric
drawing if you don't really use but
occasionally it comes up so what if we
combine these right if we're thinking of
a new way to represent something maybe
we can use tools we already have but in
a completely different way
everyone loves a gift so this is sort of
thinking about this new type of space in
a different way here is like a window
panel using different types of
projection or yet to kind of imagine
that and here's a banquette again
combining these different types of
drawing to imagine a new or a third
thing here's just some signage that
we've sort of imagined signage and and
mechanical that we've imagined and how
that could be combined and trying to
really picture what is it going to be
like inside this facility but how do we
imagine this world and so here's just
some of that drawing actually being used
one of the arrivals concourses fits
really neatly on top of castle William
and here's just sort of a slice so if we
if we look at this floor right here
right here's what that might look like
but sort of it's a it's a by axonometric
drawing or and combining two different
types of projection then if we if we
sort of zoom into this little gate right
here this is what that might look like
but projected with sort of two different
types of axonometric s-- and if we zoom
in even more to the door it might kind
of look like this we're looking also at
existing conditions right we know that
these clients have no free will what
does that actually mean though what does
it mean
what is the specialization of something
that has like no freewill and so in
order to deal with that we're looking at
an important case study which is the
Prophet Muhammad's very famous nice
journey which happened in the seventh
century 631 plus or minus and this is
when the Prophet Muhammad makes this
journey from Medina in the Arabian
hence Allah to Jerusalem or sorry
Voyager Islam straight up to heaven all
in one night and there's been a lot
that's been written about this and and
sort of we see it turning up in in
visual culture over the past thousand
years or more and the reason we're
studying this is because our clients
play a massive role in this they're all
over it right and so we can't escape the
fact that our clients are involved in
this why don't we study this journey and
then figure out what the existing
conditions of these clients is and so
here's the first drawing from the
existing conditions report the source
here is psy albahari
and this is showing the Prophet Mohammed
who always carries a green attache
Jasper you know for your reference and
he's sort of rising from the Dome of the
rock in Jerusalem and he's rising up to
heaven and on his way up to heaven he's
offered a glass of either milk or wine
and he takes the milk later he is told
that it's a good thing he took the milk
because had he taken the wine his entire
nation would have gone astray what he's
not told is that beverage service at
this altitude is actually probably
pretty difficult and precarious and look
who's providing it our clients right
later on level one of heaven we see sort
of and there's so much this I was just
listening to a song yesterday in my car
in Farsi and it'll do about this this
journey and how heaven is alight they're
so excited that the Prophet Mohammed is
coming to visit and so they're cleaning
everything in a hoovering and sweeping
and level one we see Adam and Eve not
helping at all right up in the corner
doing their own thing and in fact it's
our clients who are sitting here having
to clean everything on their own right
and this the story continues later on in
heaven we see that and this is again
from sahih al-bukhari volume 4 where we
know that the Prophet Muhammad meets
with John the Baptist and Sutton some
people tell us also in different sources
tell us that he also met with Virgin
Mary it was shown
and she's actually consulting one of the
clients who apparently now has become
like just a fluffy sofa for the Prophet
Mohammad's to sit on while he drinks
this holy water infused tea that's being
collected by another client over here
later we see John the Baptist the
Prophet Muhammad and the Prophet Jesus
all brewing it out in a hot tub right
again again a situation that's sort of
created by our clients who are
completely uncompensated this is the
last drawing from this set here at the
very last last the highest level of
heaven right before you get to meet God
right the most important person up there
the prophet Moses was seen right here
he's telling he's telling the Prophet
Muhammad you just have to go through
that gate and beyond that beyond beyond
this massive tree right the Sidra tell
muntaha
the tree of the greatest extremity the
biggest tree in the world if you just
sort of get beyond that tree you'll go
and see God and so Muhammad goes behind
the tree and he goes and meets God and
then he comes back and he tells Moses
God told me that we have to we have to
pray 50 times a day and Moses is like
whoa like that's it's way too much you
need to go back and so there you see our
clients right here they're moving this
this is a heavy tree right so the
clients are moving the tree and so
Mohammed goes in again and then comes
back and he says God said that we have
to pray 20 times a day and Moses is like
be kidding me there's no time for that's
gonna be like almost once an hour like
you need to go back again the clients
move this tree and he keeps coming and
going and coming and going and finally
he comes back and tells prophet Moses
God said that we have to pray five times
a day and Moses is like okay fine like
that's like that's reasonable and so we
know that that's the story but nobody
tells us about the story of these
clients who they're all numbered as you
can see
their wings have to keep on moving this
thing this tree back and forth back and
forth we also know from a different text
that God is given a certain number I
think a hundred number a hundred fresh
fresh clients every day that that are
sort of at a service so it's not it's
not a very good situation and so like
good architects but we are we filed an
existing conditions report to detail
this situation and here is the existing
conditions report as you'll discover in
your careers existing conditions reports
always run the heavens are thick tonight
dense with discontent despair fills an
air colored with lament the heavens are
thick tonight anger beyond belief the
crop the clouds cry aloud a thunder
crash of grief among the Angels rancor
for happiness denied for wanton
prohibitions for dreams ossified for
fantasies deferred deleted aspirations
love foolishly exchanged for worthless
masturbation's they're done with
servitude a life degenerate they've had
all they can take of God and his
 see them gathered there at
heaven's door challenging a circumstance
that they've come to a poor the edge of
paradise is where we see them wait the
heavens are sick tonight the angels are
at the gate I left a little bit of time
for sex at the end
so we know that these clients alongside
not having any free will they don't are
they aren't able to experience sexual
desire and this is one of the main
reasons why they're heading to Governors
Island they're heading to earth and so
what we're what we've created or working
on with a number of public and private
agencies is this this sort of genitalia
attachment facility and how this will
work is the clients will just enter it
laterally like this and then the
genitalia will be sealed onto their
bodies and that obviously is gonna
release a lot of heat it's kind of like
an oven and that's why we have these
really really nice pools here they're
actually for cooling and we've also
created little pods for these clients to
actually test their sexuality once they
get out of that attachment compound and
so here we see two clients potentially
testing out their that their newfound
desire for the first time here's another
one obviously these are all gonna have
to leave the spoke because different
clients have different wing types and
move in different ways you can also see
that there's no perfect world right
heaven wasn't perfect and Earth isn't
perfect either right there's no perfect
world that dawn is always spotted and
cracked and it looks like a really
beautiful thing from far away but as you
get closer it's actually full of
imperfections and there's no perfection
here on earth either here's another one
and here's some of the the pods right
they're laid out on governors I have the
next two for J in the mote Governors
Island is so beautiful in the fall
actually it's like it's it's really nice
to go there at this time we recognize
that there's massive opportunities for
marketing and advertisement here and
third-party sponsors that could that
could help pay for this facility and if
these clients are experiencing this
sexual
for the first time than why not create
advertising that maybe that may be my
cater to that and so while this is still
in development and this is I guess what
I'm just gonna end with this but while
this is still in development
we know that desire can't be evaded it's
impossible to abate sort of somebody's
desire for free will and so while we're
still at schematic or conceptual design
like the clients have actually said
it we're coming and they've made their
sort of way
close to Governors Island and we all
know you're probably familiar with this
but on top of the Williamsburg Bridge
there's a crossing point between heaven
and earth
and that's actually the place where
these clients have sort of their
amassing themselves and waiting a
caravan of clients right we're coming
and so what we're doing right now to
sort of mitigate that situation is we've
created kind of a holding area for these
clients where they can wait until these
sort of figure out how we're gonna
handle it and while the politics kind of
plays out right well this politics sort
of plays out and while we try and figure
out how to sort of handle this situation
the clients continue to come and they
continue to come and what we've created
for them there is a call station right
and at this call station safe for now
they're safe from heaven we don't know
what their fate will be right but
they're safe they're safe for now they
can make one last phone call to God and
you can imagine if you are leaving your
lover and that one
you know after you're done sort of
ripping the leather seats in their car
and keying it right like maybe you would
write one last message to your lover
what would that sound like what would be
and that obviously would be very
personal and it would be very private
and these are private messages that
these clients are making to God um and
they're stored in a very secure server
above Governors Island however you
wouldn't believe what's happened um we
we have obtained a copy of the some of
these messages and in the name of
research I'm gonna read them out to you
because I think they play an important
role in our project and let's just see
if this this is also just sort of some
renderings that sort of we're working on
for the project and I'm gonna read out
these messages as I play this in the
background and see if this works so
these are the sort of final messages to
come okay so everything I gave to you
and I said Allah and love you made me a
slave to you and I said Allah Allah day
and night I flew the skies and I said
Allah Allah I waited on your tirstrup
lies and I said Allah enough I dreamed
of things I fantasized and I said Allah
Allah incessantly I said goodbyes and I
said I'm not alone I figured you're the
one for me and I said Allah Allah you
made me fear apostasy and I said unloved
I thought without you I can't cope and I
said Allah Allah I turned my face away
from hope and I said unloved you had bad
days I bore the brunt and I said Allah
Allah you made me feel a worthless
and I said Allah from me denied was
every plea and I said Allah Allah for
Moses though we split the sea and I said
Allah you free Joseph from slavery and I
said Allah Allah gave me saleha's misery
and I said Allah Allah you told me
you're the only one and I said Allah
Allah and then came Mary's bastard son
and I said
and you said Muhammad's my new fave
and I said Allah go find him in some
desert cave and I said Allah I thought I
meant nothing to you and I said Allah
Allah I thought it's what I have to do
and I said Allah Allah they asked me who
has wronged you
they asked me who has wronged you and I
said Allah Allah
I'm leaving him and they said Who and I
said Allah Allah and that's the
presentation
[Music]
[Applause]
right it's okay yes you know it's that's
I don't think I would have been able to
answer that question until maybe now
after or after the past few weeks when
I've been I'm teaching architecture for
the first time now at this Buffalo and
before that I was teaching at Hunter
College but that was not it wasn't like
an architecture program I was an Asian
American Studies program and so now
actually I'm teaching these sophomores
to the second year and we have a site
and Seneca blossom Buffalo and I just
have realized that these students know
nothing about the site and they haven't
gone there and they haven't studied it
and they kind of looked at it through
Google Maps and Google Images and things
like that and I kind of like want them
to cook like go to it and go look at it
I told them if I skip class yesterday
I'm like you have to go to this site you
have to lay down there got them in the
pool I mean it's like site that's like
right next to a toxic waste on but the
whole thing is amazing
so I told him like go to this society
and I want you to lay down in the grass
where you're where the pool is gonna be
so you can look up and look up at it I
think it's the point I'm trying to get
to is I just feel like that having that
site and having the love for it is it's
like so important and I think when I was
in what I did a residency on Governors
Island that's how I discovered it I'd
never been there before I never cared
and just walking around I was like I
can't I could never design that project
anywhere else except for on that site
and that's something like that I've
discovered more about myself after
working with students but I think that I
think that was what your question was
right so that why is it like I cannot
complete me often like yeah those photos
I showed you of kind of the airport like
I was so thrilled I kind of actually
perfect purposely picked a flight that
wasn't to LaGuardia so I think in
general for and take those pictures of
that jet when you're done actually
yesterday morning I mean if people were
like what is he why is somebody like
taking a video of this jet liner but for
me that is the sight was like so
important there are there questions or
comments I'm happy to answer that I like
I've never done a presentation like this
before and so it's been sort of like
this it's gonna take two hours just
gonna take 45 minutes and doing it it's
sort of like I realized there's things I
would change or like maybe things I
might do differently and if you have
comments about that it would be great to
hear that well
I have to probably think about it a
little bit more but it's just sort of
now just having adrenaline but just
having finished something so that you're
that high that you get when right after
your interview it was up until like
maybe last meet or a couple weeks ago
two weeks ago way before except the
title I was only gonna show the last
project because that was the lecture
that I gave Parsons for the architecture
leak prize and it was already and I
don't know that I'm showing that that's
a huge project that sort of has I got
hungry
50 drawings and I think it's a very sort
of compelling narrative and so I wonder
if it's a good idea to mix life back
with every single thing I mean this was
more of a traditional life or protective
of children such I'm going to show you
all my work it's a risk to only show one
project because new people might be like
she's only got one trick you know so I
wanted to credit as spread it out and so
it's something I have to think about how
that works and how it all had they all
work together before crossings was an
idea that I had for an application this
was but actually this was my application
but it's an experiment and like this
with you guys and you present your work
you have to experiment with it when I
was at I was like Columbia yesterday for
a big review and it was like that there
was so many different things that
students were doing one kid started with
a quote from Senator Jacob Javits sounds
like that's really boring but actually
kind of really interesting like there's
so many different ways that you can kind
of present your work that's sort of a
sort of experiment but other questions
yeah what so what would you describe as
like a process things to sort of clarify
yeah
yeah absolutely
there's so many things that like dislike
with all of you in your design work
there's probably like a story or
something that you need that sort of
describes how it might have started and
so I'll tell you you guys remember the
jetway project that I showed right and
there's that one drawing that it is on
its third - the rubber gear rubber
Donnie the the condoms that gets spun up
into here so I'll tell you how this fact
this project actually is born out of
that drawing and out of experience I was
with my aunt on that flight but in
Reverse in Pakistan and we were both my
aunts a professor and weiu and we were
both happened to be on that flight
together coming back and we were
boarding the flight and Lahore has this
beautiful like modern airport but for
some reason like at the security thing
like they were doing that a security
wand and like if they didn't have like a
proper thing to step on so there was
like this big red bucket then everyone
had to stand up in this like glorious
modern Airport right we're all like
standing on this red buckets you're
elevated above everyone else and then
they do the lawn to you and then you get
off in like and the men and the women
are kind of separated a little bit at
this point and so I get on and I'm like
wearing my blazer I remember they do the
wand shouldn't be telling me this
actually maybe I won't sign the media
release now they do the wine that end
and it keeps on going off the metal
thing is keeps on going off and it Sun
going off and if there's something right
here in my pocket
and so I took out the thing from my
inmate that sort of I open my pocket and
you know what emerges is that thing that
you can get when you go to it when you
go to bars that it's like a little
packet that has two condoms and move and
it's metallic
apparently there's metal in that and so
I'm standing on this this red bucket I
come the whole International Airport
like with my aunt and then this thing
kind of comes out of my pocket and I was
like I need to get on this flight very
quickly and subscription to it away but
that that moment was the inspiration for
that project and that drawing actually
the first one and that it's like that
with so many things that you designed is
the controls one thing and then it leads
to a hundred other things you don't even
remember anymore like what instigated it
it's like great that you guys have this
where it's like just students that like
plan out these lectures and it's just
students who attend them and it's just
students and I kind of walk away from
never had this set at G savvier was
everything was so formal and like we
didn't have a sort of a forum like this
yeah
it's just that moment like I gotta do
this I think it's like you you think
that you have to do it and then there's
like a spurt where you have all this
creativity like just like you guys won't
have like at a certain point where
you're in the middle of a project and
then it goes dead and then you return to
it so like with the sella Victorian
project that dwelling could be alone
like there was a period where like it
was like I made all the work and then I
let go and it was got stole so many
projects will do in your life will just
get stalled because like the character I
will go broke or somebody suing somebody
else or like I didn't like that the
developer goes to jail and so many
things and not stopping by and then the
we start and I think that that's how a
lot of them are it's like a bunch of
work that comes out and then it stops
and then new work that comes out later
yeah oh sorry
so also like when you're showing like
those students drawings
yes they were we did you evening the
profiles of the students yeah yeah it's
roughly based on that no no no no I did
like Google like boy with red hair or
like something like that because they
were supposed to send me their photos
and they are alive read like obviously
when somebody asked for that right away
you're like and I told him I'm like if
you don't send me your pictures it's
gonna be bad and one of them was
terrible I was a Kurt Bonita the one
who's with the ocean with this temple I
actually was like Asian woman cartoon
like this is like wrong that I'm even
doing this and I'm in the end of like if
she probably would prefer that to have a
girl pictures people are very slow but
no I didn't those are kind of yeah now
I'm going to because at Buffalo they
have an amazing they love making and I
think that this is I don't much I mean
not from this is the first time I've
been inside for bringing it you guys got
food security thing that's going on
there they primary the Columbia is
getting into the models everywhere when
I was there everything is so digital but
it's Buffalo lady that smart lab and
seeing seeing and everything and all of
the space to Buffalo a space like this
year you know I'm gonna make I think
gonna try and do some prototypes and
some of that stuff because the drawings
are all there it's like and in a way
it's like you can also make it because
the drawings are available in the
measurements of narrative so I encourage
you
do you have clients for these projects
or it's a start but I think an idea
both and sometimes sometimes it's bit
like I've started other times when
someone's come to me and then I've
continued something like I was doing a
residency fellowship with the drawing
Center and that's when life I consider
that almost like a client someone who I
work with to sort of show and create and
builder and exhibit the work that is
like it would be a bunch of
installations that mitigate that sort of
that condition of transition also they
want to join
oh yeah the project that they will like
any project right like any project it's
like the clients who don't you know you
can pay for the drawings right that's
the deliverable you get paid for 25 30
first you get paid for schematic
development 25 percent 50 percent 80 90
percent and then for completion so the
clients actually buying the drawings
from you when you graduate and then like
obviously it goes to the contractor and
the contractor than those composts I'm
not a licensed architect about a
licensed architect would have to stamp
those drawings then they become legal
documents as you all know which means
when somebody dies the loads of people
thinking suit what happens but yeah the
drawings are I think the project right
now in many models that would make this
year those become part of those yeah
inspiration
[Music]
gonna take a harder line yeah reminded
by the play-doh see their shadow and
then and then they think that shadow is
actually because the fire is behind that
I said Louise that breakup is like
somebody has brought that up and related
it to that project before and I always
forget with the allegory there's a fire
behind the person and they see their
shadow okay I look at it as a flip on
that whole concept where once you see
the world greatly if you see the world
you're more enlightened but in this case
I feel like what you're doing is you're
making
you know we're like the speed West
raishin actually becomes a kind of
something that liberates you actually I
like that what ignorant says : ignorance
is bliss but honey those were it's
interesting because that comment has
come up before what it's not something
that I should probably look into that
more I think for that I guess that
project was born out of a thing that I
was thinking of I just bury it started
very soon after I graduated from from
cheese Columbia G SEP and it was just
like now I've graduated it and like it's
like what is the next thing what happens
next and it's like you get married and
you have kids and then you die well what
is it go get married and if you don't
have kids that you just die and so and
that is why the project is actually like
the tactics weird when you look at your
own C Drive right and all the weird
titles that you give things like right
before your final MCU rendering - one
trying to push everything out like maybe
really quickly and so the title of that
folder is covered which means which
means great and that project is actually
designed very much like a grave in South
Asia and South Asian grapes right like
they don't we don't have fancy mahogany
coffins you take the body in a pine box
and then you take the shroud out and you
put it into the ground in an
architectural grade that's built on
brick so the graves are structurally
when you put the shroud in and you put a
massive concrete lid on top of it and
that actually going to a funeral in
Pakistan and seeing that it was actually
something that I
this project in this idea of like if
there is no marriage than is it just
staff you know but it could be that
could be an allegory for so many things
like well there's this church it's like
people doing that right so give you this
to create and you do PR can you do a
mark and you do this and you keep
ticking all these boxes and it's like
who are you taking them for right and
then also like what it what happens in
that space we're certainly gonna find
that and it's also about expectation I
think to what other people expect from
us it's interesting as well because that
story or this panic that I'm telling you
about these these South Asian graves
it's only it's kind of irrelevant but I
guess because I brought it up at a tower
at a sort of Muslim funerals at least
it's only men that go and then women
come a next day a lot of the time after
the body is already put into that and my
mother after I was I think showing her
this project she's in her 50s 60s and
she only recently discovered because of
me that actually the coffin doesn't go
into the ground she had never been to an
actual funeral before like that and in
America obviously the laws are different
you have you can't dump her out into the
ground here but because they don't have
this or the build up grades but it's
just a sort of interesting thing her
imaginary of what sort of dying was was
completely reinvented when I think I
showed her this project and she started
seeing she's like oh wow so really just
a sure out of there like that's like a
different thing yeah delivery cart of
non way I guess yeah was it made to look
like a tombstone because
the delivery thing that sort of unfolds
but into uh hi well that thing that's so
that's what I call it as well our
deployment unit that will lead you and
like it doesn't it doesn't stay there at
the site of dwelling so it can be reused
so it would make it looks like a
tombstone at that point and it here I it
has like that but it's actually like
that's human scale it's bigger than the
person and it's like an arch that person
walks through but I imagined it almost
look like a very decorative almost like
a carriage like thing like a horse and
care about eating a horse and carriage
anything but you're right it does have
like that arch like a arresting isla
there are your questions yeah possible
and consistent and the stock photos used
to be under
you're referencing you're making
cultural references that when you got to
the point of your students in Buffalo I
didn't know if it was ragging on and if
yes same when I have been on your
website previously and you go to who
works there by it like it's like an
infinite school people who I don't know
I think is really interesting well I
think and so thank you for that comment
and like I think it's weird like I so I
did a residency Governors Island right
and there's this thing you'll find this
too right after you graduate where it's
like you like it
he's talking about like on my website
there's a section with the team even
like Claire underwood for house of cards
there is this is this sort of like thing
about like having this team because it's
like no people hire you they're like
you're just one person right and like
why are we gonna hire is the one person
and so because of that and I was also
ripping off a lot of light like douchey
architect your websites or just like
they have the people there and they're
like old you know like the black and
white at the Northeast and and I was
like okay oh I'm gonna like make fun of
that and they went to Governors Island
they're like and they had my little sort
of cubicle there for the residency and
they had the desk and they were like
yeah and we have you know like we have
the desk we gave you had extra desk and
three extra chairs for your team and
that was like
it's like that it's like an hour because
I have to graduate from school like an
act like seven years at that are less
important and in fact I want people to
know that I'm actually creating this
work with very little health you know so
the goals have changed but an important
other thing that's I think very related
to your question is that architects are
purveyors of fantasy right like this
building was a fantasy right somebody
was like how did drawing with this
building like back the Death Star was a
fantasy to across the street right like
somebody that was someone's fantasy and
then they put it on paper and then some
developer was like okay they like but so
we are architects aren't purveyors of
fantasy that's what we do and it's like
that's why like I see people who like it
kind of like have these projects that
you know whatever the final intention is
and it's just like one drawing it's like
that's not enough right if you want to
be a proper architect a proper purveyor
of fantasy that has to be the under
drawings it can't just be like the one
then it's just like a punch line right
like but that's the thing it's like yes
we have to sort of we have to sell these
fantasies but we have to take them as
far as you can to their logical
conclusion otherwise no one's going to
believe I am I am also wondering who
your audiences if there's so many think
it's like a similar speed novel or a
Gabriel Garcia Marquez owl or so many of
these things where it's like you don't
have to understand every single thing to
be along beyond the flick sort of beyond
the trip like and I do want to avoid
things where it's like nobody gets
anything is and it's just me laughing
everyone else and that's not fun like
metaphor it might work just like some
some like inside joke we were having
like a peach of the second year meeting
with the teachers to see what we're
gonna do next semester and one of the
teacher that being suggested with me we
have like a riddle or something like
that and the students trying to figure
it out but then we were thinking maybe
that won't be that fun because we're the
only ones in on the joke so I want
different people to be in on it and like
in different ways and I think that
that's where architecture has to be and
yeah right like this you're gonna make
buildings like this actually eats this
is something you'll hear when you go to
work right and you're like at a design
project and then the architects that
will use this term 5% for photography
five percent ten percent for photography
and what they mean is like there's 10
percent of the building that you're only
creating submitting photographs and it
go into magazines and it's not for
anyone else right like there has to be
that percentage just for the
photographer that's gonna go the no one
will ever experience the use of the
building that like no one will you would
have to be like looking at it like this
to like actually enjoy that view but
it's like something that we do for to
our audience maybe it's kind of but it's
like something that we
boy that on hopefully the whole building
is the whole building is written for a
photography you're in trouble
[Music]
[Applause]
you
