I'm going to present here tonight a few
fairly recent products fairly recent
because as in architecture takes a long
time to be to be built as Lorena was
mentioning I really work at your tick
ulation of disciplines and Java from
from urban scale at very large scale
urban planning to landscape and then
design at very small scale and truthless
architecture and and and it's the
articulation precisely of this case and
also research and practice with a
continuous contamination of boats about
science writing also in curating
exhibition is also an important part of
the work that really motivates and has
motivated my practice also like that
references from elsewhere this is an
image of brain mapping you're not mapped
by Santiago Ramon Iike had that I always
show it was shown at the Istanbul art by
Enya where I did the project under the
direction of Carol increase topic area
and and and I think there's a link in
between this map and and also the urban
maps of networks and infrastructure
hidden networks that shaped the city and
territory is much more than we would
think and quite interested in this is
another image you might know of the
first x-ray by recurrent can wear also
you see the structures the bones that
you don't normally see so that's that's
this idea of that what really matters is
is what you don't see and that's that's
a sort of red thread trap
my work this is a image from the
artisans Anya Solomon with whom I've
been collaborating for the Istanbul our
biennial and it's the dark matter so
it's again what what may what makes up
most of the universe but but you don't
see we've been doing a project together
in Istanbul here you can see a little
bit of different scales and approaches
from you know from the smaller was a
pavilion for the Sao Paolo architecture
biennial and the bigger one and master
planning for for Geneva 240 actors I'm
starting with a with the recent project
that was like awarded cultural building
of the year in in 2018 in France it's
the result of a collaboration with us
with architects HHF and I was the the
leading architect for it so it's a
competition that we we won in 2011 so
you see that sort of reason for us it
takes a long time to get built for an
initial call was for a series of three
buildings a museum visitor center a
restaurant and then an observatory Rico
Point and the smaller series of
infrastructure Follies in a park or 130
nectars just outside Paris that you can
see the picture in black kids this
mother in between urban sprawl and in
nature and sort of artificial and based
environments that's why this project
goal is forest so far only two buildings
have been built but it's it goes as
quasi gether its
the wallpaper ellis tataki they knew
about my fascination for james for the
fact that penis just one competition we
want this this number this little
connection of Foley's and that's how it
goes this is a picture of me as it's
built even see the observatory so the
park was landscaped by Alastair French
landscape architects you can see here in
this series of pictures this is la de la
cerva my Lacombe you see a which is not
far it's in Percy and the roof this
image I'm showing is fairly important
because of the of this hole in the roof
is this window in the in the rooftop
that that phone museum was very
important like this idea that you frame
to to see landscape you need to frame it
so this this framing thing is also very
important you know my work it relates to
the history of cinema is related to
Peter Green Wave in the draughtsman
contract and it relates to the seeing
and the fact that you need a limit to to
see it's particularly important for for
landscape you need you need to think of
the views you're designing and this is
you know this is dreaming in another way
it's like it's very recurring
I don't know how to put it like less
loud it's a it's a famous scene in
blow-up it's filled by Michelangelo
Antonioni Michelangelo Antonioni is also
constant the constant reference for my
work and I had only been a filmmaker you
would have been an architect so circuit
actually is really important space is
really important in this is this famous
scene where David Hemmings is shooting
Verushka and more references of about
his feet come come later for a project
landscape project I didn't in another in
another part this is a very long
adulthood he told otherwise we would
stay here too late but I I should really
watch this and it's a very sexy scene
this was like going back to the project
so it was a series of Farley's that with
a public competition so like part
limited budget so I had on two kinds of
sets of constraints so one side to find
like a strong enough conceptual idea and
and and for me it was really about
framing the landscape it is this big
park again in between sprawl and and
domesticated nature and and almost wise
nature if they're almost feels like
Africa is very textured Park and then
the other the other constraint was also
prosaic more practical it was about
having a limited set of details and
constructive solutions to just not
explore the budget and finally not to be
built so we came up with this idea of
different is a family of different set
of frames of different sizes that would
be very different ambiance when combined
together with different angles but all
prefabricated and quite quite simple to
construct in here you can see some study
models of the secondary infrastructure
of Folies such as a theatre and an open
in an open-air place for meditation and
so forth so here again you have aerial
views and you can see how on one side
this side is is quite rough but it's
sort of middle-class and it becomes
rough there the other side is very
awkward so there's always been this
thicket of this kind of dual nature in
the side in certain nature of why the
nature beautiful berries over there and
that's also there at the time the curb
usability lhasa wa because of car
manufacturing so you have this to really
nature of city in nature sitting water
artificial and built but also social
it's a very it's a very affluent and
then there in the very deep right area
so the parking areas to do like a
liaison has to sort to connect these two
realities and and the buildings in the
park
so you can see the museum at all so
these this connecting function more
aerial views so you can see in those
images also the the nature that is very
textured it's very it's green and grays
and browns and it's so you will see how
I react to it inside the museum let's
the observatory and that's the museum
and so they all both structure they look
quite different but they all are
conceived out of the same frames
combined in a different way so we start
with this museum is called insects
Museum because it's a collection of
interests that are alive it's not like
an object it's also the headquarters of
the National Association French Nurses
Association that sort of cultivate sort
of breeds insects and then sheets them
all over and another another part in the
program was also to have like a space
for a temporary exhibition about
environment and contemporary art like
very very specific in focus and then as
you can see five main exciting main
about this but it's an item as you can
see here drawing that the beans
orientations this way here this way and
then those those elements are quite
simple like really quite straightforward
to be in backward lane where they like
interconnected they create a certain
complexity but starting with very simple
elements you know in the middle of its
an exhibition space the permanent
exhibition space and it's the temporary
space and then you have laboratories and
offices but it's a small structure it's
roughly it's a bit less than two
thousand square meters with the
technical and from outside it's it's
sixteen burr in polycarbonate with the
views that are quite limited and the
frame specific points in the landscape
but otherwise it's almost as a sort of
preschool set of toys that are like put
together and and so the aspect from
outside is quite introverted and also
tonight the building becomes a sort of
lantern and sort of emanates lights to
the park so you can see it does it does
image this year you see again the the
nature that is almost African to me so
it's almost it's really very different
from any other Park experience you would
have in in English and on the Luxembourg
or the tree where everything is
perfectly manicured the certain
roughness
here you see here like the way the
building becomes a nice sort of Lantern
and not so easy which you can you can
see the way the the openings are
distributed in the building so it looks
like a house in a way like but the scale
is slightly bigger is more like a naval
architecture so that's that's an image
before the exhibition was set so these
people are most a federal thing not very
but I was I was hearing I was feeling
really entertainment Sinagra we had a
contract for the exhibition design which
is something I also do a lot in my work
but there was you know trust that's a
public project so they're always changes
in the politics and sometimes projects
get stuck or sometimes you know sort of
different whims and desires that come
into place at one point we didn't have
control of what was going to happen
inside and sort of hardcore
entertainment project might have
happened so that's when I could so even
though we took the photos for the
project it became twice
and here it's like mostly of people in
the office and and my son tats are doing
stuff out here but that's the main
exhibition space it's that's again
that's a butterfly case again the plants
are also fake in this image but you can
see the space and you can see this big
this big opening towards the park where
they also wanted to put like silhouettes
of trees to explain their trees on the
other side and I had really been very
tough with it but you can see also in
those images that the space inside is
quite soothing it's quite wide it's
different shades of it's different
shades of white white on timber and when
we want the competition was very timber
and wood and ecological showcase and so
forth but then being outside several
times I thought I would I jack this this
point and sort of do something different
even to you like not really allowed you
should stick to up the competition entry
was but I thought that the nature is so
outside is so again green and brown and
gray and rough that we needed to kind of
counter some imbalancing a balancing
environment inside so it's like Andrew
eight years
Frandsen architecture critic for pinup
and several other magazines called it
like hi markets we screening for mental
disorders so the when he first seen so
the the place because there's this this
soothing this is shooting an environment
given by the by the wide and here you
can see also but the complexity of those
in all those frames when the two
different structures can come together
and that's that that's the space of
temporary not be space and then next we
do temporary exhibition and that
somebody was so I felt really like a lot
not to have a complete like plastic
colorful plastic and sonography inside
and then I was quite pleasing the end
because this is very again we're not
it's not a David to your neural layering
ago visions gallery it's like for every
kind of public it's quite mainstream if
you want to but I I really like food a
lot to have something in a way that
wouldn't be too entertainment or to you
know to play food not not in a good way
so that's that's the final sonography
and so we could do reshoot it after
words and then you forget to the
observatory an important reference is
for me when when I started architecture
first I didn't want to start
architecture I want to be in fashion and
then this Italian fashion design
a few of you might have heard of food
it's colorful like a prince in the 60s
he was a friend of my grandfather I was
with him in Switzerland during Second
World War and he met me in his eighties
still very glamorous and still very
attractive and he sort of managed to
convince me to be an architect in the
land still frustrated today hi since it
was a very important and I will be an
actress and but another when I started
being an architect I started a lot with
landscape inspired by the British
landscape gardens from Delhi and castle
to Russia and stove and stir it and the
work of William Kent and John capability
Brown and so for Alexander probe and so
forth although those references were
really very important and I was
fascinated studied Asian gardens and
theory of gardens in Asia it's the
savior impermanence this idea of like
ever changing was very much on my mind
very very very important as opposed to
the stability and the firmness of
architecture which is not entirely true
because even buildings age of life but
in a way garments
laughter stood there alive and with
elements and atmospheres but much more
seasoned so that's love that's what was
attractive to me
and then also those parts in particular
this is a viewer Russian and I'm part of
because of this idea of framing again
because you know in all those parts you
have either follies or little buildings
such as creation temples or gothic
temples or whatever the goddess or
whatever or in this case is just a
statue that sort of indicates the axis
of views where you should look at and so
that that was like a major reference for
the observatory
of which you see here some constructive
details we were very good engineers in
Paris and then books in in Basel to
achieve a sort of lightness is in the
exhibition in the competition design
again it's this same frame that is the
frame it's like at the simplified shape
of a of a house overlapped in a sort of
sense uncanny sense of like instability
you see it's almost as if the the
Neitzel of house was going to to fall
but of course it doesn't this
Observatory was specified as work of art
and architecture to to really skip all
the health and safety regulations and it
really doesn't have any other function
but like being a new Cup point and
framing used do in a dual way again
because when you're on the top you can
see different different sides you'd see
the Sun these are the structural studies
you can see different different aspects
of the park but also when you're in the
park or even in the city you you have it
like this this presence appears almost
as a strange insects itself so and in
the different views you can see the
different angles offer different
perspective on these objects what I like
very much
Oh neat is then it doesn't really ever a
function read it's a lookout points that
there's nothing to I mean of course you
can meditate but there's no prescribed
function it's not there
or anything like that you know it's a
reference also to the Parque de la
Villette with Albert bernard tschumi is
for lease also in the ambition of this
park that is part of the greater Paris
got that he projects what I like about
it is particularly is the sensation when
you're up there a vertical of almost
falling like this decent unstable
balance so again these these ideal
instability that for me it's very
fascinating this is again it's tough
fajr during the stuff are shooting sort
of his own failure visitors with my son
that sort there i will rent rather so he
had to do very tough negotiations from
virginia was in virginia the time of the
uh when the struggles were made and I
had to really negotiate really hard for
him to skip school this is on the day of
on a summer day or they are the opening
so you see how it works as a lookout
point we go back to winter again and you
see the presence it gets almost drowned
in vegetation the notes it's quite
important from from the city and and
this part has become a sort of design
destination at the scale of metropolitan
Paris now
this one is a in order project it's like
could it blow up like the Antonioni's
filled with
seen before it's a it's the park for a
museum modern contemporary and outsider
art in northern France it's a museum
that was built almost thirty years ago
by Roland Simone a we did also the
Picasso Museum in Paris and then and the
time when I want the Commission for the
park which is a sculpture park also an
extension was being built by a French
architect Manuel go talk to two hosts
quite important donation of outsider art
so it's a condition a bit like the Mike
foundation or the Louisiana in
Copenhagen it's out of the city and it's
in it's in between countries in between
France and Belgium it's in France but
it's very close to bad German and
it's a good museum with a program ish so
this is another scene in Marion Park in
East London where David Hemmings is
shooting the two lovers and then by
blowing up his image he finds like some
elements of America so that's what about
him and these two lovers remind me of a
sculpture that is in the park as well
and the fact that the you can see this
is a plan this is water a little River
and that kind of axis there was created
by the donor so this this museum was
done with the donation of an important
industrialist family of northern France
and the guy Monsieur Ellen was very very
involved in the construction so there
was this idea that there should be this
line that we prolonged and also this set
of trees and then the sculpture outside
are like they you know the the visitors
come from inside and out and the views
are also constantly recording from a
place to to the other it's outside it's
almost like an open-air gallery part of
the scope that they had was to
reposition the discoveries and then I
really found the topography like making
it slightly geometrical as you can see
this model that prolonged days is this
this path that was there right at the
beginning edited trees we planted trees
open up
and then open up also did some parties
but mostly connecting the part to other
parts that are and then did a more
metropolitan scale and so this is
another scene I'm not showing it so
completely but it's it's salsa and
Antonia needs professional reporter I
can't remember the it's a film of 75
with Jack Nicholson and Maria Schneider
the same that did last time in Paris and
it's and this is a very famous scene in
cinema because it was done with the
Steadicam at the time or like
technologies well not just today and you
have this camera that goes from inside
the room to outside in this Spanish
squaring each other
it's hotter Spain and then inside again
the main scene is Nicholson that is that
is is dying here is being murdered here
and but you don't really see the scene
until one is dead this thing is like
he's a man on the who's trying to escape
and very fascinated with the story as
well he is a journalist in a reporter in
Africa and he wants to change his life
he wants to change identity and have a
fresh start because his wife as a fair
single
his board with his job is born with
everything and she wants to change any
meet somebody in Africa where is
reporting and then this this many means
is is murdered and it takes it doesn't
know why but it takes the seeds and
opportunities to take the passport of
this person and and and there is Ida and
this new identity and then he starts
also working as a sort of weapon
smugglers or something is like reading
an adventurer and then the man who were
after this guy already kids go after him
and then he dies so it's about you know
Antonioni's like the master also
existentially if i didn't but it's this
really no escape from where you are but
I'm not showing this this is like really
I'm I'm going in different directions
but this scene is important for me for
two things two to two aspects again once
again that what you don't see is what is
really important is he doughnuts or nuts
he didn't over lose it but it's not
iconic it's not immediately shown and
then did the second aspect is this this
framing and and the way the camera goes
back and forth which is important in
this project in the way you go back and
forth in museum and you
Buddha sculptures of course these are
like elements that you could see in the
space or or not not so directly this is
like an entry space about your
everything is strictly green and working
on the tech text it is not image with
the Picasso sculptures so it's all about
the word trees already so I got rid of
trees which was very complicated because
it's something you're not supposed to do
but it's important to edit landscape
also when the students much elements and
sometimes it's there's a disturbance and
then again it's all sheets of rain
different textures the trees that were
added were added for the qualities when
you know the leaves made with the wind
it's very subtle you can barely see the
spin and architecture intervention the
lightly sometimes is sometimes very
intense but that's for regulation and
again health and safety issues otherwise
there was this decision not to put life
directly on the sculptures so they're
like kind of ghost-like this is the big
new building goes wrong they were
insisted with her to have the light
coming out of the building like it was
seeing
and here's a little Finn you can see
this kind of atmosphere here that's ago
there and then there's a program nation
that is continuous in in in the park
with new sculptures coming the museum
director she's a she's a very good a
curator she was at some some I'm
frustrated with so much greenness and
kind of rigor because I very much having
a like landscape for the reasons I
mentioned before for that kind of legacy
but I don't like a certain you know easy
narratives so too much floral presence
I'm very floral Gardens and wonderful on
the workers regime is wonderful that's
not what I do for me really planted like
concrete or cashmere it doesn't it
doesn't really matter it's that it's the
juxtaposition of materials that is
important to me so so again if you do an
interior or a landscape or even a
government maybe I think that would be
the same principles that I would follow
so I'm interested in this juxtaposition
of rough and smooth
and and the centrality of the material
so that that's what I tried to do here
and also kind of disappear because they
were around in the museum with
sculptural extension of the museum's
lots of presences but the museum curator
was done for sale and then she finally
commissioned to a Belgian artist and
work of art that involves didn't feel
there is now there that involves seeding
so it's a work of art she did exactly
the same thing I did with observatories
classify the work of art and in so here
you have like a line of color over there
which I find sort of fair enough and
very and very smart not too kind of
appropriate thing and I think it's also
quite beautiful but again the way I work
here it's like almost a disappear to be
very so it's it's a different world than
you'd see another work in Norway where
it's like it's the contrary or
disappearing it's being an iconic and
for me you you know it depends
everything depends on the situation
you're in so sometimes you want to
disappear and be very discreet and be
very understated and sometimes you need
more presence and more statement it's
it's it's not it's never the same kind
of approach
it's the approaches is is it depends
very largely on the
on the situation you know your
so that's the oldest project so far that
that we won when sunless Topanga was
done capital of Europe European Capital
of Culture it's a super today that's
already 10 years and I think that I had
a student here last year
ester that has grown up in the city some
as close to Stavanger which is the
second city in Norway it's very fast
growing but that didn't have much that
much that many symbols or many or in are
present so the work there was a
competition launched for for a shelter
for like a canopy an urban structure
that would be like a host multi-purpose
activities and then public friend all
around and then the brief code for the
use of wood in innovative way that's
right school region would like the
Murakami northern band The Beatles song
before before that and here again you
can see that which this kind of the same
frames that they were present in the in
a much later project and here the
inspiration was those where those fans
you can see some different times of the
day and the night those farms just
outside just outside the well every
every city in Norway and its its
elements where you keep store food so
that it's not eaten up by animals
like of course it not means like these
they were completely teen birth this is
a time now that we show it throughout 24
hours and of course it doesn't look
exactly like this but this is a
reinterpretation and move forward
looking reinterpretation and say of such
of such an element that is very familiar
so for for us and we did this with a
market actual practice attendee Oslo
followed the on-site construction is it
was important to really refer to the
existing element and I'm very embedded
in in the collective memory and then
sort of twisted beat and so to make it
like home forward-looking and it's very
simple it's a very sort of abstract
figure in even to its borderline because
sometimes it's too complex it's also
opposite to the former project in a
sense that here for something very small
for such a small project the number of
details and like different details is
sort of it's kind of crazy and it was
given by different situations also with
with the client but anyhow you have this
envelope that is very abstracted with no
primary and secondary structure it's so
9 / 9 double reed in timber as you can
see over here over which you have a
series of shingles glass [ __ ] of
shingles that are posed and printed with
a pattern so that
different different with when the clouds
are rolling or needs and then with
different lights you create different
reflections also the on the floor and
then the destructions that sort of work
routed to her to the ground like almost
like a gothic tree and they become
benches as well so they're like very
very much not simple that's it in the
middle and geta which is the local High
Street so it's like sort of commercial
center so it gets really like almost
confused with it with the other houses
and what was surprising and Astaire was
grown up during it teen years
pre-university years she was she was
there with this with this object just be
built and she confirmed it how much this
has been appropriated made made their
own by by by everybody in the town so
right now you have the tour of Norway in
the bicycle tour already starts from
there or you can have yoga you can have
markets you can have music playing and
all sorts of things and the idea was to
also create is object and will be not
just a canopy but a sort of activator or
public space in a culture where you
don't really mean that much out in a
square or even in a high street because
of climates because of darkness and
night even though summers days are very
long so we wanted to bring to the north
this more southern southern approach to
to the public to the public space
so the fact that public space can be he
navigated and also appropriated in a
very informal way again this project did
the cover of many magazines and if it's
it's very much not discreet
it's very laconic is a word that I
wouldn't say but it's very striking in a
way it's very neat and it's up to us
well now you could if you wanted to
criticize it but but I believe that was
like a design attitude that was very
much needed in this particular situation
but it's not necessary at all times and
and this is like completely different
scale of projects like the only like
motif that you have red thread is that
it's also like a public project that's
an articles the article I'm most proud
of her heritage in the New York Times in
the financial section in the business
section it's a good article so to read
because it explains really well well at
the fans which is Perry central business
district did and we got this big
Commission to do the double Commission
so one as master planner sovereignist
and another one as designer in my French
than colleagues so the the master
planning was to really regenerate in a
way to sort of bring two new to new
light and to bring to new life also like
the businesses that was set up after
second reward and was like bringing an
idea of modernity that was like a
already of obsolete and so the master
plan that we did for the public's
patience of subterranean space is the
first after comprehensive one after 64
and then we also design the big public
space seventeen seventy thousand square
meters public space below like one - and
towards not there so here is an areola
default where you can see this Bulevar
circular I was showing this process
quite quickly because otherwise it's a
very complex enough project but you this
is an image of liquor busy again is the
plan wasone of 29 that was never built
but make appreciate relevant and famous
where he was proposing to basically
demolish everything be like even bigger
than holes man we're almost man and get
rid all most any comparison and with new
ones
and that also separate vehicular flow
from pedestrians and and of course this
was many years later was in again the
Lada faster
was set in 58 that was happened you see
it creates this kind of disconnection
you weren't working one on text and
slapping the face all the different we
have six levels underground with with
sort of infrastructure trains and and
that's a national route there's a metro
there's all sort of things or nightclubs
until you for artists there's all sort
of things underground but also that
creates a certain this connectivity so
the transfer was already in a higher
point it's called a defense because its
defensive and and this is like any image
around the boulevard circular you could
be in Asia
you could be everywhere you know it's
not doesn't look like Paris or the Paris
postcard far is a year that we have in
mind but it's quite striking to see
those those bridges that connect this is
another one that about 30 or more of
them that connect the defense to all the
neighbors around and then this is the
kind of situation that you have for six
levels below so power Kings that are
greatly underused because the public
transportation works quite well so we
were asked to give a vision to make the
site attractive again because aside is
suffering from a vacancy rate of 30% or
more because this is no tax incentives
other than his idea modernity that was
shown here in Paris very much and very
much shocked at the play time that was
shot there was was very soon obsolete so
and this idea of also of like separating
flows in separate
also programming zoning suits of
business distributes nothing else is
very very obsolete so that's the quote I
like by Eddy Heathcoat is the tree
architecture critic for the Financial
Times and so he talks about embrace of
complexity and that's very important and
also the fact that you know if I'm
really changeable is like this so we
were sort of went into mapping below
above him below in producing it's about
its hundreds of different thematic maps
and then looking really at each single
aspect making a planning of
transformation above above and below for
the next twenty years and then proposing
a specific changes around the ground
acts and you know so before and after of
course if this is not a projects it's
not a design project but it's always
more it's mostly setting intentions to
revamp the site and also using under
under use and leaving our spaces for to
bring in new functions I just put cetera
retrofitting parkings like not
demolishing and building all over but
like working more retrofitting than the
night to learn aspects of it and of
course bring in nature which is
something very difficult because it's
also built on a slab this is an image of
an exhibition that took place about the
project
itself does was a little film showing
showing especially the nature of it so
it's 161 actors so it's quite big and
here you can see and it's really like a
multi-layered element where you notice
this thing in black is the is a deck so
it's 30 actors it's the biggest in
Europe
deck and so it means you have these six
levels below it also creates lots of
winds lots of emptiness also
disconnection in a way and also
logistical issues it's very complicated
to build a deck to plan to 300 deck and
so forth and then underneath does this
crazy labyrinth ich werde on
on six different levels and yes it's
very polished and jacques tati a smooth
on top and then below where you have a
situation also that it's you have sort
of Paris Grand Central easier because
there's a metro station here we consider
as a matter from this sand from the
river goes goes down but you have this
kind of situation where similar to Grand
Central because the the main mentor
there is
sit space for about half a million
people like then we'll go to different
places then after looking at the map and
marking the different sort of land-use
and technical aspects we did which are
those images that you see here in red we
we did a sort of programmatic
intervention on different aspects and
one was redesigning these contacts which
is the external access there was adapt
well in their innocence
prolonged by Emperor's kings emperors
and now presidents that goes from the
mover and now it goes beyond tear and
it's something that you perceive when
you are on the top of the tower by the
button yes as we perceive where you're
pedestrian then another important point
was to bring in nature in a way that
it's like not natural nature artificial
nature so it's the origination of the
ground access then looking specifically
space over there that can be connected
that could be connected at ground level
with the neighboring cities and then
look also importantly and the series of
like marginal spaces and spaces we found
10,000 square meters which which are
about
[Music]
that the client didn't know they had in
in between above and below in this sort
of luminaire condition and that and that
in a way you know could host activities
that are not at father's of bank or
insurance or and make the place more
attractive more edgier and sort of for
free of course like sort of offering
space for for free so that's what we did
and then we also went went on to study
thematically really like all elements of
urban design streetscape or planting
cultural activities and you know the
nature of the sites throughout different
times in seasonality of the of the year
and in our collection open-air our
collection that is already present on
site and now this could evolve lighting
and so forth so it was really like a
kind of gigantic project and then I
speed up then then in the same side so
the same week we win a competition to
design a public space over all that so
that's the con - that was opened by
meteor in 89 and then year like that's
the back of it so that was it at the
time that was it there was just ejected
that by pushing it off a very nice
garden designed by Jim Klimek but it was
like meant to be undone you can see here
these are two cemeteries denying
possible to move and this this space
here was the only back-end available
space to build in a sort of when the
from Paris it's a reg B arena but it's
also like a music venue so our retro
planning was done by a lady Gaga concert
that Darlington ejected concert you know
to speed up because there are big stones
were coming and so it's like a red beam
music venue mixed-use space that was
built there so the public space was
built on this occasion and on this side
year the city is completely developed
but this site was left like left over
this was the first image answer I forgot
mentioning that that was built by
Krishna person pair and the first sheet
Mousavi
built like another building their domain
I designed the tower over there which is
not beautiful now than the business
school coming and so the principal here
was to very simple like to have deserve
there's a difference in level even here
of 15 meters which is quite big from
from the beginning to the end this is
long about 800 meters so it's quite long
the initial master plan called for big
disruption at one point and as only
obvious difference in level but also a
very infrastructure below heating path
very complicated and expensive to move
you could move it but it's not really
what the client wanted for timeframe
issues or budget issues so the master
planning that we received at this big
monumental staircase just in the middle
but that I felt you know that's if you
want to like do an urban coup to
sort of Connect connect to different
areas of Paris and also symbolically
because you want to get they bound you
the outskirts with central Paris that is
always a bit into La dÃ©fense that is
always a bit intimidating for those
living in the value so like - and I can
be stare then it's like against we did
you wouldn't be de the thing and so and
then I'm also you can see this round
over over there it's very it's very much
no linear now it's very dispersed lots
of there's lots of inclined plants which
are all given by the constraints and in
a way I didn't like the idea where is
this ramp instead of stairs or the still
staring at one point that is less than
4% so it's like more hospitable as well
you don't have you know this
interruption then the ramp becomes the
roof of a building you've seen swimming
pool in in an image before so you can
host and as things that even pay for the
public realm above through the programs
that you put underground and and then
they need this design your frames of
like sort of particular reason and then
the second point was like intensifying
the garden just in one point and also
making space for or for follies and you
see like an image of the plan
[Music]
another image so the principle was to
use this is the same element if taming
let me go back once it's good that is
always the same but as different
different colors and different finishes
so there's different five types of them
I haven't seen his image and then to put
different percentages of each painting
in place so that there's a sort of
vibration that is created but in a very
simple way and then the same Trapasso
that shade which is used also for
handrails is used also for or for other
for other elements throughout the
throughout the sides and this is it and
then you can see this this these little
red things are in fact like animals that
were existing inside the ventilation
stations for whatever is underneath so
it's something that was not about
avoidable but instead of camouflaging
them with like sort of plants and things
so is that since we have to have them
then let's go with like sort of paint
and do like urban sports so this is a
climbing world and there's another one
that's for skating and and and so forth
or sometimes even sort of some animals
are integrated into the painting and
then the nature is like the planting new
planting is very limited because it's
already biodiversity given by all the
trees in the salaries and then we
introduced this this red color here
again you see though this ventilation
stations and to make this grain assorted
advance vibrate to challenge it a bit
it's almost like so these are images at
the time where the life side was not yet
completely completed but again it can
give you an idea of how it is it is now
so it's like really dealing also with a
lot of things that are already there and
you can see this bridge nature of this
infrastructural nature of the alarm it's
like floating floating above and below
this doesn't beeping this a problem
that's the crispy on the bottom perfect
alien for Houston over there with a
little main tower is not there yet so
that's it and it's it's in is you think
it's mostly be dimensional and then some
urban you know some designer that we
design the Banshees redesigned the the
the lighting elements as well but it's
mostly you know sort of painting in
there and it's an extremely complex
sprites much more difficult to design a
project like it and to be able to make
these because of the infrastructural
nature of the sides then you know the
building the scene right at the
beginning
first image that you see now I I speed
up or you tell me from and being too
long this is like just in a few images
it's a new project I've been working
more recently for an our district in
Indian food in the UK as you know
believer who was extensively bombed and
then underwent shrinking and under went
economic crisis there was quite he never
recovered the second one being and that
Margaret Thatcher suggested that they
should manage decline that much
Manchester was too close and was being
redeveloped service but recently liberal
has seen a sort of Renaissance do today
art for the presence of date the
presence of other cultural institutions
Street in Liverpool redesigned by
assemble one the Turner Prize for the
Arts so it's like a big hot place for
artists so here I was asked by some
developers not by the council to look at
this place this is a UNESCO heritage
site it's very beautiful sites on the
docks and very breeki and with some of
the biggest bricks buildings in
in the world that's a former tobacco
factory that is Irish developer owned
and then with this fabric of like a
smaller warehouses underneath and so I
was asked to look at it and to make some
images at first they asked me some
images to go and talk with the city and
to sorta redevelop in eating our
district and Design District a bit like
Miami design districts and I said well
you can't really so this is like a pre
public consultation video I'm just
showing it it's very advertising driven
and it doesn't show the specifics of it
because we don't want to show in a
public consultation I think so to
specifics but yeah man idea of the drone
images can give you an idea of the size
of Central Europe
this is a place called evil two waters
that is going to develop as a certain to
be I rise towers and in decide I think I
can skip it what I was thinking is like
retaining the the existing urban fabric
so started looking at I said to the
developers well you need you know so you
needed to think about the plan and you
can't just do an image it's quite devoid
of sense and meaning so here at started
looking at what was the militia below or
not what is sort of what was listed or
not and finally you know the red could
be in principle demolished but I took
the decision of like keeping as much as
I could of existing fabric and
especially on the fabric and the shape
of the streets not to be the like a
tabula rasa X but to be the work was
already there and then insert new
technologies that will be sympathetic
with the materials and would be
sympathetic with the nature and the
spirit of the site but adapting adapting
the topologies of their sizes and
shrinking and enlarging to to and up to
the to the side that's a first thing I
did the plan on opening up giving also
great great importance to the public
tram and to two squares and and that's
one of the few images
was ever shown and like where you see
this is just a positional world almost
left old not too much cleaned and you
that means a sort of sympathetic again
this is not a design project such as the
kind of architecture that you would want
and the program is mixed-use so you have
our galleries your the first revolving
theater in the UK you have in campus a
university new mobility hab but also you
know office is more like demo it's not
uniquely arts its arts and digital and
tech and housing as well so you have a
like view from the side right now this
is this was adopted as a result of our
work and now it's evolving in
opportunity plans and following up you
know the sites and the land that is
available to to development the final
two projects are completely different
scale is is a president very happy I'm
done for the frame for the Italian
embassy in in Paris the new room was the
Cure acting as curator and with the
collaboration of Prada but that's not me
that's carlo scarpa
and the Francesco la rata bus that's
what that's an important reference for
me because it
it's the workers capital at sabatelli's
in in Palermo in Sicily and and what is
important what he does here this is a
project that's over 50 years I believe
now it's not a new project but it's a
very powerful project that shows all -
the juxtaposition of several years not
only works of art but also the palette
saw but at least they're saying and the
showcases
so what Scarpa designs and particularly
the sculpture is put in space against a
green a green wall a sort of green
screen and this air in between so like
spatially very very interesting that was
the with this collage of mists and
they're all that they were similar
quality for another reason that gives
you know the principal of the project so
that's that's a drawing the lady right
at the beginning so I have this
presidency of the ambassador it's not a
cultural center it's no fool or
rocaille it's gold and greens and grace
its mirrors Sicilian theater in an and I
was first approached by the embassy just
to design the set of of a tiny Leonardo
da Vinci painting it's a disheveled air
lady you might have seen it was here at
the Met three years ago
something's it's very tiny it's like
this but it's quite relevant painting
this is like this you know as we were
setting there and then and then from
like just this one painting about more
than a dozen were
in the space of like not even six months
like risotto that's very tallien his
ability to do things against deadlines
and very less minutes and against all
gods but it was a pleasure to this
project and especially because those
paintings were coming it so Leonardo
DaVinci and sometimes Szalai were like
the best pupils may be lower so there
are and there were come from different
museums and and this my brief year set
up by the ambassador and his wife and
the curators at the nude but also with
the supervision of Prada there was like
also involved mostly in the financing of
this show temporary show for the five
hundred years of Leonardo da Vinci in in
France and so the brief was to do
something contemporary to do something
that would you know like make the work
of an artist and that but in a in a
space that is and no white world space
it's a not a neutral space and then to
create a sort of special from an aid in
this in these rooms and also like
keeping what is in its reception rooms
so it's very velvety and so forth so I
came up with this idea of frames again
frames that are like polished steel so
they they me
or the environment and then they're set
against this white walls and pedestals
that are also therefore for security but
also to create a certain sequence and so
all the paintings that are you can see
there are enough plexiglass box and
that's for conservation things start the
design it's not material design decision
but all these paintings are floating and
you can also see not only the sequence
in space but you can also see the back
of the paintings these are two very
beautiful sanctions and Jones you can
see this image ow
you know reach the environment is and
also our different the scale of this
project is from the previous project
it's almost like the scale of designing
an object building something very much I
very much enjoyed that a very critical
acclaim from the different curators of
the museum which was that's the Codex
atlanticus as well that's finally done
this kappa yatta disheveled
hair lady last one tiny project that I
need so I don't know many of you are
familiar with the work of black teeth
which is like a giant photographer who
became relevant as a photographer at the
end of his life really because he'd been
taking photographs all all his life but
his main occupation was being a painter
he was very privileged from his father
was a banker I think he was giving him
between two or more words and from his
diaries you don't even you don't even
feel this being a war it's all about boo
triple threat people and his life was
made of beautiful women this this is one
of these three wives model and galas
this is no I got a see designed for the
sets of these hundreds of butterflies or
bundles or things you can then doing
commissions from Maxime doing apartments
from four artists here in New York and
then being on vacation quite a lot of
time and then making photos of all of
these vacations and sort of car race and
tennis playing and the photos are
beautiful so he was discovered I think
here in the US if I'm not wrong it I
think it's a curator at the MoMA but it
came it became really big in photography
when he was already 69 after doing quite
New York painting I mean in my opinion
what the foundation is i oh i don't like
i'm being registered oh that's that in
my opinion these paintings that are not
so great we're like essential for him to
become a fantastic photographer but this
show that it's a very very tiny show
it's a it's a very modest budget that by
onedah and i just opened this summer in
Paris is about his relationship with
with fashion with Carmen in particular
he was a close friend of Madame calf man
so he was on holidays and this is also
very very extensively reported in his
work and then he painted he painted and
he did like silk patterns that were used
by not only Caravan for caravan eg used
to the drawings that were not always
used but throughout you know very early
these are from early I think is 9 1912
or something he start sketching fashion
and then photography and then doing
those patterns for these are patterns of
pillows very beautiful designs and and
here my intervention is really like
working with tiny budget and in quite
difficult spaces with
lots of colors to to to really give
relevance to it's a beautiful building
that the setting was a beautiful
building Tyrion was crying contract with
these beautiful and materials that have
have never been seen before so nobody's
ever seen it this is a parody dress that
is is designed the pattern off so the
patterns are very floral as well and
these are all the sealed the seat
samples from they were done in India so
that's it and then I don't know if Sonia
alai Mraz arrived because I wanted to
show you very something that is in this
other computer something that we've been
doing here at the Cooper this
collaboration with these artists alia
Sonya liner and that was also the Arno
can you please just send me to connect
that would be very quick
so we did this - you are looking at
mulberry street chinatown and and some
of the designs they were developed by
students here at the Cooper Union there
were now on showcase in this exhibition
I is CP in Brooklyn that is opening next
week on the 17 here I think does the
work of Karina and has their auto but
also the the research booklets were
video but also the research the research
that we need is also will also be
partially presented in this exhibition
and I'm writing the for the catalogue so
this is like a short field that Sonja
now a crash sudden everything's of
Whovian islands on the street and
Italian Americans from across mostly
sunny
mulberry she what it's done eating
ensemble it is here in their maker on
these hallowed grounds still on the
stage and in trance and enlightenment
and captivated audiences by ha ha ha
Pino main tail and his wonderful man
Te'o family they would love them they
were artisans they were magnificent
actors theatrical performers painters
set designers all embodied in one it was
unforgettable people would come every
night and the marionette story were the
stories and the sages of a thousand
years old many is a magnet for Yosa
which means angry amalgam I was a member
of the things when they are puppet
theater before it closed the audience
loved me for my generosity and
miraculous powers I was the embodiment
of the night Academy I was raised by
either in my party in 1980 they use
materials that are recycled from the
streets of Little Italy he does seem I
come from all fabrics right made my
metal armor from a broken rib that I
found on the streets together they
painted my face
Here I am with my third owner starting
in on them Tommy is a filmmaker who made
a movie about the mateo family in 1979
it was the portrait of an era about
revenge after the filming
by 2000 killed me as a present to tony
wishing that it would keep the tradition
alive behind us you see the site of the
new theater
now our construction site for a
condominium building back in the 20s the
monthly rent was $15 but for this month
now you can maybe buy a cappuccino the
same size look like this in the nineteen
twenties
[Music]
[Music]
my father my sister
doing the voices and four sons was a
family perdition this is the voice of
Madinah later I had bridge and I was
teaching my brother and this is me with
Mike back in 1982 me the captain General
of the Franklin is a very strong night
maybe Antichrist
[Music]
some of my former colleagues a sword in
the basement of edom entails dr. Susie's
house once our performances were so
vivid that the audience forgot that they
were watching a play one day a visitor
even shot a puppet to have the other one
win
but since the theater closed in 1983 my
friends lost their purpose now I am the
only one from the old school that is
still walking the streets of Little
Italy and this is not a retreat it
crosses the old center of this little
Tony's parents were born at the south
end of Mulberry Street close to where
the vanity of puppet theater was located
mothers which was Neapolitan the
Sicilians with an Elizabeth Street and
the categories and opinions on Mott
Street he took a long time for this
bonus to be listed and much longer for
the Italian immigrants to become as me
okay
nowadays this area is a part of china
town by the population of children grew
in the seventies the neighborhood
expanded in all directions
Chinese is Miss owners purchased
properties in Little Italy resulting
today's culturally diverse neighborhood
where the border between the two
neighborhoods is blurred now Little
Italy is better known for its
concentration of Italian restaurants and
for expanding italian-american
population but once a year or the day of
the feast of San Gennaro Madhuri sweets
is still called
yes Angela this tradition was brought to
New York City by Neapolitan immigrants
and has been celebrated since 1926 and
every year on that day Tony takes me out
for a walk among the thousands of
visitors
so in this these are some of the work of
the students here that were then would
modeled in 3d and inserted in the field
this is Karina's
really has changed so much since I knew
it they will continue to change and
transform but I wonder what this future
will look like sometimes I dream on it
in one of my dreams I walk through the
neighborhood and pass by an open
architectural space that was something
like a museum or a cinema it contained
all the movies that have ever been shot
in Little Italy
Scorsese near where Coppola dagon all of
them you could sit on the stairs and
watch movie scenes that were projected
onto the walls of the adjacent buildings
is this the
protests by Esther
in another dream Little Italy was devoid
of anything Italian even restaurants
work on money I pushed everything out by
birth buildings for luxurious apartments
were built and the only building that
reminded me of the history of Italian
Chinese Jewish German and Irish
generation was a memorial for the
tenement houses the memorial consisted
of a tenement house without any
apartments all that was left was the
Navajo light well frame in the sky
I think that's
[Applause]
[Music]
