we're in great partnership here tonight
and it's really a great pleasure to have
you here so welcome to bring it in thank
you very much thank you for at the end
being able to schedule this it's it's
great to be here and thank you for the
presentation I'm gonna try to be I'm
really I'm gonna try my English to be as
best as possible
I don't know if I'm gonna make it
possible and I don't know if you can
hear me I'll do my best anyway it
weather and I are heading an office that
represents more people but basically and
I'm gonna explain you really quickly
where are we coming from and how do we
operate it's a he and a she and there's
a Mexican who's Eduardo and me that I am
Catalan I used to have a picture here of
a flamenco woman but because of the
latest political stuff I decided not to
stand for the flamenco at least so um
this conditions special in the way that
Eduardo comes from a city of huge
density and huge dimensions and its
culture is based on that understanding
of the city a city that can be you can
dimension it by the ten minutes that it
takes to cross it with an airplane but
also with an economic power that it's
incredible if you compare it to the
standard flow of the of the European
very static economy also and regarding
its culture its it an addition you see
here the three culture Plaza it's an
addition of three different strata you
can see here the Aztec the Aztec
remains together with a Hispanic colony
and with the contemporary moments in my
side I come from Barcelona as mother was
saying another a Barcelona's a is known
for its very strong urban structure and
thinking but also and I'm showing here
one of the many examples of architecture
of its architects to take very care and
the detailing and on the making of
architecture you see here a building of
housing done by Coderre Cantone you go
there and then that we like to detail
almost everything in here a addition of
sections made by me ideas of a croissant
as as now there has already pointed out
we have basically to base point we are
not only a global office at all we are -
we are an office of two different local
small spots one based in Barcelona and
the other one made in Mexico you see
here an array of the project that we've
been working in the last 10 years
and I think that the main condition of
this double location has to do first of
it of the role of the architect and its
environment it has to do on how in
Barcelona you'll see in Spain you need
to sign and stem your the contract it
goes back to the society to the
architects society and then in Mexico
there is a control from from the
government over the the process of
construction and then in Spain you've
got a lot of control on how there's a
lot of people involved in the
construction process which has to do
it's not only the architect but there's
also a technical architect there's the
professional association that it's
behind the architect there is a contract
that in Spain is important and in Mexico
it's not so much important
the owner areum sadly enough they're
very bad everywhere but probably in
there a little bit better and in Mexico
because of this lack of in
of of weight of the profession of
architecture architects tend to do as
try to behave as contractors and also as
developers you know in Spain although
it's not the u.s. we have a construction
code we have even way more stupid and
ridiculous construction codes and then
of course because of the cost of the of
the labor in Mexico we have the
opportunity to change a lot the work
that we produce oh yeah
while the construction is in process and
then if we take a look culpability
insurance and so on Spain is basically
the place that it's more regulated after
all these I'm gonna show you here the
number of plans that we had to submit
for the ex house
I think it's 78 if I'm not wrong and the
same index for the plans that we
submitted in Mexico for a house of the
same square meter it is incredible the
amount the different amount of work that
the government asks for our office is
very digital to say it's really little
bit basically whatsapp is our way of
connecting Mexico to Barcelona this is a
some conversation with a contractor
saying that there was a problem over
over the side this is a meeting of
Eduardo in Mexico discussing structures
and sending them to me in Spain where I
was trying to resolve the overall
structure of the house this is me in
Mexico in a very fancy office in McAfee
in the middle of the street and also
during construction you can see that the
way of the of the buildings being
constructed is extremely different in
Mexico specifically if you're not in
Mexico City you need to buy all the
equipment instead of renting it which
makes you be extremely precise on how
you're gonna how the process of
construction is going to behave
to say all this wood that you see here
it's going to be reused in the end of
the of their construction and at the end
it's going to be incorporated I know
sometimes as paving sometime as benches
sometimes we try to to take care of all
this material in order to incorporate it
if you see the other side that's the X
house and of course there's a you seen
one a lot of Labor and the other one you
just see like almost no one but a lot of
you know the crave and so on I'm gonna
try to it's been great to do this
lecture and I'm gonna try to to kind of
explain what our aims are or the topics
that we're interested on I'm just gonna
try to lay them out so here this is this
picture that somehow while I'll go study
a lot of professors used to show and I
think it's interesting it's probably has
to do with the remembering or the recall
of lodges primitive cabin that has to do
with this need of protecting from nature
right it seems that nature was a
something that we need to protect
ourselves and then how somehow
architecture is a way to construct this
kind of protection but what I'm
interested is not so much in
architecture which I totally agree that
primitive architecture has a knowledge
and an intelligence on going back to the
very basic of it but what I'm interested
on to show is more than any other thing
how architecture is driving or it's set
up as a space for community how at the
end the architecture is enabling
community to be together
you can see how we believe in that in
some of our projects and and I'm going
to show just a few things just to hint
on what what I basically need there's
you see here a crossing of two streets
in Mexico City in aroma and this is a
project that we were offer it's
basically three different
buildings that they were all connecting
to the street and they had all their own
entrances our project and calling back
to this community idea was basically to
to build up a central patio that would
be the entrance to the building and that
would be able to connect all these
people together you see here our our
idea of how at the end its discontinuity
and connecting to the center of the
building as part of this almost patio
house at the end of course all this goes
together with an understanding that the
building is an historical building and
that we need to kind of recover its own
behavior of course this is clear when we
refer to big housing units but what
would that mean in order and when we
refer to to housing and how would you
say that a single-family houses and I'm
I'm gonna explain this project later but
I think it's very clear how here in this
house that has these three different
legs how each of the legs responds to a
different part of the program of the
house but at the end it's the inner part
of it where it concentrates all the
public and it's both interior the
exterior needs all put together in order
to reinforce this idea of the community
at the center of the architecture this
is another picture that it's been
training in the office since the very
beginning
and I think that we like to discuss
sometimes the approach is different but
we like to discuss this picture on how
although there's not really like it
actually really defines something that
is about architecture and probably the
idea is that there's there's this one
slab that it's constructing a micro
space or a space a feeling that is that
you behave to a place and not to a
different one and we like to believe
that what makes the difference is this
this one limit that we have here you can
recall other architecture ever other
artists that work with this idea of like
constructing the lines or the borders
between spaces or even kind of
defrosting them in order that it's not a
strict line but something that is
something smoother again this is
possible the understanding of the limit
it's possible because there is its
counterpart like its counterpart I don't
know if you say it this way like it
takes it's it's versus another scale
that it's facing this is this one space
so talking about the limit I would also
try to discuss another another idea that
would be how these houses are
incorporating this idea of defrosting or
like expanding the threshold between one
space and the other one you see here a
housing in puerto escondido that TDA
house where the project basically was to
construct a space that would build up I
don't know if you see my pointer here to
build up that goes all the way from here
it's an open space that goes all the way
out that made the main stage of the
house is one this one over here and
although this can be closed at the end I
make that the inner outer space is the
center of the house in the case of the
sunflower house although the logics of
its its appearance has to do probably
with the framing of different views at
the end it is through the section that
we can understand what are the meanings
of the house which is a which is to
build up a connection between the rear
patio that is protecting from a super
strong wind that we can find there from
and connecting it to the frontal views
that are facing the sea you can see here
the layer of glazing that we can have
but also this connection with the outer
space we've been trying to push up this
idea of the limit and the latest project
with the
in process now it's a small house that
it's being built next to Mexico serious
as well where prefer me the house is not
anymore an enclosed space it's basically
a stair and it's the stair that connects
different pavilions that have different
uses so it's become the opposite as we
used to do you see here the section that
for me explain basically what this stair
is about it's about the connection of to
outer space that are connected in there
in the other direction with the
landscape you see here the house that is
in process and it's going to be done
it's being done in brick just as an
experiment to work with the local
technologies and finally a third image
that we tend to discuss it's it's Walter
de Miriam multi lemuria
I think by the I'm sure that you've been
to the broken mile and the earth boom
but for me what's most impressive about
it it's it's control about the land art
and and probably this this picture over
here defines clearly it's it's super
architectural intentions somehow for me
the fact that there's this line that
it's run it's just one of the lines of
the project is defines one of the things
that whenever an architect or an artist
it's put on a line or a a tray somewhere
beyond being making this space being
demonstrating that it has been inhabited
what it is is pointing out that this
space is amazing sometimes no so there
is intent this intent that if you see a
row space you you might not put
attention if someone has already been
there and has draw this line has
highlighted it it's way easier for us to
understand that the value of it if we
think on how architects can can draw
with these urbanity I think that drawing
this line has been many times the idea
of the
small houses or pavilion that we've done
in architecture which at the end we want
to keep the landscape the protagonist of
the space and architecture just be a
small spot a small line a highlighting
of the existing space build up the
relationship but without ever raising
the incredible spectacle that is the
nature itself even to a point to
incorporate the architecture of course
if we discuss it in an urban scale
probably architecture architectures or
architects work is more important in
introducing behavior in the city and not
so much the constructed facade and I'm
referring that incorporating mix used to
the city or even trying to to get
through the code and get the building
not to have parking and I'm talking
specifically of Mexico City where by law
you need to have two two spots for car
for every dwelling that you build which
builds up a city that it's completely
congested so going through the codes and
finding the way in order to to to skip
that role and even and believing in that
by constructing different kinds of units
and different types of architecture you
can bring in different people and
therefore not necessarily build up a
architecture that forces gentrification
but also just incorporate density and of
course we do build that through a set of
facades that build up that what is going
to be the scene of the city and we
normally believe that whenever we talk
in big scale we should be as us I don't
know how to say it might be the hour and
as I'll do the last show as possible
like
as as discreet as we can and this has to
do with the buildings we're currently
building but also two other buildings
that you see here that the facade before
we need a renovation and after the
renovation so basically this idea of not
occupying necessarily the protagonism of
the of the street I'm going here to the
to the war the famous wall that it's
lately worrying all us and these there's
this artist Christopher Buechel that
it's trying or it's been building up
this idea about converting the the
prototypes into landmarks as kind of
understanding that it's part of like
almost like land art and we believe that
the city needs to build up just as the
opposite of that that barriers may exist
because at the end there are barriers
but we need to find ways and I'm showing
here very silly image of a restaurant
that there are ways to enforce the
different layers of property or even of
different but there are architectural
ways to enhance them that so that there
it's not such a physical thing and I'm
coming back to the same image I was
showing before where by erasing those
lines you are able to build up a
construct that has to do about community
and public and private of course all
these were the topics I was discussing
community living and urbanity but there
are also the instrument and I think that
there was talking about some of that how
Planning section are crucial to our our
buildings some of the strategies may be
explained in plan sometimes in section
but I think that the relationship to the
landscape is normally explained by the
section so let me show you have here the
ex house it's pretty clear which house
it is it's the one that has an x-shaped
away and basically the idea behind it
was really really absurd it's nothing
about the shape that it was actually a
result the idea that the different
houses that were built at that place
were normally these two different
straight lines and one would contain the
public realm and the other one the
private realm of the house so the idea
was that why should one have the good
views and the other one the bad news and
by playing with those two different
lines we came up to a cross and trying
to protect an amazing tree that was
there we kind of juggled with the lines
and came up with these X shape that
basically what it does is construct this
extremely simple shape that for although
it seems that the important is the shape
itself for us what's important is the
patios that enable each of the rooms of
the of the plan to have the same prior
good views of the of the landscape
however it is through the section that
we can understand how the house relates
to the site it is a house that it's
almost floating its kind of set up on
the on the landscape and it's through
its walls that it it kinds of protects
from the sides and just faces front the
detail section you'll see it's kind of
way more detail it has to do on how to
be able to construct a clarity of frame
although what is at the end more
important is the construction of the
house and I'll get to that in a second
the frame of the house and the framing
of the videos got us to play with the
idea that in one side you could see one
video and made a reflection in the other
side you could be seeing two things at a
time but of course this house it's also
about materiality the real effort of
this house was to build it with that
technique of projected concrete it's the
way that tunnels are built so this house
was basically an experiment of a
developer in order to do houses we
shortening the time of construction we
were they look he looked it for us
because we had built one housing
concrete in Mexico and he decided we
were expert and of course we said of
course we're really experts
three so we started working with this
idea that foundings were not done with
this kind of protective material but the
whole overall second part of the house
as the house was going up was this idea
of the projected you see here how it was
working you basically and prepare one of
the walls and you should concrete which
gets to its maximum strength in three
days instead of twenty-eight days so you
get to speed up the process a lot it was
a process that went back and forth we
actually poured down some parts of the
house because we could not make it work
as the as the technical people had said
it was going to work so it was more than
any other thing an experiment of course
the fact of working with the materials
puts us also in some critic situation
sometimes where although we have an idea
to leave together with the landscape at
the end it becomes a great problem to
maintain through construction the trees
and you see here how we are from the
very beginning to the end of
construction really close we believe
that construction or the site
construction there are a lot of
detailing and and control that need to
be taken architects should be
we believe that architects should be
from the very beginning of the project
and in the field the project is finally
built you see here eduardo during the
project the construction of the TDA
house that was the one that i was
showing you before and you see here how
the concrete was made in house because
there were no plans so by learning about
how the things are done in in in the
place we also get to to make them at
least as affordable as possible and part
of this and care about the material I
think that just by seeing some of the
exhibitions that we normally do we try
to work very close to the material
itself you see here in an exhibit down
in my tree
with honeycomb paper but also we've been
working with wool textile like all kinds
of different materials and always this
care about understanding the roughness
and and the tectonics of it so if we
understand that these are the
instruments I wanted to go through a
three projects more than any other thing
and discussing the instruments and and
explaining the project on how do we see
them from the office we were approached
in Mexico by a couple that wanted a
house made out of stone and we were
really scared of em to the very
beginning and we said no this is gonna
be extremely cheesy we don't do this
kind of architecture this is not going
to work you know we have other people
that we you might know let's you should
call them and they were super stubborn
and they came back and back and back and
we kept saying no and they were at the
end we decided that we were gonna do it
as far as we had a stone work
structurally so we went to the site and
started seeing this stone the stone is
is out of a volcano that it's next to it
the post line actually it so it's
another house in Pakistan and the Costa
Co is an intern area of a volcano so
this is a magmatic stone that there are
three qualities and we decided for the
intermediate that was it wasn't as xishi
as the finish material but at the end
would enable construction since the
lowered one is just for fences so this
is the type of wall that we have been
looking at that we could but we could
bill we started to get information on
the dimensions and basically that the
site where they wanted to build was this
site that was completely rectangular
with amazing views to the mountains in
both sides you know that Mexicans are
all about embracing people and having
people for dinner for lunch and so on so
the house does make this kind of
movement to embrace people for vis that
visit
and response to that and also kind of
directs the house to the main of the
views that is in one of the sites this
exercise was done in plan but at the end
was an exercise that mainly was had to
do with it the roof and sectionally it
works this way whether at the end it
concentrates all the water in one of the
points and there was of course this
other effort that I've been discussing
about how to live in between the inside
and the outside so we build up this plan
where you could be either in the inside
or the outside it was a sequence of
spaces from one to the other one and you
generate this kind of doubled
circulation between open and closed so
the stone came inside even the foundings
were made out of the same stone we start
learning and you see here the housing
process how the slabs were done out of
concrete and the walls were super thick
walls that had nothing but stone and at
the end there was a little bit of finish
in order to have no animals go through
that that was the only problem that they
inhabit the stone and then they cross to
the other side and they fight you when
you're inside so that was the only
protection so it's a hundred percent
stone vertical things that you see here
were just made in order to keep the wall
vertical wire we were constructing it
and you see here the house completely
finished where all the vertical walls
that are facade are the stone walls and
they're holding the roof that and that
is made out of concrete you see here the
other facade that it's completely
opening as I was saying it's a place
where it opens up to the amazing view if
you see the views from the inside
it's pretty amazing we keep saying that
we don't need to do a make architecture
just putting a tent in our sights it's
more than enough because they are busy
you see here the plant and I think that
probably depends what's more the most
important is how we operate with these
wars that the openings are very small in
order to keep the structure feasible and
it's just in and in the sections when we
start to see how the materiality of
those walls is completely important in
how we leave the house you see here that
the space of the entrance and dinner
party aware that at onyx and the
roughness of this stone is showing up
and how they've been using and taking
over in the last month's
it's pretty amazing that they let us go
with the whole thing and I think that at
the end they're pretty convinced the
height of the house goes really high in
in the patios and that's the maximum
height that we could have the stone be
self structured
in a different house and has to do also
with the materiality and we had this
other client that it's the owner of a
very big how would you say like
redevelopment where where he's been
there's several plot and he's decided to
do different legs in order that the site
is self sustainable so he had a project
by a different architect and he
approached at us he was not very
convinced it was a completely its how it
was a box made out of glass sitting in
the middle of woodland so he was not
sure how to if that was going to work or
not and we said okay we can try to do
your project if you like it that's good
and if you know you can always go back
so our very intent was kind of go by and
go beyond the idea of having just one
box and tried to adapt to the side so
this site where the house is located it
at the end of a cliff it's a it's in the
middle of the woods but then there's a
cliff that goes down so the first idea
was kind of open up in order to open the
facade in here to the cliff and of
course because we had kind of stretched
one of the open up to two sides we
decided to kind of have three legs that
were almost the same thickness so that
the importance of the part had more to
do on the relation the relationship
between them and not so much on the on
the legs themselves so in this case it
seemed that the important part of the
project was kind of face each of the end
parts of those legs to the different
wheels that we could find and then we
started to kind of turn to find it same
spot and adapt it to the site coming up
with a plan that has to do like almost
like I don't know how you call this this
kind of and this thing that the kids
have that happens
there you go so this but I'm not gonna
able to reproduce we call it like this
the house of the regulator in Mexican in
Spanish in Mexico I don't know how to
say it either so basically the house
opens up to that three different kinds
of spaces that you can find around one
is that leave the other one is this one
figure this lake that it's gonna be
doing and the other one are wood and of
course at the end all this is kind of
recovered in uncovered by by the trees
all around the house and this is one of
the houses I was showing you before it
has in each of the legs a different kind
of program and they all come together is
in this central spot that it's both
there the core of the house we had very
clear from the beginning that landscape
was important but also that the roof was
gonna be the important part of the
project and we started doing all these
models trying to find out where was the
we were basically trying to understand
how could this and roof operate and we
were trying to find there and the answer
in the water on how the water was gonna
go from from how could we collect it and
put it down at the end there is an
improving but after all these kind of
explorations we decided that the roof
was going to be flat so you see here the
model of the house but what we did
finally incorporate in the roof was a a
lot of different beams wood beams that
the owner had because of this this
construction of the different legs he
had moved a lot of trees from one place
of the other of that site and the ones
that were not being able to be in
transplanted he had kept it and he had
the wood just talk so we decided that we
could use it as a structure of the of
the roof and
and the experiments in here were
basically trying to find out a way that
the wood beams would be structural so at
the end the roof is basically the the
wood and just a little part of concrete
and it's only the wood that it's working
structurally in order to hold the roof
you see here the house in the place and
you see he here me and one of my kids
that they loved architecture him and
trying to set up the house and making
sure that the trees were that by
locating the house where it had to go we
were not harming any of the trees during
foundation and when this first windows
came up the client came over and said
Europe you did amazing you just look
here it does you know like the your
framing the way it's perfect and we just
told him you know whatever we put the
window your friend seems something
amazing so it's not us so you see here
that the house is called the house of
the rock Casa de la Roca and it has to
do because there is an amazing rock in
one of the borders and through
construction we because of the lake that
it's next to the house finally moved and
the engineers decided that it should
drain through the place that we had
located the house at the end the house
kind of took a weird shape in in its
base in order to let the how that the
lake drain you see here the future river
to say and the house started to take
shape that the idea of using concrete is
not any idea it has to do that in Mexico
that labor is cheap and concrete is a
very labor-intensive material it's a
quite cheap material to build with and
it's also that it has a lot a lot of
inertia and in this place that it's very
cold at night and very hot during days
we thought that it was a good strategic
strategy to use it the house was finally
built up in concrete and the idea was
that it would totally be taken over
green but also that it would disappear
in the landscape again the important
part here is the landscape and not so
much the architecture so we decided to
paint the house black on black or in
black so it would disappear you see here
the same house after the the water
season that they say that it would after
rain so it's it's more and more taking
the green is taking over the house
almost disappearing that is what we we
like this is a picture of the lake
before rain and you'll see here I think
a few after words and this relationship
with the main stains you see also here
the beams but at the end plate are quite
a big role on the on drawing the
directionality and the sphere of the
house and of course the views were
important but again whatever it was it
would have looked that would be amazing
the architecture was basically something
and it is all for us the what is
important is not so much the finishes
but the space that we've been and I am
repairing here to a very simple room
where you have the roof and the wall and
basically you have the views that are
what are kind of giving importance to it
and I'm gonna go to the last project now
which is a project in my Inlet Roma
again in in the area of in one of the
districts of Mexico City it's the aroma
is well known because it used to be at
the beginning of 19th century one of the
nicest place to live and borscht was
family would build their their houses
and they had like these huge houses and
that that would occupy like super big
nodes because of the earthquake in 1985
I don't know if you you remember or you
know there was a huge earthquake that a
lot of people died and
mainly it was because the city was not
ready for the earthquake it was super
intense and specifically in conversa and
aroma the district's kind of got very
damaged so they lost a lot of population
and it's been in the last in the last 15
years that because of entrepreneurial
architects that have been trying to put
a lot of energy there and also because
it's become like the hip place to be
there's these look into into like people
recovering the houses so we were
approached to to recover this house it's
an old house of beginning of 20th
century and we did like the house very
much when we enter it we found these up
and and we found it was pretty
interesting so decided to keep the
structural where we were not supposed to
we were just supposed to keep the facade
so but with this idea in mind and
knowing that the law or the developer
both of them allowed us to to do from
this one unit house to be to make nine
dwellings and a commercial space we
decided and we started working at the
office and starting to do crazy and
pretty stupid ideas just trying to
understand what were the possibilities
of the site but also what where our
pushes positioning on front of those of
those options we normally work on 3d on
computer animated images but also
through models of use as you've been
seeing and of course this had to do on
how to increment the area of the house
but also on what was gonna be our
behavior towards the existing if we
wanted to do something completely equal
if we wanted to hide it if we wanted to
like give a glimpse of what was going on
but not kind of like doing everything
new
if it was gonna be a continuous thing if
it was gonna be something more crazy on
the top at the end basically the
strategy the strategy is if we have this
one lot and we were forced by law to
keep the facade we finally decided to
keep the whole existing house and what
we were interested about this house was
basically this one patio that was
generating a really nice entrance and
the project finished that by being a
replica of this kind of space by
duplicating it and doing a second kind
of replica generating a double patio
that is sitting on one of the sides of
the plots and this same strategy had to
do what was going on a plan that there
was this facade and this existing
building and we kind of build at the
rear part and put it a roof down to it
you see here how at the end there's like
this base and then the the additional on
that were parts and you see here how
during construction the major work was
to reinforce the existing structure you
can see here how we located on the we
kind of superpose the concrete structure
in order to reinforce the existing house
and decided that although we did like
the character of the existing brick we
also accepted that this new restriction
was part of the history of the house so
we wanted to show it we had some concern
on how to produce the back part but the
decision was that if someone that knows
about architecture would come here they
would understand that the brick that has
been used in the front and in the back
is different you see here the use of a
new brick but also the language that
that the openings are talking in here is
the old opening
have to do with having the slap in the
facade and so on
while in the back part there's the the
structure has nothing to do the facade
and it's completely free again the
discussion was how to keep the idea of
the base as something that was old and
then the addition that was something and
you know so we kind of inserted this one
floor of glazing in order to separate
that and finally building that this
white base that would face up to this
black addition on the top the intention
of these spaces was basically to get to
to absorb as - as light as possible and
kind of build up apartments that are
kind of although it's a level we are now
thinking that it's more like a Tetris
more than a Lego that it's completely
matched up and if you see the plans you
will probably will be very hard to
understand because the tetris thing when
especially because I'm going very fast
but if you were to look you will see
here that that all the apartments have
double and triple spaces in order to
build up a little bit of identity of
each of the spaces but also in order to
be able to adapt to the openings that
were already existing and making
inhabitant we did lower down 50
centimeters the whole house in order to
build one more floor within the old
structure you see here the facade after
the construction it appears the addition
but the ability addition is almost not
you cannot perceive it from the streets
and of course all the vertical
connections and so on were incorporated
in the old structure as just a void at
the end the relationship to the exterior
is made up through of all the dwellings
is made up through the the opening
through this central patio this communal
patio so everyone needs to go and
through
patio in order to get out but also gets
the lighting out of it and you see here
the different apartments that each of
them has kind of a different
characteristic in terms of the space and
this was an intentional idea in order
not to we believe that if we can it's
better to have like different scale of
apartments for different types of people
and not just an array of course this is
very time-consuming when you're an
architect but at this point we were
still ready to make it you see here the
different kinds of spots and how people
have been taking it over thank you very
much whatever
there's there's been an attempt by the
way first of all congratulations facing
super report there's been an attempt
with the presentation of beaming up
current political issues we see that
Trump wall
you've mentioned social etiquette
struggle but if I'm gonna be difficult
to reconcile these wheel are being
connected with contemporary the wall
political struggles with building houses
most of the time for rich people which
maybe I can find the hard to reconcile
dining the context of Barcelona's since
we know that in Catalunya most of the
time were that we're the ones who push
social but maybe need to be more
difficult to reconcile in the Mexican
okay so I'm and this is a struggle die
so how do you reconcile these this kind
of we love being connected with making
our country everything for the planet
and I think this is a superb thirteen
and you would say question because it's
a question that we asked ourselves a lot
in the office and let me say three or
four things the first is that the houses
that are here are not necessarily more
expensive than another single-family
house per square meter that is one of
our aims so that it's true that in
Mexico this is like having a
single-family house of more than one
hundred square meters is already you're
defining a social
ladies no I don't know how to say it
however we're not dealing we're dealing
with a either as it's more normally
people that have to do with culture and
not so much basically every time that we
filled with people with a lot of money
it's never worked it's been very bad on
our side because I think it's a matter
of I mean we've tried but there's a
thing of manners that it's sometimes
very complicated not I and I don't want
to get into that but man I think it has
to do that on the way they think of work
I think that yeah I think it has to do
with that that they pay for work and you
know I'm just like I work but I work for
them but I but they don't decide what
should I be doing all the time I mean I
think that this is a completely
different explanation basically but our
conversation but it in Mexico we've
tried to do competitions and every time
we've step out because there's always a
political issue afterwards if there's if
there's not an open competition we step
out if there are money involved we step
out input in these kind of developers we
only work with developers that they
don't pay money in order to have the
permit so with with in working with
we've been working with few developers
in Mexico and every time that we face
that there was money that should not be
will step out because we do believe that
the architects have a political role on
our work and it's true that there's a
double exercise what I think there's a
double exercise at least for me in my
profession there's one that was to do
that the architects and helped build up
a
or vanity to say we build up this but
there's also an intent to kind of at
least build up in what what it has to be
like being the teacher that it's like an
exercise of what I believe the
architecture trying to get architecture
better so for me there's things that
have more to do with this kind of
exercise and others have to do with
building the street I don't know if
that's clear enough but this for me it's
not a political issue I think that
that's a decision as an architect like
and I think that architecture should be
austere that's something that I believe
on as an architect and although I think
that there are many other architectures
that I think that are very interesting
but I don't know how to do but I think
that there is an aim to pursuit kind of
an investigation for architecture that
it's not necessarily socially oriented
but yes socially oriented in terms of
economy but they are socially oriented
in terms of how we should be living how
what does it mean to house what does it
mean to to be in a place what does it
mean for me those are questions are
still important for architecture
I'm a FEMINIST as a great different
question some veering away from the
social issues which I think are
important to addressing yet it seems
like one of those things that as
architects we've been addressing for our
decades if not centuries
so I'm struck by you introducing your
and I miss the very beginning of your
lecture but we're also issues of codes
in that discuss but I was struck by
you're talking about these projects and
saying that you want to mostly focus on
the instruments of making the projects
and how much you at least show your
process as being very plant section
oriented not safe designing through
animations 3d models renderings and you
know a whole range of instruments that
more one thinks of us being very
pertinent and important to a
contemporary practice and if you think
that that's your choice of instruments
it has an impact on that formal
austerity that your projects project
I think of the
we are also very austere in the way we
work I would say and I'm not sure if
it's a takers indecision or it's just
like that but it's clear that it on the
table we do work with models and with 3d
we do but I think that there's and I
think that that has to do on both our
education that we're the planning the
section are clearly a understanding of
the space more than a 3d model for to
say at least in my salad weather maybe
it's a little bit different but the
experimentation and the logics of the
project do happen although many of the
project happened to be held at the end
very three-dimensional but that is
through planning section a lot of times
it's and I'm I would say that the
thinking might also be very I see myself
thinking very linearly although at the
end when I explain the project to
someone in the office or whatever might
not be so linear but the line of thought
might be very linear
and if the work actually has a certain
continuity between the two you know
context in which they if there is a
continuity of ideas of strategies in
your authorship and yet it's very
distant progress do you can you identify
if my reading is incorrect actually that
the projects are in fact quite different
that they they there's a more clear line
between what you do in Spain and what
you do in Mexico as a manifestation of
the circumstances out of which they
arise I'm just curious
we try to have to be very consistent in
both sides although there is one topic
that we haven't been able to address
which has to do with the code which is
that in Mexico um because of the site
being so big the size of the house is
not so important normally we're always
below the amount that it's legally
permitted while in Spain we not normally
go all the way to the limit and then all
these inner spaces that I'm talking that
in-between spaces in Spain they count as
a build space so that's always an issue
because we need to if you are limited in
square footage because the sites are
small the clay always go wants to go all
the way to the maximum so there's it's
been very hard to be able to build up
big spaces like that
yeah whatever it has overs evil about
exactly actually a balcony would be a
50% yeah so so it's for me that's the
biggest difference between the two of
the house that two of the poly the
strategies that we we addressed because
the way that we construct this
in-between spaces needs to be a little
bit different because of the code issue
except where the sightings been our
super big that are very weird because
then it would be very rich people which
I don't know I think you can go ahead I
think there are many instances where one
could trace but but also you naughty to
you know saying that you're not really
global famously go their growth the
architects should never be global and
there should be attached to a place and
move far there are several computers but
yet there are many ingredients that are
very new to much right and you were
talking about the
for example between Barcelona Mexico
City mostly through who what's up yeah
so how are you setting I mean it's the
way in which we operate yeah also could
you would explain how is that entering
we like to say that our although like
for me starting to work with Eduardo was
amazing because his references were very
different than my references it's very
sad but in Spain or at least when I was
in school the references were mainly
European and maybe American aus but
never Latin American at all and suddenly
there was all these all these things
that came over that were extremely
compelling right and I think that I
we've talked with Eduardo of course my
references were sometimes local that
happens the same so I think that we've
kind of build up bridges that are
interesting and we did a trip together
to Brazil that was I think that was very
important for both of us we had both
been reading architecture Portuguese
architecture in all it extends right
from from Portugal to Brazil and I think
that there's something about the clarity
of and the brutality of the way it
expresses itself that we were very
interested on
while local I think that it has to do
because we believe on how things are
built and if you don't although we were
both educated here in the States beyond
we we we are very attached to
construction I think that has to do with
the location both both of our schools so
and this kind of the lightness with a
materiality an understanding that things
can be construed the same thing can be
constructed in different ways but that
like for as the TVA house the first
house had to do with like pushing the
concrete all the way but that at the end
has also to do of understanding who's
gonna build it how is it gonna be built
and so on and so forth there was one
house that we did in in the Pyrenees
that was supposed to be built in in in
the top of the mountain and the whole
house was designed so that you could put
that part take the parts with helicopter
right so just the process of designing
that house was one to one with a
constructor so it was a very it was very
notable at the end I mean we learned a
lot on how to build things and although
one of my panics is always that I don't
know enough about construction I do find
myself that construction is important
for my Empire my way of doing so that's
why local and not so much global and and
something that is very different like
from one side to the other one it's very
funny how in Mexico the structural plans
are in plan and in Spain they're in
section III don't remember which is
which but at the very beginning it was
very hard cuz of course each of the
projects we work with local
consultants so it was hard to understand
what they what they were talking about
like if the Mexican project had to be
read read by Eduardo and the Spanish
projects had to be the rhythmic me and
at the end we've kind of learned all our
way through what's the nature of the
partnership in your mind in what ways do
you bring different strengths again
what's what's it like designing with you
and you know outside of the personal
relationship what is the one of the
disciplinary particularities it's very
funny the way that we address projects
from the very beginning is very
different and has been shifting Eduardo
who's more on the Eduardo was trained in
Mexico as an architect did a master
degree in urban studies at the GSD and
worked with Phil operations with Jim
Cornette so that's his education he
worked with evolutionary doors and then
will that's his main body and then for
me it's always been architecture and
architecture had to do with and then I
did exhibition design and an
architecture so the skills have been
very different from the very beginning
and there's and I think that
what's interesting it's how each of us
finds in the other what's more
compelling of like I do find very
interesting when Eduardo becomes very
latin-american to say when he's very
powerful on his moves there's a lot of
Mexican architecture that it's super
strong and really rough and and it
wireless less picky which is always
better and I'm more I'm probably more
subtle and I don't know and maybe I'm
more stubborn and sometimes it's also
good right so I'm more Eduardo has big
gestures and I try to have big ideas if
that makes a difference
I don't thank you
you mentioned one of the other building
forests
was
the way this operates in Mexico is when
you build in remote places you normally
take we take a a carpenter that does
them how do you see that the of the
concrete in the pattern of the concrete
we do it with wood so the wood needs to
be worked out so that's why there's
always a carpenter and the head of them
of the construction right and then
normally the labor is local completely
local and these two people normally
sleep on-site there's the first thing
that you do whenever you build a house
you build like a small cabin or where
they sleep and they protect the
construction and and then and also the
material is set up there
and and then locals normally were there
they normally depending on the side you
they you pay by week and when there's
the day that you pour the concrete you
get more people into just by the day
it's also like for example in them in
the in puerto escondido house the one in
of the section i will show you which was
the first one it it's a very it's a very
natural rich or rich natural i don't
know how to put the adjectives like you
do like this and there's a mango coming
down i mean it's amazing the people are
very poor but they don't they live with
whatever the nature gives so it's it's a
very
[Music]
thin line between porous being poor and
rich right so they can live without one
was not working so there the people were
contracted or like paid by the day
because some days they would come say
the days they wouldn't come so you
cannot really have a fixed amount of
people that comes all the day because
it's very it's it's extremely
interesting from a sociological thing
like for me the first time I was
importers Candido I saw this guy with a
concrete and he was not wearing shoes
and of course this for us for me I
assumed that for you too I was
I'm gonna be sued this guy is gonna get
hurt Lala and I was with Eduardo another
word I was saying I was like this guy
should put his shoes on and Eduardo was
like this guy doesn't have shoes and if
he puts his shoes on he's gonna hurt
himself so you need to understand within
within the system you cannot try to
convince them that your way of doing it
is better you kind of need to do like
this and Trust in Spain we're getting
closer to us which is good and bad
which means there's every time more
prefab there's more codes there's more
paper to be filled and there's more
lawyers but beyond that it's still way
far from here so there's still a space
for design way bigger than him here too
so but it's true that construction is
more expensive because I was saying
before in order to do a house you need
to have a concern architect you need to
have a technical architect someone that
supervises the material so at the end of
house a house is super expensive because
you need to to help beyond the people
who are building it you need to have
these all other people that are signing
papers that becomes super important to
the state but at the end it's just like
common for a small house maybe we don't
need a technical area
like for me it's great because I don't
need to take responsibility towards that
but I mean we're adding at a lot of cost
to something that should be more
affordable is their building type that
you are really really really eager to do
next or that you haven't had a chance to
do
I think I'd like to do a flat so I'm not
a flatter like a place or something that
has to do with the plane or ography I'm
super happy with what I'm doing I think
that it's amazing but I'm doing what I'm
doing so no no no I love residential I
think it's good of course I do believe
that the city or the architecture has a
lot of different things but I am and I'm
not I mean there's time if it comes it's
good and if it doesn't come I need to
enjoy whatever I'm doing I think that
that's good enough
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
