I think Cooper for me is a kind of home
it's place I rarely return to physically
but I find myself constantly returning
to in my mind and by my actions it's a
place that formed me and implemented the
only form of architectural education
I've had and when you return to the
place that informed you you feel or I
would say I feel an immense obligation
to prove myself worthy of that
investment so I'm gonna give you my
apologies right at the front for that
cuz I don't even know how to begin to
describe the surface in 30 minutes of
everything I'm gonna tell you about the
world to the place that actually gave me
the tools to see that work so again my
apologies but
whatever accounts
this is another home and I look at this
image often naturally and not in a kind
of tree money save the whales sort of
way but in a way that I find myself
actually wanting more and more to be
reminded or I'm finding myself remind
myself of what it means to be here and
what we're doing when we're making
architecture I think it's a reminder
what it means to be human living on the
earth and just what this human active of
architecture actually is because when we
talk about architecture we're really
only talking about how humans live on
the earth and again for it we have had
an existential digression but how will
we know right now the only life that
exists in the entire universe exists in
this very fragile thin film soupy mess
that wraps this tiny ball floating
around the Sun in the middle
nothing so I think it's important that
we understand that every building that
we make that we every build and included
to the earth was the earth every
material we use started as the earth
basically we take material we take the
earth and reformat it we reprocess it
and put it back into the earth as
architecture we live surrounded by our
own inventions and architecture or
otherwise the chairs are sitting in the
chalkboard the lights here started as
the earth I don't even really know what
that means myself but I think it's
really really important to be constantly
reminded at that we go to great lengths
to get those resources exactly as I said
this is the only life we understand that
exists in the universe and it's the
human form of that life that has almost
total control over the resources of the
earth and we go to very deep lengths
here to get sheet rock the gypsum mine
is a Shiro and look at this image and I
wonder why
sometimes we make monsters to extract
minerals for rocks and we make
gargantuan infrastructure to basically
whittle the earth into the shapes that
we use to build
and I think it's important that we as
architects are mindful of the kind of
ways in which we receive the material
which we have a very intellectual
relationship with how it gets
but now I can think I can maybe start to
talk about another form of that we're
all as architects may be more familiar
with at home as a kind of center of
domesticity and I spend a lot of my time
as an architect whether working on
literally homes or any other form of
architecture I think thinking about how
architecture what its role is it's
shaping the daily rituals of human life
quotidian or otherwise just what is
architecture how does it elevate
positive shape the way on earth so I
thought I'd show three projects today
one is the renovation of the building
that was a home into an office the
second project is the renovation of a
garage into a home and the third project
is a home that maybe ends are being
slightly
more than just the first project is the
hexer foundation for children we were
approached by the director of this
children's philanthropic foundation to
create a new foundation headquarters for
them so they didn't do any program on
their own they basically funded arts
programs throughout the city but they
needed a place to have meetings that we
had offices for Burlington setters and
there's very little program to this and
they ended up in purchasing building on
the Upper East Side a townhouse that was
originally designed in 1902 by William
extravagent architect so it was a home
designed by an architect before an
architect went through many different
incarnations in its life between the
time this was designed in us inheriting
it and really the interior was a real
pest each of their search shades of his
former glory but it was really overlaid
with decades of bad decisions and in
fact would be inherited it
it was the soudanese ambassadors house
and because Subban had no embassy in New
York it was also that the de facto
embassy
we went to kind of survey the space
every door we opened the closet door or
otherwise there was a mattress with
somebody and some political asylum
seeker it's a very strange juxtaposition
of never learn outside but as an
architect you looked at it as a typology
right the time house it's a purse
Pacific typology it is very long narrow
building it's an infill space as a front
back the front lends itself to a
generous space maybe because that's like
the back lends itself to the same kind
of thing because that's where the light
is and the middle basically lends itself
to circulation
homage of suburban
that supports the life on either side of
the building
[Music]
so we looked at the product as a way of
wanting to near the question this
technology have the middle bit something
that we know of so familiarly how can we
make it
seem unfamiliar therefore slightly more
as a result so we kind of accepted the
plan typology
townhouse as you can see here basically
mutilated the new plants stair and
elevator at center generous spaces
upfront generous spaces and back and
little else it will come back to his
plan a second but what we thought we
could question more is the section of
the townhouse this idea of
stratification in a building like this
is kinda pancake structure where purple
has no idea what blue is doing who has
no idea what brings to it but otherwise
are between them we thought how can we
just slightly mess with that that
relationship
and I say only slightly because it's
there's very little footprint here to
work with us so it's not as if it's
really to tear up great portions of this
there is a kind of balance between
usable real estate that we need and that
you're making architectural
we thought about doing that we could
create a set of relationships who just
aren't there otherwise and so you see
the section it was just a matter of
Manhattan border court matta-clark menu
sort of way slicing through these four
plates in order to make a space that's
not going to occupy the space the one
that starts to set up relationships that
going to be there otherwise so you see
that in the full-blown section that idea
taking place here where these floors are
all pulled away from the existing party
law and the transverse section you see
that it becomes a very long narrow space
and a stair also participates in and
just quickly go back to the plans then
in show you show you that's that
cut that's been made to that cut
let's stare and just this narrow
slippery
so what that meant structurally it was
that by pulling those floors away from
the wall that is important otherwise so
rather than have a column with lumber
structure that extended out to the floor
we really wanted you to sense that that
liberation so we realized that we could
hang those floors from the roof so we
established this new structural frame
within the building where the roof B
became a means to pick up that corner
any to explore to deliberate then the
way that it connects to the ground
though sort of see that here sorry for
this
you can see the full block and a
construction of that hanging recipe
these members are both in tension this
member ended up being more than just a
rod because we realized once we
liberated the floors from the wall the
wall was not being supported any longer
so this piece had to be able to take the
depression of bracing that wall back so
it is in fact intention it's hanging
this floor below
but it's also an impression that it's
bracing and here is that top view then
that everything is hanging from and then
you see not very clearly here but this
is that space running this way
and ends up looking like this this is
the view immediately upon entry into
space where a move open front door and
then given the full dimension of
building both vertically you see
probably up to sky and also horizontally
and throughout the entire first floor
the ability later on so you're meeting
in a place where you understand where
you are in the world I think that maybe
kind of took that we are we find
ourselves possibly returning to this
idea of how you orient the individual
with the building and power or any
ability within the world by making these
moves you become aware of the larger
world outside the building as much as
I'm aware where you are so you can see
that space under the top at the very top
it's very narrow it's just two feet what
it's just enough to get light into the
building and in fact this rail that
hangs here as a
we've been and I can run along that
track which is for somebody to rappel
down through to the glass or at the wall
whatever is necessary so at the very top
floor that glass wall is vertical it
then begins to taper and open wider as
it moves down the floors the building to
the point where at the base it's at
least as wide as the entry boat so that
when you do walk through that tree
there's been developed by that new at
its base you can see the stair you're
now in many places at any one time
whenever in any one floor you're always
sort of building
disabuse again being in that stare and
recognizing again the power of what is
really a very straightforward and very
simple movement in the building I think
lends their company is exceptional the
spatial relationships I say that to you
because I remember we have students
often struggle believing that somehow
they needs that somehow complication is
the means to complexity and saying
here again you see the idea of and the
kind of maybe the slightly didactic
quality of trying to describe what's
happening in development what physically
is happening in the building that you're
experiencing as you go through it it's
my idea of hanging life at home is
somewhat palpable but the things that
you chose to expose the verses and
things of chose to ensue
starik self that participates in that
same kind of space trying to be very
clear again by making that law that
everything's been liberated from very
free and independent a single open
element pulling the stare away from that
so that light is the means by which you
sort of define that relationship at the
same time articulating the stairs an
object in space as severed from the wall
that monster Nestor
so again you begin to see then how just
bringing light into that central space
through the stair maybe it allows you to
think about that space slightly
differently - even though it against its
for a narrow part of building
here also the stair by being liberated
from the sidewalk it's landing needs to
somehow support it as well so we tried
to make the structure do as many things
as possible in this case that tension
rod is hanging florist also becomes a
way that the stair landing and taking
back onto that that tensou
and raveloe see that again that
admission to open that floor or
horizontally so we're having that same
stretch of understanding why dimensions
here on extra memory but we've also
maybe begin to notice is that the
there's a change in grade from the
street side to the rear yard side which
is behind this image many many
generations to figure out how to make
that transition happen what we
ultimately ended up doing was just
graduated sloping the floor up to the
point where the elevator entry is at a
grade that was at 120 so it wasn't
considered when the rails to be planting
so kind of thing what that introduced
also is then the reception desk became
something that by virtue of this sloping
gradient
desk becomes better call this tantrum
the best
and the rear area this in fact was an
enclosed space originally this frame
that you see is replacing the wall that
was in that plane and we also who love
this wall in order to make this kind of
in-between space outdoor space that's
covered and as it means where they
didn't hold receptions between the scene
work space and have no space these
entities
next project as I said as a garage that
becomes a home and it's also in New York
in a small one block walk alley of
Charles language sits between Charles
treatment parrot Street West Side and
our client lives as lived in there for
many many decades maybe not quite at the
time that this photograph was taken but
what this shows you is the kind of
operation that Ravana gave the area of
Sangha competitive district and through
office time this area of New York I held
on to that that grit and that kind of
edge and sketchiness it was really the
kind of only back-of-house happen that
remained in that happen and there were a
few sort of response if you knew where
they were it was fun to come back
and be part of this this netherworld
and like most of New York that is
celebrated for its authenticity becomes
a victim of its own success largely due
to these towers which are anything but
it was really these towers that set off
the kind of change of happiness to a
place where
[Music]
what
and so those were the 10 that was in
kind of the terms under which we
received this project this is a site
Commons interesting this is a photograph
of the site that we found them too just
by coincidence or a research when we
started out this is a 1930s photograph
but for these habit of trial claim and
you can see that it doesn't look a whole
lot different when we inherited
Oh before I get too deeply into part
number two talk a little bit about the
client he's a he's an architectural I
guess you could call it architectural
photographer but not in a way that we're
making
jazz Staller is photographer who was
really interested in photographing the
margins of architecture kind of
byproducts of architecture or sort of
stuff of architecture before it's
actually become architecture
waste byproducts
very much as a kind of industrial
naturalist
he's really able to look at industrial
space and kind of supply
[Music]
in case you can see this is the project
for the building as we inherited it and
you might see some fire very very tiny
building I think it's 20 feet by 20 feet
and
to that same footprint and our client
was interested in
because of his retina development and
it's going on and because of this fire
is that the same kind of role and wanted
to create a building in at this very
tiny scale that reliably find the
attributes that
etc that was happening around him
here's back to the building again you
can see that it's very small and there's
a very very small rearguard as photos
taken from the townhouse that our client
lives in there's this 12th of rear yard
itself here is the interior
[Music]
salvaged
but the first thing you notice I think
about the building is that there's
absolutely no mediation between the
inside and outside tightening as much as
a sidewalk
and I think if you really begin to think
about how most three workers anyway most
people move from kids from the external
world to the inner world there's a lot
of players ready to move for smaller on
a sidewalk or separates industry you
step from that sidewalk into a lobby and
from that lobbying they step into an
elevator that elevator lift you from the
street exit you out into a partner
worker pregnant and finding her home so
we thought it would be interesting to
try to find a way introduce that same
idea that same buffer in this place that
really had no means to offer it so the
way we looked at that if this plan shows
this is the Charles Lane just building
on my side existing similar sort of
Caritas on the other side and
town house and here's the really are
we thought that by creating a very very
narrow sliver of real estate between the
alley and front door need to generate
the same ideas of domesticity
just to show you the upper level that
bedrooms on top levels stare again very
how you fit all of the elements of
domesticity into criticize
[Music]
you see this tiny titles building vying
for attention and as the fire tower
assists the asymptotes the Paris streets
start construction or construction
[Music]
it was also interesting as this
independent project is again another
kind of infill project the entire
intended building is really found up in
one single service that design so for
better or worse that's the news through
an issue sort of tell the story and we
pretty quickly had a kind of involves
what we wanted that to be which was this
idea of creating a kind of extreme
between the street and the interior and
then also paying very clear sort of
taught face deliver that face ability so
after
the process we all know through
into this which looks like this which is
again a space square that lower level is
kind of indoor outside space in this
case the
eight is open
close
very hot glass beside it stretches over
the length of as a way to maybe not over
articulate because it's such a small
building you want a fairly larger agenda
fussing in the space so exactly the
spaces that are defined themselves
within the space
in close and agrarian reform
relationship the street
that screen was developed by just
imagining be a lane of Steel it's
twisted 90 degrees from plan to the
other alternate orientation
to create
you see here
that's that the interior that space
really everything is on this ground
level this is kitchen this is little
nervous is that nervous
the opposite view to see the kitchen and
again just tried to take advantage here
here at you're literally in between the
inside outside it was open
stretching and I'd give kitchen powder
to the very large it just appropriate as
much space it's good
given the terms here all three
you can see the windows on this very
erotic side are actually quite low and
there's a reason for that is again
because the climate these people
landlord miscibility seen the
relationship between your landlord
himself is that very tiny short space so
what we wanted to do it is create the
conditions where here you still felt in
that sense of extension of the building
and that sense of ownership of that
space
[Music]
tablo
exactly
so the last project is maybe that is
ends up being something more than that
just call this is a project that would
completed on a prior to develop stretch
of plant in the ascent mile I'd love to
show people this photograph of the site
as we originally inherited it it's a
[ __ ] you know that seems like it's
every architects very quite that
possibilities are anything with this
site there's nothing
but I maintain this is not the site for
this project this is the site
here's that sign again all the pumice
topographically
here it is a political construct
property line so within that property
line is also seen in basement so my
client add to that the setback lines
the property lives that becomes the left
and as that the setbacks from natural
conditions of the to oppressed and the
wetlands
this is way from demonstrate
at that that there are two separate
flood zones that establish the elevation
at which building and by that time you
basically him then I basically designed
itself maybe not quite but something
that very very different idea where the
site conditions are strengths are
here's some of the sites of
understanding that bearing on how we
need to occupy it long story short we
ended up
that double bar is relationship with a
transparent bridge connecting them at
the second level and a terrace with fool
connecting them roundly but again you
can see how much of that which make we
like to think of it that's it that's it
was letting to see plan as they will in
the site but you can see that they're
very very much aligned with the building
envelope
the ground level what we tried to do is
a fairly large house is very much not -
- haven't we have been funding that
happen
in fact a very large house a fraction of
what otherwise so we tried to take very
lightly and ground
because not so much Australia idea
mars-1 for them are together but that
bridge becomes the kind of social level
so that there are a bar inside the bars
become a social space and the other had
to become private room so you can see
here kitchen
that holds our
I have
sandbar cover hood here
and player at everything with happen
here
erection it's an emergency
master bedroom four bedrooms and office
yes February's service area
one of the other one of the actually
learner they've even larger constraints
on the project was a vertical one
there's a limit on the height ability B
and there are two different versions
that look at there and being a certain
height if you're a slope and only the
ascendency lower than that your flattery
we needed our client wanted to be as
high as possible because those dudes
that were pulling ourselves away from
the only things between them and their
emotional house is
so you can imagine why that was
developer that it's a slug through house
only the apex and that's what it's at
that height where significant lack of
house and that's the bill it's up there
well we were able to convince the villa
department if we made many many slopes
on a plateau we actually provide the
fact that my project was written so we
went through different layers of time to
study how any slopes that exist
on the structure and still
this is basically where we started with
the
sawtooth and far-field said options
paint a timetable subject and it ended
up doing a lot of things Wars but you
can see here one of the things that it
does is allow the way of bringing light
in move Simon you have a filter as
opposed to
just it's lady
and it also creates the surface which we
can we need harvest solar energy so
that's the
and you
of the house
and you need to see how that sawtooth
creates the place and as I said there
were a lot of opportunities that that
start to present you see that how light
comes through and we were very conscious
that we wanted since he only got like
not to be about you it was plenty to see
our pockets behold anywhere it's
building and space so it was about that
was about really trying to now find a
way to again make one aware of
relationship to the larger many
extensive system
and given the orientation of the flat
portion of that the house is has the
largest residential solar residential
structure to the other state at that
juice our whole ground loop system for
eating the pool and domestic water and
we actually scraped the existing
off the site to in traverser II and
captain pocket for her
back in place
is
it's
so here you begin to see the texture
that are possibilities or opportunities
of not only character the quality its
detail
see how attached the
faces
[Music]
budget the ether because here we enter
the house
the houses are letting something out
and this feel like
[Music]
of
actually it's this in fact in the
original design in place wasn't exterior
spaces with 19 other states these
elements weren't here to get covered
briefly and
the
was success in our list
that is broken it had Mary had crucial
the time that first
that's artistic they need more room so
people into space just his way of
talking that monarch after that you see
result entire operation
here to do that from that greater the
way
our house will understand that house is
crashing and rattling house
and one of the employees working on this
house particular in work nuns houses
that are something more than his houses
is he is I thought so
who
music idea of
text text that happens
she was
to do project in this house and we all
sort of where that product existence are
earlier in that entry area which the
clothes
anywhere
and that's very close to Canada because
we were very concerned at that element
look as much like party architecture
when I was operating as it as a like
piece right so yeah these are big deep
since they're actually led diode runs
along the back and these pins which are
come off of these piece every and the
i/o there's a last tube and runs through
this piece and emerges
so Internet's idea straight
service
the piece
is
yes
elevated arpeggios or any disease and
education
you know we all know that that is our
our currency architecture
I think that we are
[Music]
time
[Music]
he doesn't
this fall was researched
that dissertation reorientation of place
and
sorry
throughout each
[Music]
library
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
we're all
[Music]
how
[Music]
[Music]
a lot of
and in my life
I don't say that
being on but I feel like we never see
the lead the subject over to make the
object world
it's not about
our complex'
[Music]
it is a house that well this size it is
occurrence and fresh house quarter size
but
how
all wrong
here
I
quite yet but
whether that's
to design process question I'm a pastor
all of the questions
right
we go around also
[Music]
that's awesome
[Music]
the name
power
[Music]
just
we're where you are and at all since the
way English partnership Andy
[Music]
they English
[Music]
No
or it
be aware that welcome world what we see
how we see it
cognitive or what you see world
[Music]
also
[Music]
like
[Music]
there's
[Music]
[Music]
here's a hole
which
today we are
[Music]
all those
[Music]
that wasn't my idea
yes
it was a mule careful
what
like I feel so simple as object is that
our
tired
[Music]
[Music]
stupid sidewalls it was whatever we
build market fines
[Music]
that
or any
positive attitude larger markable - left
that response to question that that
[Applause]
actually pain that is
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
larger earth
[Music]
earlier me
[Music]
Thunder riders
you
I think it's a really question
especially
there's not enough how much more
interesting the states
I also the beauty in education
and I believe that
as
I feel less
I am much more interested in the serious
factor and its representation
maybe that's also I
but it all for yourself in the best best
is something that absolutely
more and more of actuals
where I realized that narrative is I
think what actually makes best most
[Music]
you understand that and I say not just
for Arkansas
they else
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I
[Music]
and
I
you
lovely
[Music]
and this exhaustion of
Irish
[Music]
yes
I just
and I myself with that whole game I
remember seeing is that his neighbor
at words
all the titles
morality open where our resources
Howie's I said
I'm hurt yourself
motivation
you have a shot - fudge
I
[Music]
because
[Applause]
