[Applause]
well Thank You Lorena very very well
thank you and I also want to bring
attention I had brought my partner and
the real source of inspiration I T
Blackwell who was my partner and the
firm and in life she's here and none of
this happens without our collaboration
and working together but she wants me to
do all the talking first mostly so here
I am so you know this is a different
talk for me not here threw me a
curveball when he said I don't want you
to just come and talk about your work I
want you to talk about your pedagogy
your teaching and part of this comes
from a lecture I gave it MIT of 10 years
back I don't know if not here remembers
this but we were in his studio and he
came over to me and it's very grave kind
of expression as he if you know Minari
or he can have sometimes it's like
Marlon you have a crisis you have a
crisis between what you practice and
what you teach he says they're both very
good they said they just don't seem to
be informed by each other and I hope I
got that right but I was like oh well I
guess that's by my design I I used to
teach with Peter Eisenman years ago and
we would always talk about yeah what
we're doing in the studio has nothing to
do with what we really do to make
practice and and and also the desire not
to have emulation you like you know you
go in and teach and everybody does what
you do it's really about opening up new
frontiers for the students and really
asking questions
like what if you know why not imagine
and that sort of thing but because I
took an idear seriously about this talk
I dug into that and have tried to find
relationships and I've actually found
more relationships than I ever would
have imagined and then probably there's
more than he might have imagined between
what we do what we practice in effect
production
and a technology versus you know theory
what we teach so we put it bolt it down
to really a combination or two
strategies systems and shapes that
really informs the work that we're doing
in the office as well as the work that
I'm often engaged in in the studio in
the design studio and as Lorena said we
have a small practice of about 18 people
in Fayetteville Arkansas which is in the
middle of the Ozarks it's we like to
call it the land of Bill and a billion
chickens it's it's in the foothills of
the Ozarks it's also home of Walmart the
capital of Walmart and it's undergoing a
real transformation right now both
culturally and economically it's it's
you know if you look in the five best
places to live in the country it's
always at the top five it has a I kind
of really flies on the rate radar really
unique quality of life and we often
we're very much into repurposing so you
know we bought a building we fixed it up
something we did for about 69 dollars a
square foot I think so building we
couldn't figure out what to do we step
keep you know ripping the rock off and
the problem was they started tearing the
structure out so we just our big
strategy here was to paint it in thin
stripes and then take every window
opening and do an essay on windows
everything from Rochelle Brewer to
singer deliberate so we're always
interested in how buildings can be
somewhat didactic now as a young person
in high school growing up I was a
wrestler and I had an experience of
having to wrestle a wrestling bear a
live bear for practice this was in
Colorado one time was a very kind of
memorable moment in my evolution and
formation it's nothing like getting your
butt whipped by a 500-pound wrestling
bear that actually knows wrestling moves
so anyways when you come into our office
this is the existential question about
facing the bear and the challenges and
of course I always like to say payback's
a [ __ ] so you know here we go so office
studio environment is what we like to
keep kind of more striated rather than
kind of teared as such and you know it's
a very kind of open studio lots of
empowerment I think with everyone have
playing a role in the manifestations the
conceptualization and the manifestation
of our projects and so I am caught
between these two worlds of the Academy
and practice and I used the Academy to
really inform the practice and solve
problems in practice as much as I use
practice to solve problems and
challenges in the Academy so I'm going
to talk a little bit about how we engage
and get students again to immerse
themselves in the world as its given to
it now I live in a land of really
disparate of disparate conditions words
like abandonment nostalgia erasure
they're all exploitation they're all
aspects of this place but there are some
really some great gems here it's often
thought of as a place Arkansas as a
place of real natural beauty but
simultaneously one of real constructed
ugliness but there are lots of
exceptions and this is one of them the
building you see on the left Faye Jones
very a classic really part of the Canon
now Thorncrown Chapel in Eureka Springs
Arkansas about an hour away and we've
taken everybody to this Chapel zoomed or
heard saw iseman murki you name it we've
taken them there and they all have a
very similar visceral reaction to the
building because it is architecture in
many ways at the highest level now just
across town is another icon in the
landscape it's part of a tourist
destination called a passion play where
actors act out the life of Christ at the
base of this icon and he's
affectionately known in this part of
Arkansas is milk carton Jesus and he was
designed to be really super tall to be
seen for miles
and as they were erecting him they
discovered that the FAA was going to
require that he have a flashing blue
light on top of his head
so rather than redesign him what they
did is just cut them off at the knees
and push him back into the ground and
now he has these proportions more like a
milk carton in any event I showed this
to you to illustrate the highs and the
lows of what we're working between and
we don't see our task as one of
resolving one condition to the other but
in fact as creating resonance between
these conditions and taking an inclusive
approach to begin to wrap our arms
around the world is given to us so that
we can represent it on our terms as we
find it and to do that we have to be I
think a much more inclusive in our
thinking and so as lorina says we love
to think of architectures larger than
the subject of architecture so what we
like to do is put on eye our wide angle
microscopic lens to generate ideas and
actions from the everyday world by being
very close observers of our place around
us and we're always looking for the
patterns that connect the relationships
between what is nature made and what is
culture made and finding sources of
inspiration between those conditions and
also looking between the ideal and the
real between the ideal and our
discipline and the improvise and again
taking an occlusive approach they all
have value not to create the kind of
plus/minus black/white kind of
opposition's that were often challenged
to do in the in the discipline and by
looking just at the everyday world by
looking at themes I think there Nardo da
Vinci said it best you know it should
not be so hard for you to look into the
ashes of a fire or mud or like places
clouds in which you may find really
marvelous ideas so all we're trying to
do out of the muck of our own condition
out of the the the chaos sometimes of
the design studio is to find really
marvelous ideas and working through the
reductive operations of abstraction to
be kind to represent the firm
world in a more strangely and unfamiliar
way or strangely familiar way so I'm
going to dive right in because I've got
a lot to show you because I'm combining
again teaching and practice so there's
more stuff too so we see these
connections but systems for us is
something that first of all all the
studios that I deal with are really
based in transformation or transmutation
about observing looking translating the
world but never taking it so far that
you leave where your the origins of
where you began behind but it's always
embedded and so the DNA of where you
begin is in the DNA of where you end and
it's more of a transmutation rather than
a transformation and systems for us it
really deals more with indeterminacy
deals more with the see reality that we
find in nature we find in culture and we
find in systems of articulation as we
try to generate those in the work so
I'll just show you a little bit from a
studio we did at the University of
Michigan that in many ways started with
just looking at elements the things that
are most often overlooked in
architecture columns doors windows a
kind of less of a formal approach about
the you know the building in fact what
we have tried to do in all the studio's
has taken not a comprehensive approach
that sees technology as a source but
more of an inter scalar approach with
inter scalar relationships being the
source of a more integrated approach and
I think that is proven to be much better
when you consider the scale of the city
the scale of the building and the scale
of the hand the detail has opportunities
for resoluteness in the making of
architecture in the fullest sense of the
word and as a key to get beyond the
merely
diagrammatic which is often in the built
environment what we are left with and so
we just looked at columns you know what
is a column how do you what does it do
how do you define columns what types of
columns are out there and so students
studied this just initially for a few
weeks trying to define
as an archetype on on on their terms and
to understand what it does not just what
it looks like but what does it do
and then we challenge the students to
take in this particular case a student
was given a column but he was told
also you will now take a window and you
will hybridize these two into a singular
figure and this will be a kind of your
base figure for a field condition that
you will develop that will create
hopefully the basis for an architecture
so he begins to define the column
columns from where he was found in
nature where it's found in culture and
begin to see the patterns that connect
there and then begins to develop his own
prototype combining an idea about the
column in the window but now treating
the element as a spatial proposition so
not something that you perceptually
inhabit but actually becomes you're able
to inhabit and so it becomes something
that is part of the spatial character of
an interior condition and so going
through a variety of studies and
iteration which is absolutely man you
know very important and looking at
variety variation and not the self
sameness that you get in a mechanical
iteration but things that are
self-similar when you're doing it in a
more thoughtful and reflective way and
so he went through a whole series of
these and began to develop because his
base figure was then he begins to
organize in this case we're doing a
project a library with a hundred reading
rooms in Marfa Texas a robbery for the
Western canon in Marfa Texas and so he
inserts these figures into the sheds
that are like a donald judge sheds
almost and creates a dichotomy between a
parametric condition and the more
cartesian limited and where they morph
together great things happen in this
interior
place and so there's the basic box of
light so that idea of the column window
again as a singular figure begins to
provide light articulation space the
reading rooms and you begin to see this
as a kind of a jellyfish that has its
own interior arty within the Cartesian
boxes or sheds in in this particular
plaza and and one of the things are
always trying to do is introduce new
techniques to students creating a
workflow between analog and digital
seeing allowing every student to find
what works best for them but never
allowing them just to become consumed by
one technique and so every year we take
a position about space light material
but also about representation in this
case it's a poppy red prism of color in
which all the spaces are made and so
he's working back and forth in
developing this between the hand and the
digital to develop these particular
spaces and in our own work it was
running parallel to a project we were
doing in the Indianapolis Museum of Art
art Nature Park an experiential center
that we're working with a merry mess
environmental artists they're an IDI
Blake landscape architect where we were
developing a kind of modern grotto and
extended threshold into the park that as
somewhat cave-like and we were really
taken by columns and what could a column
do more than just support something now
we're working directly with G Norton
sand on this who informed us after going
through all these iterations of
developing columns that they didn't need
to be structural in the end what they
needed to be or vessels of light so I
kind of wanted my money back for this as
a structural engineer but actually not
really he came a really great
collaborator in his crew so we went
through all of these fascinated by these
columns that our Aalto had done at
newspaper headquarters I can't remember
the name of the town in Finland but we
had I had five forced my way into this
space and found these columns and I was
like okay and this was a place again to
start we started with just the most
fundamental idea of a column and
developed those that eventually evolved
into the
biomorphic columns that begin to animate
and articulate a space of the threshold
as you come into the park and the
columns are organized on light so as
light moves they're not organized on a
grid they're organized on the passage of
light and so we're carving out of a
refuse mount a 20-foot high refuse Mound
and trying to repurpose that Mound as
this sort of choreographed sequence into
the part elevated pathway a reflecting
pool on the roof so you enter from the
roof down into the grotto underneath and
there these columns morph into these
vessels of light and of course there's a
plenum underneath the floor which
provides air and allows it to stay at a
constant 62 degrees year-round so it's
very cave-like so this is these are
actually skylights at the top of the
columns that then light pours through
the water through the column and then
begins to animate the space as you move
through the columns what's revealed on
the other end is a kind of from vertical
to horizontal space a me Chien kind of
setup frame to the major lake in the
park now this didn't get built due to
the recession but there was another part
of this this is called the experiential
center called in fact the interpretative
Center or the Ruth Lilly Visitors
pavilion which we did have the
opportunity to get built and it again
this is that that site plan that you see
of the experiential and the way it's
tied together with the pathway but the
the site is in the Oxbow of a of the
White River here downtown Indianapolis
Indianapolis Museum of Art Canal so it's
a peninsula it has some real serious
issues with flooding has three 100-year
floods in the last eight years because
of indiscriminate development upriver
and has turned the effectively all of
the land here the hundred acres into a
wetlands of some sort so if you factor
out flood wave flood zones all of that
all you have to build on is 0.67 acres
in this park so it was very easy to
our site and our site is wet the kind
with water we had to the Corps of
Engineers you have to lift the building
up five feet which is right at eye level
out of the forest floor working with our
our Landscape Architect he came up with
an idea of figured mounds that allow the
building to float above that and channel
the water in and around it so that it
almost seamlessly comes out of the
forest floor and floats like an
apparition in the woods but it's our
goal in any kind of systems project is
to seek the nirvana of one material one
detail in a project haven't done it yet
but we are always trying for it
and so here we go we're just using an
exoskeleton one material
IPE and that becomes the floor the wall
and the canopy it's like a kind of like
a taco that or a tortilla this will have
wrapped around the program but what we
were inspired by was what we found in
nature the microscopic images of
butterflies the leaves eaten away by
insects but yet having this structure
left in place a porous surface not
unlike the canopy of the trees that
would allow light water and air to pull
through it same thing what could a
building in an analogous way do
something similar and so that's where it
all came to fruition and the exoskeleton
the geek designed here is while it
appears to be light it's quite heavy but
you never see it you only see it through
its shadow cast by the Sun and it moves
constantly it pulsates with the rhythms
of the day and the rhythms of the season
it's different every day it's imbued
with the order of change I need to get a
video this week show you how it just
kind of comes on and off like a lantern
and and then to get pie the codes on the
floor on the deck I should say we
inserted one by two ultra or UV rated
acrylic bars and screwed an aside so you
could again people could walk on it but
then we light it at night and it becomes
this apparition in the woods and it's
very simple susan glass between charred
wood service area
then we begin to pleat but the system
for larger holes not just punch through
it but pleat the system itself and this
creates these other intensities of light
and chances for snow and rain to pass
through as well and again thinking about
the abstraction what weathers and what
doesn't whether this is now all silver
but the black charred box remains it's
abstract it's some kind of an abstract
permanence in the woods small building
but the first National Honor Award
winner for the city of Indianapolis in
their entire history but a beloved
building in the park now using the
system's the idea of the unit and the
multiple as a way to develop a system of
articulation less about form in many
ways and more about the space between
and more less about architecture of the
thin the fast and the explicit it
challenges the museum kind of paradigm
for it with an architecture that is
thick slow and implicit and so the idea
of an interior already becomes manifest
in these types of projects rather than
the seamless interface between outside
and inside and so I just want to show
you one students project is a mosque in
Albuquerque New Mexico and all of our
products begin by you know actually
going there each student was given a
cactus an actual cactus that they
observed they measured they analyzed
they try to understand how water worked
with it how light what makes it you know
stubbornly persistent and bent on its
own survival what is that and how what
is the analog for architecture and very
often I have students look at natural
elements things that are not
architecture but have an architecture in
the way that maybe like a computer has
an architecture and to understand that
as a system in an analogous way and then
we spent each student spends 80 hours
drawing a form surface
drawing of the cactus itself and then
developing a detail from the cactus
focusing in drawing that as you see in
black and white black and white and that
becomes the genesis for a field
condition a field of units that is just
basically creating this fantasy of the
cactus right I kind of again a
transmutation and from that and I don't
have I wish I had all the processed
drawings but through it iteration after
iteration a tectonic wall is developed
and then the wall is tested against
certain kind of formal desires in the
way that it's situated by program and
sight to begin to discover the
intelligence in the system its ability
to adapt to anomalies and eccentricities
that may happen in the system and we're
also looking at materials things like
everything from nickel the copper two
bronze each student is given metal we
work with a Zehner advocated Kansas City
and they use chemical processes and and
physical processes to begin to treat the
metal to begin to alter the metal to
understand what its own properties are
as they think about how they used it for
their particular design always on the
site immersed in the site speculating in
composite ways of what it would be like
to inhabit the site and then beginning
we gave to give them the port we pour
plaster of Paris models that are blocked
and they carved the project out of the
block so it is carved in its own way out
of the darkness and the project emerges
in a monolithic way both landscape and
architecture and then and only then do
we begin to speculate on the site plant
and the students begin to develop a
choreographed sequence of vignettes that
take you through the land into the
interior as well and beginning to see
what tests what this can do as a system
of articulation in terms
experience simple plan's the plants tend
to be simple the sections not as much
especially on the envelope and it really
becomes a project that is very much
about the envelope and the system itself
the exterior as well as the interior and
this is in great detail to understand
the relationships between structure and
cladding how we built today but
beginning to conceive of it as something
perhaps more monolithic but done in
layered ways and then ultimately this
results in the building and its position
on the earth into the sky the interior
as well because that's very important
and then of course the ultimate kind of
articulation in our own work even at the
smallest level we're always dealing with
systems how do we deal with the unit and
the multiple to develop articulation
systems or articulation a house the
honey house for a beekeeper in North
Carolina eight foot by 24 foot long it's
based on one architectural element a
wall made a quarter-inch steel plate and
folded glass that's load-bearing
essentially a load-bearing wall made of
voids and this is developed through
analyzing the bee boxes of a beekeeper
and understanding that the frames that
you see in the bee box delimits the
activity of the bee but they don't
change the way in which it's programmed
to behave so it actually has its own
system of operating within the frames
and so the idea of dual systems
cooperating together to make a larger
system is something that we're very very
keen on and a lot of this actually came
out of sitting in a lecture by Jeff
Kipnis years ago and talking about
monads and self generating systems and
then you know the whole time I've been
drawing a bee house that looked like a
bee and it was only then that I
certainly became to the realization that
it's really about a system it's about
what does it do what can it do rather
than what does it look like
so analog versus metaphor and so it
becomes an organizing wall for the
display of honey a brie Soleil as well
as I said a structural wall that carries
half the load
this particular structure and it comes
with opacity translucency transparency
depending on how you engage it and it's
conceived as a kit of parts again a
system that is pre manufactured in
Fayetteville and then shipped to North
Carolina where this is a tin cache
there's North Carolina and erected in
three weeks why did we do that
because it's hard to keep contractors in
the mountains in North Carolina on the
job because they have all these seasons
they have like turkey season deer season
you know dating season all of these
things and it's really it's not so we
just say well we'll make it ourselves
and ship it out there and that's how
that's how it all worked out so but
understanding this is what gives you
empowers you to scale up if you can
understand a system at this scale you
can understand it better at a larger
scale
now sheeps are a big part of also what
we're doing in the office before I
became an architect I was a cartoonist
and I very much studied all my life how
to get the greatest degree of expression
from the most reduced diagram profile
silhouette I see every building as a
visit as something having personality
something that in effect sits on the
ground in a particular way
beats the sky in a particular way and
that is a special character that does
not depend entirely on formal
manipulations but in again on posture so
shapes so this is how we design almost
it purely in section in silhouette I'm
working in a landscape that is mostly
space not a lot of form opposite of New
York which is mostly formed not as much
space so the singularity of of buildings
is very important to be in the round and
understanding these on the horizon the
profile is everything if you see a barn
if you see a shed you see a silo those
are powerful in their relationship to
their horizon and that's how I often see
that so we this is a taxonomy we have
tons of these throughout the office and
again looking at the everyday to find
ways to represent the world in a diff
way so perform at Gordon matta-clark
here on this barn we represent it to
become something else through program
through sight through other external and
internal forces in the process and it
becomes strangely familiar and what it
allows us to get away with is a lot of
stuff in our neck of the woods here
because it it is it produces a
productive tension between what is local
and what is global being mindful of a
more universal language but bringing it
into a local context through local form
and a project that sort of illustrates
this very well is a post-katrina project
that was funded by Oprah Winfrey and
Autodesk incredible collaboration there
for architecture for Humanity in Biloxi
Mississippi starting with a shotgun
house FEMA has demanded that all
buildings now be raised up to 11 feet
above the street level in the city all
new buildings which if you think about
the social and urban implications of
that as if it's you know again
transformational for city our approach
was to simply recognize that there is an
interface in our culture between the
private world of the house and the
public world of the street which is the
porch the front porch that's where
people often socialize so we insisted on
keeping the porch on the ground as we
elevated that this building 15-under
square-foot house and then we stack the
program to make it more adaptable to
various sites and to minimize the
residual space that you get from long
shotgun houses the local typology and
that became what we call the porch dog
house which is a prototypical
market-rate house for a hundred and
thirty-five dollars a square foot that
can be reproduced unlike many of the
houses you see and they get a I call it
to get it right program but to make it
right program which are basically
unicorns half a million dollar homes
subsidized to about $50,000 LEED
Platinum but who cares in the end you
can't reproduce them and and that's I
think that's a big Achilles heel of that
program but really dump things
perforated shutters that control the Sun
but also can be locked
place for security a lot of people
Katrina died because they didn't want to
leave their possessions here you could
lockbox the entire house things like
perforated stairs as water rises doesn't
force itself up into the house it just
comes through and this if you little
cottage you see there is a Katrina
cottage by the new urbanist this is the
demonstrates the impoverishment of their
architectural ideas not so much their
urban planning principles but
architectural ideas this is what they
came up with and I can guarantee a which
building will be there in the next
category four storm and I think in a
Darwinian moment we have to be able to
adapt and I think typologically we have
to see typology is not fixed but in fact
evolutionary and dynamic so the shape
doing probably I want to share with you
is something that we've really started
to get into a little bit more again
based on this idea that let's go with
the thick the slow and the implicit we
have actively outlawed what we call
screens and things in the school
temporarily
that means no perforated screens over a
curtain wall system as a sectional
device for the building some kind of
faint stab at ephemerality we're saying
no let's try something else not that
that is necessarily bad but it becomes a
trope in so many schools these day and
it's you know it's easy at a certain
level so what what if you had to
actually make windows you had to
actually think about figure and and the
figural configuration what if all of
that has to be taken on you know so
decorated ducks and figural sheds come
back on onto the menu and so this
particular case we're doing a project in
DUMBO at st. Anne's it's a public
bathhouse which New York has a whole
history up and also a hidden speakeasy
embedded in the bathhouse that you
wouldn't know you're in the bathhouse of
here in the speakeasy or you wouldn't
know
the speakeasy was there if you're in the
bathhouse and this is again centered
around figure figure relationships
following the light and making concrete
float one material one detail concrete
only and again as I said situated just
across at the bottom of the Brooklyn
Bridge here the student you know looking
for sources of inspiration in the water
Chile's project in the Canary Islands as
well as things like Blade Runner but
just trying to think about atmosphere
and to think about that the role of
light in that and again it's located
right in the courtyard of Saint Anne's
and it begins to kind of straddle that
triangular courtyard that wall that the
brick wall which used obviously used to
be a storage building all along there I
think was it called Empire or enterprise
or something like that it's that whole
development along there and so we
started by doing sections no plans
sections only charcoal and only and then
once you got through charcoal and making
of models and so forth you switch to the
digital but shaping it thinking of the
environmental and the thermal as a way
to shape the interior and and the
interior and really starting to deal
with thickness as a way to sort of begin
to develop the plants that have a strew
figure-ground
relationship and as well
developing a sectional and formal
figured set of relations between outside
and inside and then really thinking
about how that manifests itself sexually
in a in a variety of volumes rather than
just the extension of space you know in
one or two directions and I think this
becomes very very critical to the
complexity richness of the space and
then a a study of shapes in and figures
to get the right thing to work for you
as it situates itself between the sky
and the ground and and then ultimately
this is the the building which is all
done important place concrete
and we just worked with a concrete
consultant the students working with
they're working with a lighting designer
here from New York all of them are from
New York so we had people from keys
office we had Alex Miller from Taylor
Miller lighting as well as pratik revile
from trans solar working with the
students on chimneys and all sorts of
things that deal with climate and
comfort and the students are again are
working in drawing casting concrete I
think that's something that should be
dear to folks here at Cukor this Koch
Cooper there's culture of making
styrofoam burning the styrofoam to make
the space out of the port and place
concrete and then photographing it under
light to begin to test the vitality of
those spaces and then really trying to
understand systems as well you think
from geothermal to the to the thermal
variety that you would get in a public
bath that has a caldarium and you know
the frigidarium and those different
types of cold and hot spaces and then
detailing it and really getting into the
scale of the hand how would something
like this come together and what's
possible and again just asking what is
if what if right and so anyways so
there's these are the kind of shape now
shape is a big thing and it probably
none more so in this little project
which is a north adducts Christian
Church in Springdale Arkansas it's a
it's a church that was done for $100 a
square foot people ask well how did you
do that well first we went back to
origins just looking at what's the least
we could do and we went back to the
beginnings of the church and you know
looking at the typology looking at
what's what can we do to embed all the
icons all of the rituals that the church
is involved with this is where they used
to pray and worship in a rundown office
building in Springdale and they could
say they only had $100 a square foot and
they want us to build this church right
here for them and we said yeah well we
can make it out of cardboard we would
we can do that for you but you know but
I said we don't want to do this right
here these are adventures and religious
architecture where I come from and you
know metal buildings with a cross hung
on it I grew up in the south southern
baptists but and you can debate this but
it's like you know I don't believe if
you believe in God I don't believe he's
hanging out there you wouldn't live here
when your SUV cost more than the church
I think there's problems with that
problem a value system problem and I
told them I said you don't want to go
that route and they said well yeah but
he said you can't build us the big brick
church with all the traditions and
Byzantine kind of influence that we
wanted then you'll have to just work
with this and I said oh this is a
welding shed on a piece of property they
had bought into the interstate and I
said oh you mean like tear it down and
then build a church the sanctuary in the
fellowship hall and they were like no we
want you to take this and turn it into
the church and of course our heart sank
it was like wow man this is terrible
so any of it what we did is we added 10
foot to the front of it produce a North
X that would set up a an act axial
relationship with the sanctuary the
fellowship hall with moveable walls for
overspill doing special services and we
re skinned it with a box rib metal
system off the shelf but we fabricate
all the transitional details locally so
you get a level of abstraction you don't
get what they give you and so everything
is coerced out windows doors there's the
fire door with the concrete pad at the
bottom everything is coarse and so even
if you can't afford it the I della T to
craft and thought is paramount to
realizing something that's reductive and
expressive and that's what we were after
here and of course and then we mixed in
a little Corbusier with it because I I
feel like everything goes better with
little Korb on the canopy here that we
took from the I believe was the guard
house from guard garsh and then we lit
it up at night like a like a billboard
it faces the interstate this is the site
here looking to the estate and there's
other big red patches or big mega
churches in the area here
go most of our projects come with cows
this is the section through the narthex
you have the father John's office on the
second floor looking down the narthex
that cabinet here right here is a return
air duct this is the niche for st.
Nicholas the patron saint you pick up
candles here and you go underneath the
tower bathed in the blood of Christ and
then into the sanctuary and and so there
that is and it's just a kind of very
simple ritual that's done every time
there is a worship service again bathed
through the tower the top and the and
the blood red and then inside we cut one
one hole in the existing building to get
Eastern light and in an iconic status
made of bar stock steel again everything
though is proportioned with Greek
proportioning system so we're using the
golden mean as a way to polish the form
and the spaces to get that kind of
connectivity not only to their history
of the church but also between the
different scales of the building one of
the things that they had to have though
was a dome and with a Pantocrator and
there was no way we could put a dome on
top of the building because of the
superstructure having to cut through it
so we SPECT a fiberglass dome they
couldn't afford it the contractor didn't
think he could build one well enough and
they were stuck in the middle of
construction with no dome and they were
very upset
and finally the contractor came up with
an idea he said you know I know a guy 20
miles out in the mountains he's a metal
worker and he loves beer so for two
cases of beer we can get a satellite
dish and that can become our dome and so
that's what we did we gave two cases of
beer we've got the dish we brought it
back in we skim coated it in plaster
jacked it up on a scissor lift and here
we are we they have their dough that's
how we roll yeah in Arkansas and the
beauty of this is that in 2013 we got a
phone call from the National AIA to tell
us that this had won a national
and they were so impressed with the
budget they said they did some research
on this and discovered that this is the
least expensive building ever to win a
national a iar award and so what it does
is underscores what we're doing out in
the middle of the country which is to
demonstrate that architecture can happen
anywhere at any scale at any budget and
for anyone and that's something that's I
think very important to what we're doing
what we're trying to work with all the
students but increasingly the land where
I am which is rural is becoming more and
more suburban eyes and this condition
you see here where these two conditions
are rubbing up against each other is is
quite powerful we were asked by a
pediatrician to design a clinic for him
right in the middle of a suburban huge
suburban development in Rogers Arkansas
and again I've talked about trying to be
inclusive so it wasn't a matter of
ignoring that it was there it was the
way of questioning it critiquing it and
saying could we what if we could develop
a new species of suburban architecture
through a process of abstraction what if
we could take one material two colors
one form and challenge all the earth
SATs exaggerated twelve different
materials twelve different moves on
every building you see in suburbia and
so what we came up with was this
particular figure this PD at pediatric
clinic in in the in this in suburbia and
it is there are no windows on the south
side because due to HIPPA they can't
have windows in the patient room so
everything is sky lit from above but it
creates a figure that's analogous to
what's going on pork we share patients
dropped off the foot which is the stair
that brings you to the reception area
these are all the patient rooms the
staff have their own entrance back here
and this is a lounge for doctors in
between their calls surgery and so forth
what places where they relax so it's a
place for the worker as well as for the
patient and this is the context that
sits it we like to call it an abstract
figure
landscape of unholy unions and so we're
looking at the things we love billboards
silos grain elevators and and then also
those things that where we don't love so
much the typical suburban well what if
we got those together in an unholy union
and that's what manifests itself in the
in the pediatric clinic which
understands its place in suburbia not
just to be engaged by the foot traffic
but by cars and so as you drive by at 40
miles an hour engage that custom Cayenne
red box red metal skin and pass it it
begins to act as more of a sign or
billboard in the landscape than
something completely in the round and
begins to flatten out so here's the pork
of share into the lobby we covered all
of the these main stair and blue glass
up above so you get this ephemeral light
of blue that changes throughout the day
that creates sense of wonder for the
kids and parents to go up through very
carefully laid-out efficiently laid out
between the patient and the staff so you
don't get a lot of chaos and overlap in
in their circulation and flow and very
quiet and then like in the in the in the
waiting room which if you have kids and
you've ever been to a pediatric clinic
it is very often chaos and so we're
really a letting the architecture
dictate the behavior or how or model the
behavior perhaps of how you occupied
this particular space and then again the
figure up above this is the louse with
the north light for the doctors and
their staff light it up at night and add
a little art but again it challenges in
its own way the status quo and I think
key to the idea of practice once you
leave the Academy or once you leave the
school is to offer alternative models in
everything that you do this is what can
change the benchmark for reality for all
people here because I think we the
people don't necessarily love our
as they their reality is a certain way
but if you can begin to alter that
reality you might get a kind of
engagement that you may ever might have
imagined so we're now working on a
school an independent school in
Bentonville Arkansas it's called a
fading school this is a school that is
about plot applied learning six through
12
it's a maker school they have three
signature programs it's called basically
wheels meals and reels each student gets
a bicycle they learn how to fabricate
bikes they learn bike culture they learn
how to fix bikes they also have meals
they learn how to produce food to grow
food to cultivate food to make food and
reels they learn how to tell stories
using animation and film these are the
three programs and so we wanted to make
a campus from scratch this is working
with landscape architect Andrew pogon as
well as sq duma's ripple we divided up
some of the buildings but a school for
scrap at 30 acre campus they had taken
the dean of students from princeton and
made them the headmaster for this school
and so the curriculum in the school
become a didactic kind of relationship
and we started just by looking at our
place at farm groupings that we have we
the leading producer of chickens in the
country Northwest Arkansas but we looked
at that as a way to begin to start
thinking about how we lay this campus
out there's a West Campus and an East
Campus right here a big covered drop-off
this is all the Arts and what we call
reels the animation and classrooms here
this is wheels with a bike fabrication
maker labs the home building for dining
and for the cultivation and making of
food testing kitchens and then the
performance Performing Arts Center here
and then the bike barn with its pump
track and soccer and all of that so and
it's named after a pilot Louise Thaden
who was a contemporary of Amelia Earhart
who grew up
Bentonville Arkansas so that is very
important as well and so we developed
this 300 foot long 20 foot wide what we
call the super shed using a operation
called pitch and roll which is the same
operation used to fly a plane begin to
develop kind of formal relationships
there but also by perforating the mill
finish aluminum and with poly polygala
on the on the roof of this thing we
create a kind of constant changing
dappled light that is analogous to the
boss of pecan trees that sit right next
to it again every aspect of this the
buildings in campus becomes an
educational opportunity and again we're
inspired again not just by nature made
by machine made so we were really
interested in how we could make building
that would work with the grasses that
were being printed as well as the green
gold paint with a Shelby GT Mustang
Shelby GT 67 this one is and so we
developed a custom color of green gold
with gold metal flake and and something
that changes in the light again to be in
how do you say an interface between the
grasses and again this idea of the
machine and then this this becomes that
figure that moves through the landscape
here and this is the realest building
has just been completed and occupied it
will also be the place for film the
local Film Festival it'll be one of the
venues for that because that's where
films are being made at this school so
this is a community lawn people to watch
films on and you can begin to see it to
its roof now also pitches in roll it's a
six hundred foot long building and
rather than being just a straight shed
like the chicken sheds begin to inflect
it to scale this length of it but begin
to pitch and roll the roof to scale each
room so rather than just dealing with
some notion of equality which is the
same we want to deal with equity this is
very different right if you see a race
you have staggered lanes we need going
around a curve rather than the same line
because everybody starts from a
different place and so it isn't just the
numbing instrument
that you often find in school where
everybody gets the same room but in fact
you get variety of light of space
throughout the building and that creates
the delight
these are skylights that you know like
the outside and what's that about you
know it well it's about always being
connected to the sky to the ground so
forth yeah inside we had very little
money but plywood is a big data appear
so we use plywood roofs we're building
this for 218 dollars a square foot this
is the student lounge here that you see
on the end faces west so we want to kind
of think about how the Sun works on that
we're the BRE Soleil and then we just
started the plantings as well and this
is the the wheels building it interfaces
with Main Street so it has a big bike
shed they the students will as part of
their community service will fix
neighborhood bikes that communities
bikes for free on Saturdays so it has
this big covered perforated visor that
also blocks the Western Sun so again try
to do two or three things with one thing
and we then the barn that I want to talk
about here is a reinterpretation of the
Ozark Red Barn that begins again is
developed in profile built like a barn
air blowers through it it's off the grid
except for the changing rooms and and
all made locally with local
prefabricated trusses with trusses and
it lights up like a lantern at night and
this really becomes the hood ornament
for the school no pun intended and it's
under construction now and then the
final building that's coming together is
the Performance Center and and then
again this is a buildings kind of
negotiating between the other three
buildings I would spend a good bit of
time at the American Academy this year
and designed the building there with our
consultant from London of theatres
consultant and this idea of the loggia
in a small town that would organize the
edge
of the street and provide a place for
activity and shelter and some semblance
of urbanity and rather than on a corner
excite if I can pull that back just a
little bit a lot of people say oh you've
got to reinforce the corner but it's
really not urban as you can see this is
the town so this is a public part the
school had made for people to walk their
dogs and so we just fold that in and
what we really strengthen is the entry
into the campus this way
moving east west and this armature then
really begins to establish an edge and
sets up space at the corner rather than
form so it's an inversion of how you
might typically approach it but we're
not in a typical situation here and then
we're using the same boxer of metal
system to begin to develop against them
delight there this is the big porch
there's no Lobby here to the Performance
Center but people can come out of the
the main stair and performances can
happen out here as well the inside is
very simple straightforward and then the
section through the theater about
300-seat we can span to 700 because it's
a the stage is level with the ground and
he can lift some of the front seating up
to kind of flatten out the stage and put
more people there and all made out of
local red of plywood quarter sawn to
reveal the grain in that so this is in
design development and where we start
construction at the first of the year
and that should complete the whole
school but again very much about shape
very much in the way same way as the new
part we just finished a few years ago
with James corner field operations sure
everybody knows who they are with a High
Line we worked for several years with
them on the largest urban park in
America 4,500 acre urban park in Memphis
Tennessee this is the River Mississippi
River Memphis is along the connection
between Arkansas and Tennessee of course
the birthplace of rock and roll
Jerry Lewis dearly Lewis that was
Presley Johnny Cash Howlin wolf BB King
all of those folks played on the street
Beale Street in the 50s it was really a
hub for that but at the same time in the
opposite side of Memphis was a prison
farm where prisoners worked the 4,500
acres of crops vegetables cattle and
cotton to feed themselves but also to
sell that to the local community in the
70s that became a kind of not a
acceptable form of rehabilitation that
land was given the county the county
didn't know what to do with 4,500 acres
a non-profit emerge and Shelby Farms
Park emerged with it a park that was
actually quite popular but did not
reflect the socio-economic diversity of
Memphis and wasn't used as much and was
having difficulty sustaining itself it's
quite large I just want to illustrate to
you Shelby Farms this is Central Park
right here so Shelby is as big as
downtown Memphis here so it's it's quite
a park so Jay CFO worked with a master
plan to plan a million trees to rethink
all the different landscapes but the key
component was a 200 acre part of the
park that needed to expand a lake and
create a series of programs and
structures that could create their own
economic viability and sustain the park
this was like a stage kiosk visitor
center restaurant retreat center Event
Center picnic pavilions boat kiosk
things like that and that was what we
were asked to do so and or work with Jay
CFO to organize those around this
expanded lake and so we can to see those
as a series of figures and ensemble
that are in dialogue with each other
with a reduced pallet of materials and
one central operation which is shade how
can each building create its own shade
because where we're at without shade
there are no people it's very hot and
humid place so that was that was our
goal and this is that figure of
characters that fill out the the 'deal
and then of course
we start again with typology x' with
going back to origins the dog trot house
how do you create breezes porches what
what do they do how do we bring that
forward this is an 8,000 square foot
visitor center with an 8,000 square foot
porch the boat kiosk with its own figure
with the canoes in storage and kayaks
picnic pavilions that are reserved out
for three months they call the crickets
and the stage pavilion which also has to
act as a shape of vision when it's not
being used and then the restaurant
retreat center this is the kind of the
landscape we're working in restaurant
retreat center that effectively is
really about events but the restaurant
itself is really about a porch as well
it's an 80 foot deep porch that has more
seating outside than inside facing the
Western Sun you get these beautiful
sunsets on the lake so all of these are
driven by shape it's a it's basically a
shape vocabulary that ties them together
as well as material local Cypress zinc
like metal and then bar great and that's
something that we used for the visitor
center which is really the the nerve
center of the entire park that also
deals in shape but also in an
articulation system made of found
materials that we created our own
cladding system with and so that leads
us to the final part of this hybrids
where they both come together and I
think if you think about what I'm
showing you
they're always already there it's just
there's different emphases but here
we're more mindful of the combination of
the idea of systems and shapes to make a
more robust architecture and so again
this is a 32 foot cantilever provide
shade year-round and it's cooled by five
twenty foot Big Ass Fans
that and that's the product name form
but that that is important because you
can program the porch year-round
recreates its own again revenue stream
for the park and its own breeze ways
that create the transition from parking
to the landscape but also create its own
breeze
to help cool so again one or two
materials moving through and then in an
unobstructed view of the landscape
through this enlarged cantilever again
we work with Dean or dancin and ëcí on
this and this bar great aluminum bar
great is light you have to come up with
a connection to tie it to the to the
substructure then to the superstructure
but it creates diaphanous kind of
quality to the vertical surface that can
be lit from within and began almost
lantern light jellyfish-like
as the sun sets another project that
takes on these similar characteristics
of systems in shape is the the kind of
keenan tower house was really pivotal in
our careers this really kind of what set
us up nationally which is a seven story
house in in fayetteville and we had
never done a tower before but I had seen
towers the local grain elevators I
traveled to Italy I've been to Yemen and
we were really inspired by how towers
are organized kind of in Reverse where
the the biggest social spaces are at the
very top rather than at the bottom but
we had to look at what nature had given
us on the site which was these beautiful
oak trees in the striated bar and so we
looked at those and developed our own
analogous kind of system of milled white
oak fins that wrap a 50 foot high
stairway and create a kind of filtered
light into this vertical space and you
can see we're using local Creek stone
local River rock and crushed pecan
shells for the floor so you actually
sink in the floor when you step on it
and these are our very fit clients you
see going up the steps there's actually
99 steps couldn't get it in 200 but once
you get to the top this is a place of
with views in 360 all the way around
with so it's really more about the
horizon a stair falls out of the ceiling
you climb up and then it's a room with
control spaces to the outside but
there is no roof so it's really about
the sky above so the whole structure
becomes a structure about view and the
act of viewing as much it as is as a
place of dwelling and a lot of us had
come from developing our own vocabulary
early on when we had no work so I
developed a series of prototypes houses
one in particular was the dragonfly
house which came from a form of
architectural husbandry of taking a
dragonfly in a camper and selectively
marrying them together to create this
particular figure we'd never got a
commission to do this but when we got
the tower we thought well here's an
opportunity to kind of repurpose that as
well so and it really it made a lot of
sense in relationship to the wood and to
that beautiful metal skin that relates
to a series of towers in the landscape
as well so this last project I want to
show you the last student project was
just recently done a couple years ago at
UT Austin where we wanted to rethink the
typology of the monastery and my
favorite building in the world is la
tourette the students had been de la
Tourette so we had gotten drawings of it
and we wanted to do a vertical monastery
that was the project in Memphis on the
banks of the Mississippi based on the
writings of Thomas Merton a kind of new
monasticism that is no longer about just
introspection living in the world in a
place shut off from the world
but it's about civic engagement as well
so it's both interior and exterior in
terms of that engagement what would that
be like so the students had to analyze
reduce EA's LaTourette
and I asked them to kind of look at the
relationships historically and it kind
of internally and then repurpose it on a
vertical site on a site less than half
the size of the site of LaTourette and
so they had to take those elements and
refigure them restock them without
changing them
and this began to evolve into a kind of
new configuration of an existing
typology and work canonical work and
then I asked each of them the 3d print
those alright so we could see them as
the way you see LaTourette is something
that's both sculptural and spatial and
so we've create a kind of new type and
that was what we're after and that was
the setup to begin to develop in this
particular case this monastery that
employs systems and shapes and figure
along the Mississippi in South Memphis
and next to a park the DeSoto part were
DeSoto first discovered the Mississippi
and going through a series of
programmatic iterations and diagrams to
look at the different permutations that
stacking a vertical system would imply
to ultimately then begin to think about
it three dimensionally in an iterative
way so this is one student going through
a series of permutations to O'Riley
arrive at at the figure that most
satisfied the site the program and the
architectural desire and then finding
wise to represent that it and both by in
some ways by deconstructing it but also
by reconnecting it in this case the most
sacred part is at the top of an Indian
Mount which is in the DeSoto park and
finding that relationship out to the
river beyond and then really starting to
develop those relationships sexually so
it really becomes not so much a planned
problem but a sectional problem and and
then looking at that interstitial
condition between the different primary
programmatic spaces and then looking at
the interface with the park and with the
river as a way to shape the building
itself again through one material in
this particular case zinc clad concrete
and then you begin to see on both sides
but between the banks of the river at
the park itself final models interiors
and then the building so here it all
comes together in a kind of resolute way
where all of the scales scale of the
city the scale of the building are and
the scale of the hand are in dialogue
with each other and this last project
I'll show you is something we had the
opportunity to do which is an
architecture school for the University
of Arkansas enormous challenge is the
first major scale project for our office
we teamed with Polk Stanley Wilcox at a
little rock to build up a little bit
more capacity and we had the opportunity
to add 35,000 square foot to a
sixty-five thousand square foot BOS arts
building we were informed by the school
that that all the new addition had to do
is be the same width and the length as
this neoclassical eastern wing many
people on our faculty and at the
university said well you should just
take this and repeat it over here and I
said well yeah but we're not in order
deign we wouldn't do that and that would
be anathema to a 21st century school of
architecture so we did want to be
responsive to how we work both with the
terrain and with the typology and what
existed so we used a very control series
of materials limestone rain screen
panels that come nearby from the
original quarry for the limestone on the
old building a 200 foot long custom-made
brie Soleil of fretted glass spins and
steel frame glass and ported placed
concrete by the fellow who did the
concrete for today on dough's Pulitzer
Museum Peter Clarkson who wrote our
specs for that and those were the three
materials primarily and when we use the
proportioning system very similar to the
existing to create a dialogue between
the old and the new again this condition
of resonance is which is what we were
after
and then figuring out how to actually
build it on a very constrained site
which was deprogramming the the middle
which was filled with books because this
used to be a library and then reprogram
it so we build our way we put a crane in
the middle and builder her way out and
then add the addition and then this is
the figure
kind of a sectional figure that creates
an interface between the community of
this University and what's going on
inside with the studios in the
auditorium and such
full-scale mock-ups again this is all
custom-designed and locally made and
that becomes our one window that was our
big joke we're making just one window
and one figure and a new entrance that
then allows the rest of the university
to move through the building along the
axis the main axis of the university and
then repurposing again taking down 200
year old oak trees turning them into
tableaus creating them into lumber and
then they this tableau becomes a stage
we've had Shakespearean actors mariachi
bands exhibits the whole thing and then
a diagram that shows what's renovated
what's restored what's new and how does
all that come together as a system show
that perceptually you create an interior
tea that seems almost seamless you
understand the relationships but it's
not about dissonance between the old and
new and then the most difficult space
was the our big big our Great Hall so to
speak where we do our reviews and such
which was the reference part of the
library poor light poor acoustics we
blew the top off of it reprogrammed it
with studios stretched the 2,500 square
foot fabric perforated fabric backlit it
the perforations help with the acoustics
cut a hole in the middle of it 8 foot by
20 foot piece of glass from Germany that
becomes the window to the sky in the
middle and then we cut a hole in the
west wall to allow you to take things
out of the room which we're landlocked
and make that threshold from the old to
the new is so really the DNA of the old
and the DNA of the new become mixed here
and creates something else both are
better for it I think so here's some of
those images there and then the formal
joint between the old and new which is
actually programmed stairs transparency
as well as social spaces and and then
some primary spaces big auditorium
underneath the rake becomes the student
lounge and then behind the screen
becomes the fact
so all of that is kind of programmed
together and becomes a great classroom
with natural light or not and then on
the top our faculty offices a green roof
very monk-like office spaces with
seminar rooms and outdoor porch place to
take lunch also a place for education
classroom as well and a place of refuge
and prospect looking out to the Boston
mountains to the south then ultimately
you see the multi generations with the
oldest building on campus and the far
distance Old Main that middle generation
and the new generation all in dialogue
with each other I've had to talk fast
which is hard for a southerner but I
thank you and I and I welcome your
questions Thanks
[Applause]
