[Applause]
Thank You Michael I am really annoyed by
this introduction I don't know if I
would ever think of these exact words
for myself at all describe myself like
this from now on when I'm asked so thank
you and thank you so much for the
invitation to to speak about the book
that I just received today I'd like to
pass it around so that you can check it
and here are some postcards so I'm very
happy to come back to the Cooper Union
and share share the work that I've been
doing over the past four years on this
project that was originally an
exhibition and later on it became a
publication because I'm here and because
people like narratives and stories to
kind of delve into the context of one's
work I'll start with the story and this
story is somewhere between fiction and
reality and it's a very common day a day
like any other
on November 2016 basically when we found
out that the elections were won by
Donald Trump I'm actually having to
figure out only one thing how do I
change the slides and speak from there
it might be is it a great thing for
sharings yeah there's another closed
world which is here so I hope it does
not break during the lecture
[Laughter]
okay all right so I'll present to you
the the book that I've just handed
around the architecture of closed worlds
or what is the power of and I'm
starting with a story a very common and
trite day on November 2016
winter has suddenly arrived and outside
it snows I am inside
airtight and connected to the world
inside I breathe my own exhalation so
while reading news of dismay over the US
elections and respired to make patterns
in my super insulated window just seeing
the condensation dripping assures me
that I'm unaffected from the cold as
well as the political disarray in
Washington I see the city steadily
freezing yet my own sphere is warm cozy
and equipped with power and Wi-Fi
syncing might be more useful for
survival than food looking behind the
walls where everything happens I
recollect Reyner Banham words my home is
not a house it is a labyrinth of noisy
heated ductwork pipes and wires sustain
my voluntary detachment from the
visceral raw and dirty urban space and
forge my total immersion in electronic
information trends my atmosphere is
fully recycled by heavyweight
infrastructure that I cannot see nor
would I wish to see if I could add plans
to these pipes and roots oil
hydroponically perhaps my hallucination
of unaffected Nostromo change from
fierce political ruptures could be
prolonged ideas homegrown a program
offer some distraction from the ongoing
news feed now anyone can grow a garden
inside and my plan is to grow vegetables
and tomatoes feeding them with my own
 inside my microcosm my safe replica
of an unsafe world the living and
manufactured have been interred
to secure that compound geochemical
affinity between capital and excrement
the purpose of this super system this
ego sphere as peter slaughter go ahead
would call it is to nurture other
complexities me do i personify the
contemporary human subject that is
blissfully distant from all that matters
yet entirely immersed in a carefully
curated replication or reverberation of
the world life cannot get any denser
inside my own bubble and of course this
kind of trite story is nothing new the
world in a bottle is nothing new to
architects in fact architectural role in
the reconstruction of idealized
microcosms is tied to the convoluted
history of utopia and here we see a very
famous utopia one that is very closely
connected to the context of the book
Buckminster Fuller and Sochi Saddam's
dome over Manhattan and we can also
recall Bonhams environmental bubble or
house record cause this project a piece
of nature I understood Natur that was
presented in the 1970s and art fair in
Cologne these these samples are iconic
illustrations of a period of a very
intense environmental anxiety very close
to the oil crisis and precisely because
they manifest like jarred fossils like
in a fishbowl are lost idea of the
untamed land what might resonate with
our climate today however is that the
containment is not explicitly
environmental it is not simply a
regulation of climate and air quality
closed worlds ensure the preservation of
civic interactions living patterns and
an urbanity in an imagined curated stage
set extruded from reality all animate
and inanimate bodies are coded by
networks of exchange and subsumed into
urban production climate is directed
along with protocols of trade and civic
interactions
one of the things I'm trying to argue in
the book is that closed worlds is no
longer a poetic metaphor it is no longer
tied to the history of utopia but it has
become profitably real it might be
committed to a deeply rooted fantasy of
architecture producing nature yet it is
fully integrated within the fabric of
reality in many ways all buildings and
large chunks of cities are atmospheric
collectives that define enclosures our
indoor environments today are in fact
politically charged spaces that reflect
social ideas and culturally specific
standards of taste and judgment because
data and measurements an environmental
control offer trustworthy and convincing
mediums and illustrations they have
attained tremendous power and influence
which has been maintained and circulated
even though in most cases these type
these types of criteria institutionalize
many observed principles the
manipulation of organic and ecological
processes confined in artificial
enclosures have become metaphors for
enforcing cultural and by standards of
life by recalling the power of data and
cultural capital so in the book overall
I argue that the history of 20th century
architecture design and engineering has
been closely linked to the
conceptualization production of closed
systems their partial reconstructions of
the world in space and time closed
systems speak of the eerie transference
of life using architecture as the medium
and vessel to secure a compulsive
cycling of matter energy and data the
projects documented in the book
represent entirely different and
antithetical political ideologies and
very different agendas they range from
military experiments to counter cultural
practices and the nostalgia of the
homesteaded housing movement to more
recently the dubious concept of
ecological tourism and environmental
capitalism in all cases the systems are
real are real they have all been built
and tested and they're invested in the
strangeness of the real they are
experimentally implemented rather than
based upon speculation so they're
definitely not utopia so they reveal to
us the strangeness of the world that we
live in and possibly challenge what we
consider to be sustainable in order to
to help you get into the context of the
book I'm going to show four case studies
which is something that the book does it
really presents an archive of 37 living
prototypes and tries to read their
stories together
so I'm gonna start I'm going to show you
four and I'm gonna start by this one
because it is it is the one that has a
greenhouse and it's a very famous that
claim a Tron in 1960 and the rise of
botanical capital that's the theme in
the story related to this prototype so
the Missouri Botanical Gardens was the
first air-conditioned hemispherical
greenhouse that used a data center to
control its mechanical air supply
hydration systems and lighting even to
control bird calls it's known through
the term climate Ron and it was designed
by st. Louis architects Murphy and
Mackay along with Thomas Howard a guy
that used to work for Beckman is her
fuller and later inherited his dome
Enterprise called synergetics in 1958 in
addition to displaying more than 15,000
tropical plants inside a non-native
environment the claim matron housed an
artificial miniature Mountain a
Himalayan mist forest a waterfall and
aquarium lily ponds and a swamp to
achieve this very carefully curated
natural stage set the mechanical
engineers Paul lund and Associates
designed two different air streams
to counter the real climate of the area
to counter the effects of summer and
winter McMinn sir fuller visited the
facility in 1964 and his presence in the
minute in the media was ubiquitous
however he did not design the climate
Ron contrary to the opinion of many
historians the guy that was actually
behind the scenes and designed the claim
at ron was a plant pathologist and
horticulturalist called fritz went who
was the gardens director and the
inventor of the claim a current concept
Wendt envisioned a public Botanical
showcases spectable with a controlled
but varied atmosphere for research at
place where a dozen climates could range
from steaming jungles to cool mountains
and coexist in a single great room he
controlled the garden by this machine
the Honeywell data center known as the
climate Ron's brain information was fed
to the brain by a nerve system of
thermostats and humidistat constantly
checking each climate area in making
continual corrections to the claim at
Ron's air conditioning streams the brain
had a lot of other operations that went
could supervise you could push a button
to turn on a rainstorm you could turn on
a hundred thousand watt banks of
floodlights for a day of a blistering
sunshine you could also turn on bird
calls to give visitors an audible
impression of a jungle it was very much
an administered scenery that was apt not
just for the growth of plants but also
for an entertaining embodied experience
within a savage unspoiled natural world
so the climate Ron is important not only
because of its infrastructure facility
of the fact that plants were controlled
by these machines in 1960 but also
because it was the first facility to
capitalize on sensorial immersion into a
primitive humid vegetable world taken
from the jungle almost like a
prophylactic from the dirty urban
landscape which is which are the words
that went you
prior to his work at the climate Ron
went used to work at the California
Institute of Technology since the 1930s
where he developed the idea of a fighter
Tron and in quotes this was a fully
air-conditioned environment for the
growing of commercial crops that
maintained constant temperature and
humidity levels in response to the
pollution of urban environment and quote
the phyto Tron demonstrated that PLAs
placed inside the sealed unified
environment would grow better that
planet would grow in the variable
atmosphere of a city a position that
remains one of the most controversial
and contested legacies of high modern
biology went essentially what he
advocated for with the that this
facility was the homogenous Asian of the
atmosphere and for the construction of a
sealed enclosure that would build and
maintain pure atmospheres of constancy
where plants and humans could flourish
in their comfort zones without any
deviations from established atmospheric
norms now in the 50s it was very much a
desired challenge for engineers to
create a thermal equilibrium in interior
comfort zones in narrow ranges this
desire reflected the modern body as a
tool in a constant atmospheric medium in
order to control and predict its
behavior and growth these efforts were
not systematized until later in the
1980s following the oil crisis and the
introduction of the sealed building
interior that would prevent energy loss
in the 90s the American Society of
heating refrigerating and
air-conditioning engineers as rahi
determined that certain combinations of
air temperature relative humidity air
motion and mean radiant temperature
resulted in what most people consider
thermal comfort now it is precisely this
mechanical vision of biology that gives
life specifically a modern character
and this is one of the arguments of
French philosopher and physician Joe
Cheng en if organisms either people or
plants are examined explicitly as
mechanical structures serving a physical
equilibrium one cannot account for the
complexity or the beauty of life
independently that climate Ron is far
and this is these are some of the charts
that engineers would do in the 50s that
all our conditioning companies use today
call the psychrometric charts now one of
the interests in this book is that
history is not really history that stays
in the past but it is not a historical
example of it something that is revived
today and this is this is the new
headquarters of Amazon that just opened
its doors a few months ago in downtown
Seattle which is called Amazon
biospheres exclusively to be used by
Amazon employees to secure higher
productivity levels for workers to
create this jungle type of office tree
which is what the architects had worked
on this project and BBJ architects
argued for Amazon hired full-time a
horticulturalist this guy Ron Gallardo
to safeguard the biodiversity and
well-being of plant growth and they were
growing these plants for years until
they would be moved to the headquarters
the company has also invent invested
along with the four billion headquarters
in augmented brain development according
to the presence of people close to
vegetal life so they have a lot of
statistics that argue that if you
control the atmosphere you control the
kind of level of productivity of their
workers at the same time this project
that is very famous in its leading
project by Grimshaw architects in
Cornwall England altered to the regional
economy of the region and contributed
over 1 billion pounds to the Cornish
economy since 2000 as to
Smit argues that is Eden's executive
vice chairman and co-founder even print
represents a lost world by manifesting
literally the loss of the Earth's
biodiversity even however neither
combats climate change nor provides a
toolkit of architectural precautions it
is not a performative piece of
architecture what it successfully does
is to construct an impressive stage set
for our loss encased in a bubble like a
souvenir based on Eden's income Schmitt
popularized a term that has been used
since ecological capitalism a term that
indicates not necessarily the
capitalization of nature but the
capitalization of a sense of loss of
nature that has become eventually a
stepping stone stone for the development
of new economies so having shown this
example and moving on to something very
very different the prototype for a
master/slave between 1956 and 1957 t2 an
anthropomorphic machine it is basically
a man-machine integration prototype or a
closure becomes a communication
prototype not necessarily the ceiling of
a space but it it is illustrated through
the idea of circular feedback circular
communication feedback and two to help
you introduce into into these types of
projects I will start by a famous image
it was used by John McHale in several of
his publications this is Cornell's
aeronautical laboratory exoskeletal
harness system it was developed by
Cornell Laboratory and it was used by
Mikhail in several of his publications
for a cover of architectural design
quarterly inside an ad issue that he
edited in 1967 and also in his famous
book the future of the future in 1969
this image showcases both the system of
excessive technological ornamentation
but also it illustrates a solid feedback
loop in the Met in the mechanical
armature motor impulses from nerves and
muscles are picked up and fed to
artificial muscles and the devices
correspond to the body's own nervous
system so it is not an autonomous system
but one that reads the responses of the
of the bodily nervous system and
augments the body's performance and
makes a body stronger beyond physical
limitations hence the term that Mikael
invented for these types of prototypes
called man plus now the bonding of men
and machine in a closed circuit
represents an entire genealogy of
experiments for man-machine integration
under the rubric of a very strange term
called master/slave this contentious
term has been used since the 1950s for
anthropomorphic manipulator systems and
later on for computer networking in a US
patent that you see on the screen then
was filed by NASA in 1972 the slave is a
mechanical replica of the Masters body
in armature designed to carry big loads
and endure all possible injury with
virtually no consequence to the user the
term at some point was banned by the
County of Los Angeles and subsequently
the global language monitor because it
was egregious and offensive absolutely
but if we strip away the term from the
terminology any ethical and political
meaning we might find a story of
melancholy
and deep anxiety as much as one of
mechanized Authority and let me show you
an example to prove that this is one of
the master/slave anthropomorphic
manipulator machines an early version
called yes-men the inventor was General
Electric's American engineer called
Ralph Moser that moves hazardous
radioactive materials but also becomes
the mirror image for a dexterous death
dexterous and polite slave helping a
lady into her coat behind the scenes
however he's very distressed and you can
see him struggling here because the
effort it takes to control his slave is
extreme and very very painful in the
close role of the master and slave Moser
engineered a feature that he called
force feedback using sensors and the
robots pincers and arms to pick up and
relay stress and eventually to restore a
tactile sense to the operator as a
recourse of his actions so the person
controlling the slave would feel the
effects of his own actions onto onto his
body
following the yes-man prototype Moser
pioneered an extensive investigation of
cybernetic anthropomorphise machines
called camps as master slave manipulator
projects at General Electric from the
50s to the 70s including handyman in
1958 then you see here the paniculata a
walking machine in 1962 the four-legged
walking truck in 1969 and Hardiman
between 1965 and 1971 in all cases
Mosher develop robotic prototypes with
extra limbs that would be directly tied
to the human nervous system rather than
operate autonomously Mosher envisioned
this type of union our neurons
translated into Kinesis as a kind of
wedding
men and machine were combined in an
intimate unit that performed as one
wedded system and they were the wedding
was further consummated by the the
feature of force feedback feeding back
the level of force to the human operator
along with this key feature it was
critical that the machines not only
mirrored the actions of men but also
looked like men it was vital to
represent with wires and connections
that delicate nervous systems as
translated into servo mechanical
functions anthropomorphism was
proof-of-concept for these engineers
general electrics press release for
their specialty materials handling in
productions divisions said quote the
systems are cybernetic because men is
retained in them and his brain is used
to provide the computer function an
additional result of the intimate
marriage of man and machine was that the
machines are usually man-like or
anthropomorphic in form although the
machine you're seeing today resembles a
very dexterous elephant other than a men
GE hired this industrial designer Earl
Stewart to work closely with motor in
order to direct the architectural form
of the master/slave prototypes in the
machine series the architecture took on
the form of the inner working of things
the guts or the circuitry and the tubes
that materialize all the necessary
connections they exposed in a very
intentional and purposeful way plumbing
and circuitry and developed an aesthetic
proposition from the performance of
circulation and system feedback loops
the lurking image equivalent to this
requisition is Venom's famous
environmental bubble and the baroque of
mechanical gadget REE that he proposed
with Francois Telegraph this is the big
dog this is the kind of legacy that
that of the camps that we see today by
Boston Dynamics that was recently
purchased by Google and and the same
kind of aesthetic purpose issue of all
the wires exposed is is the same but
they remove the feature of forced
feedback the this prototype along with
its predecessors that I have shown to
you illustrate a type of environmental
Expressionism that is still in beard as
proof of concept even if the machines do
not work that well in many projects
there is no intent to mimic nature
formally or functionally but to expose
the mechanical and chemical viscera of
ecosystems and buildings and of course
this is something that is proven through
the history of architecture are not just
calves from the Pompidou onward to many
other buildings considering today's
ubiquity of different genres and
machines and machine learning with big
data and responsive system the
master/slave devices exhibit little if
no computational intelligence that is
intelligence by machines with a learning
capacity although references
reconnaissance robots amazon flying
drones that are respected to invade our
skies by 2020 big dog and mark bot what
you have just seen are controlled by a
master user in a linear chain of
commands each master slave machine might
be limited in its operational
intelligence nevertheless
as Benjamin Bradley suggests it is a
fastness of their pervasion spinning out
of control on their own that might in
fact form the body of an accidental
global mega structure this replicate
body of the master and slave envisions a
world entirely based on mediation both
between individuals and with space our
constantly connected existence allows
individuals to affirm themselves by
augmenting their containment of
something simultaneously interior izing
and exterior rising even though the
master slave model reflects and even
materializes
an absurdity of self-love it is perhaps
the truest version we have of human
nature and its absence and with that I'm
moving to something again very very
different the prototype of Epcot between
1966 and 1982 and the architecture of
compulsive happiness and the man behind
it is no other than Walt Disney who I
actually hate but anyway but but he's
very important to the experiment of the
closed world because he designed in 1966
his dream project Epcot which is an
abbreviation for experimental prototype
community of tomorrow
Epcot was basically a controlled
sanitized and protected circular City
providing not only a new theme park of
entertainment and leisure but new living
patterns for what he called happy
dwellers Disney really believed that
happiness could be designed through
technology and more specifically by
regulating pollution trash ventilation
and electricity to offer excuse me
comfort leisure to happy 12 the Disney
ideal offered uncomplicated wholesome
entertainment inside Disney's own
pre-engineered fantasy and you see here
an audience dispossessed by by making it
mouse which was an idea that was as much
a closed world as much as the physical
city that he proposed at Epcot Epcot
when it came out in 1966 has been
largely critiqued for subsuming the
history of utopia from Claude makélélé
due to a Bonita Howard from the American
city beautiful movement of the 1890s to
Viktor grands urban models along with
the added benefits of improving air
quality and weather comfort it was a
living laboratory as he called it in a
technology showroom for future cities
just at the time when cities through
of the world were decaying and
disintegrating in Epcot each house would
have its own fuels connected to a
centralized waste collection system
water supply system and living farm
using swamp lines and filtering plants
the city was also connected via this
machine the monorail running through the
center and tying all parts of the
property but most importantly it was
meant to be enclosed in a
climate-controlled dome and this is one
of the mock-ups that Disney used
literally copping Bucky Fuller's project
it has been largely critiqued by
architectural critics at that time
here's one critique from Roy Landau an
ad Mickey Mouse The Dictator because he
was interested basically in controlling
human emotions through the sovereignty
of territory and in the pursuit of cap
of happiness as a game of managing
comfort and human physiology this
perception of life as a feedback loop of
input and output as the process of
combustion and oxidation was widespread
in the design of the spacesuit as a life
support system at the time which is
something that Disney was very much
interested in and some of the early
films are about astronauts and other
planets and in the understanding of
trauma following the war in fact Jewish
psychiatrist and neurologist Viktor
Frankl in his best-selling book man's
search for meaning written after his
stay at a Nazi concentration camp argued
that the difference between those who
had lived and those who had died came
down to one thing their ability to find
meaning in the most trivial repetitive
and mechanical tasks of life in his own
words happiness cannot be pursued it
must ensue and could in fact and sue
from the meaning of sustaining life
through a series of problem-solving
challenges likewise and these are very
much system feedback loops for the
astronauts
kind of making very visible the presence
of problem-solving tasks which is
transferred to the design of the built
environment from a general idea of
problem-solving and leveraging life
support and energy flows accordingly the
most important invention of EPCOT was
this this facility the utility doors
which was a series of underground
underground networks for the pollution
of contra for the control of pollution
and cold utilities an underground
network of tunnels contained a series of
systems to handle the waste in the park
that the party produced this is
something that is currently used it was
used at Roosevelt Island
so in Roosevelt Island there used to be
no cars and all the trash was regulated
by underground tunnels so it was
transferred directly from this facility
to result Island as an experiment at
that time still what is significant to
observe is how the language of
environmental or presentation since the
1960s especially with the dissemination
of biologist Howard Odom's energy
systems language called energies has
instrumentalized ecosystems as well as
human agency in terms of input and
output this representation of language
for ecological simulation models
derivative from electronic circuits has
become the primary tool for architects
to visualize performance and energy flow
almost exclusively through the use of
arrows this is something directly
inherited from electronic circuits to
architectural design and it is likewise
Epcot's diagrams for the recycling of
renewable resources reveal a larger
problem of deduction in environmental or
presentation with the dissemination of
these diagrams environmental concerns
have been normalized to a circular form
of reasoning
obscuring the illustration of loss
derailment and the production of new
substances and atmospheres that is the
density of living systems forcing it to
exist into a mechanical flow paradigm
this type of information deduction was
an ongoing anxiety for Chilean biologist
Francisco Varela who argued in his book
the embodied mind following his known
work on auto pieces along with Humberto
Maturana that cognitive cognitive
systems cannot be understood explicitly
based on their input-output
relationships but by their operational
closure a system that has operational
closure is one in which the results of
its processes are those processes
themselves the brain Varela argues uses
processes that change themselves while
operating and thus we cannot separate
such processes from the products they
produce
similarly the language of environmental
representation represents processes
while these processes are trying to
develop a relationship with themselves
in the environment performance is seen
as a cognitive process formation
hypothesis not as a simple prescription
or reflection of a pre given piece of
information returning to Epcot to
Disney's disillusionment the project
never came to fruition he died two
months after he presented the project
and his brother Roy Disney oversaw the
completion changing it to an
entertainment leisure park famously
known as Disney World
nevertheless it is still an autonomous
world of its own governed by internal
rules and regulations sometimes to its
detriment a year ago a toddler was
snatched by a crocodile inside the
premises of the safe haven a testament
to the instability and unpredictability
of the self-organizing nature of closed
world's individual things may die but
what will forever live is the collective
life of the system the aggregate
community of the thriving closed world
as a species of its own
and this is the last example that I will
share with you it is actually the most
famous one in the book biosphere 2 it's
still I visited it this year and it is
it remains one of the largest and most
famous closed ecological systems ever
built its purpose was to test the
viability of a biologically a
regenerative artificial environment in
order to support human habitation in
space and to provide a prototype of an
earth colony in case the earth would be
destroyed it was built by space
biospheres venture a partnership between
add baths and businessmen and
philanthropist and john allen a systems
ecologist and environmentalist bath
spent approximately 200 million dollars
to build and sustain the facility and it
supported two missions with the first
team of researchers entering the
facility 1991 locked from the exterior
world for two years and 20 minutes the
team producer own food they produce our
own air supply and during the entire
experiment all of the cruise waste
including waste from their domesticated
animals Rose recycles through natural
low-tech filtration methods what is very
what this facility is very famous for is
its failure it failed spectacularly and
publicly and it became a public failure
spectacle the first mission was
notorious for technical and operational
failures especially for not creating
enough oxygen after six months oxygen
absorption by raw concrete that was
still curing had depleted oxygen levels
in the facility by six percent along
with the poor quality of the air inside
unanticipated species called crazy-ass
flourish and thrived and the
bias-variance hungered from hunger
throughout the two years of their
residency each of them lost about 1/3 of
their
of their body fat well maybe I should go
there after this baby but anyway the
second mission became infamous for
mutiny and public feuds among different
stakeholders involved in the facilities
management in time John Allen who was
the figure of the philosopher scientist
came to battle with Edie bass the fin
and scare the guy who provided the money
basically the latter camp claimed that
Allan and his synergists were destroying
the credibility of the project that they
were a cult with bass taking action in
hiring the controversial white
nationalists that many of you might know
Steven Bannon to run space biosphere
ventures the involvement of Bannon who
was at the time manager of Bennett & Co
investment banking in Beverly Hills was
detrimental to the project of course of
the woodsman but anyway with bass
imbalance endorsement the second team of
BIOS variants who entered the facility
1994 were ambushed by federal marshals
the two men had concluded that the
founding management team including Allen
and his cult needed to go in retaliation
Allen scientists sabotage the second
experiment and they opened the air lots
of biosphere 2 claiming concern over the
health of the inhabitants they ruined
the second experiment and they were
later arrested the mission was
compromised and it ended soon thereafter
Bannon also had an open quarrel with
bias Farion abigail alien originally
published in tucson citizen in 1996 and
it was a debate that resurfaced in the
media during the u.s. presidential
elections of 2016 it disclosed a series
of threats insults and accusations of
harassment arguably the closed world's
material problems evident in the first
mission were rendered as social and
political problems in the second manned
mission both events revealed that
isolating and reproducing in our
Cheerilee chosen part of the Earth's
biosphere complex and structure and rich
and diversity of species does not reach
equilibrium dynamic equilibrium of
material exchange in the system cannot
set in spontaneously redundancy of
species and the logic of inclusiveness
did not automatically lead to the
cybernetic equilibrium that Alan's so
earnestly desired the battle between
Allen and Baths exposes another
dichotomy in environmental politics that
between the idealization of
self-organization as an idea and the
brutality of Darwinian evolution which
was transposed quite effortless
effortlessly to social order and policy
in many ways biosphere 2 exhibits a
mythology of a consensus based on
natural principles and furthers the
belief that equilibrium should be
translated to social policy and societal
values as a living experiment the
biosphere 2 demonstrated that the limits
of sustainability and their risks
associated with closed ecosystems remain
largely unknown
even though ecosystems are mostly
portrayed in several simulations that we
have for buildings today as robust
circular systems were waste equals food
in a series of cycle the idea of self
sufficiency is compulsive and hysteric
in the will to continually generate new
life from all wasteful cycles of
production and this is how a structure
our built environment a closed world
along with its dwellers is a new type of
unbalanced ecosystemic model susceptible
to the shortcomings of digestion all
substances and fluids are ingested and
excreted in a non-stop process of
material conversions what remains a
paradox is the manner in which this
questionable model imbued with the
vitalism of a digestive stomach has
prevailed as the mainstream model of
what we now call a sustainable Net Zero
habit
opposing energy loss in this light it is
critical to question to what degree
resource conservation strategies are
sustainable forms of practice and also
recognize how impossible ideas become
institutionalized through a series of
bureaucratic mechanisms that are
eventually labeled as eco-friendly or
even worse as green now overall the case
studies that I presented today ask
simple questions how are sustainable
terms developed and institutionalized
how do they become tropes to signal new
political ideologies always expressing
the left than the right at the same time
veiled under the ethics of
environmentalism a new agenda has become
the norm net zero ecological footprint
minimizing energy loss through ceiling
loop systems and other terms are now a
new form of capital closed worlds in
many ways disclose a struggle of
reconciling two utopian ideas the first
of replicating the earth in its totality
with the visceral and raw reality of
stuff unexpectedly generated from
feedback loops somewhere between the
idealization of the world as a whole as
a complete and interconnected system and
the messy and fuzzy leftovers of human
physiology lies an unexplored history of
architecture that I tried to document in
this book the question I would like to
leave you though today with is whether
this is a deviant story of architectural
history and I believe it is not it is a
story that reflects the modern human
subject which is immersed in a carefully
curated replication or evaporation of
the world as a pre engineered fantasy
inside the unimaginable carcass of bits
and fragments of information that we
have to deal with every day in our lives
the only way to navigate possibly is
relative to oneself or as French loss of
her Quentin may assume has put it in a
relational loss with content
our need for embeddedness in the world
and the ecosystem might already be
obsolete in psychoanalysis this closure
corresponds to an antigen etic and fill
a genetic stage of development the stage
of the proto psyche and which the
organism has control over nothing but
itself denying any environmental input
as well as as well as discharging output
in some ways it becomes its own self
referential reality in this new world we
are possibly in dire need of a new kind
of criticism new ways to family with
ideas of interior is a ssin and methods
to break barriers in the way that we
narrate stories through the design of
our environments as well as the shaping
of our reality if every bit of fact is
designed in the world of post truth the
role of the architect even though we
didn't plan it as such has expanded to
more than shaping the physical world and
the aesthetic and experiential aptitudes
of our daily existence in many ways it
has become of civilizational value
possibly the mythic stories of closed
roles and their disobedience burdened by
their visceral flaws might be a viable
counterpart to an alternative deviant
future thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
they were always dystopia in fact and
they were always very interesting enough
when they were narratives they were
narratives that were posed literally
side by side with the narratives that
opposed them this is in the sense when
Plato develops his Republic will get
absolutely gutted by philosophers who
control the world he also talks about
the thriving and messy democracy of
Athens so there's a kind of
interpenetration of the two even in the
narrative there Thomas More the same but
how much more does his two books the
first book is the hell of England the
second book is the hell of utopia this
always discounters between the absolute
because world of utopia and the
absolutely over the messy world of
nature of this yummy physiology and
and that kind right and but if you
actually read and utopia itself in its
narrative continuously questioned by
attacked by and developed through its
faded yes I mean and I find this is
exactly in a strange way I don't think
it's a it's a there's an opposition
between utopia and something else right
some modern utopia
I think utopia itself is the kind of
idealistic program messily absolutely
you know I mean III love this comment
and here you're absolutely right and in
a way it is it is much more of like a
genealogy of technological utopia is
right of technological utopias and in
the book I write for each project all
the failures to illustrate how the
history of failure is consistent in each
project but and and of course the
struggle that you mentioned is present
in all of the experiments what what is
possibly interesting is how the projects
that that I that I've documented were
materialized all of them and not only
are they materialize they're built and
tested and and applied but also they're
becoming part of an investment strategy
of large corporations and large
facilities to create these engineered
fantasies worldwide and it's part of the
bill it's a very major part of the
building environment so it is trying to
to continue this story but to say we're
building it we're building it and we're
basing all of our principles and what is
sustainable on this very ancient
struggle and is pre-engineered fantasy
so it's very much a critique the book I
think as much as it is providing
information
kind of revealing all the kind of
stories behind the scenes of each
project and who was behind it and what
were the ideas and what they were trying
to to accomplish I think overall it's
revealing this consistency of you know
us wanting to build this this this
utopia with the utmost technological
instrumentation but just starting with
the Trump election with rigidity you
have the Trump world which is completely
to do with letting every kind of
disaster happen
yes I'm pushing it towards this pushing
to with disaster letting everything
taking out all controls right which is
totally inhabited and funded by the
world of Amazon
of breath so you have these two again
you know these two worlds which are
totally supporting each other yes
completely consistent I think that what
I find really fascinating in here
because haven't read the book yeah they
just brought straight
he's the different issues that you bring
together that you're cute but they're
after ground unit I think they're into
Warren which is the servant is striving
for power every one of them is it yes
yes absolutely but together with that
you have the very old fantasies of with
power supporting to govern our economic
power the thing is a fantasy of power
and power of man go back to your narc
you know yes trying to fly so get these
we enacted and we're not directed by
what I find fascinating I can put in
inside all this the the importance of
the whole system's approach and I find
that because mainly does interest me but
I find that fascinating
he's essential in terms of a very
changing paradigm when this was event
over the war Second World War and that
was a different approach in terms of
power conquest and technology and the
enactment of supposed to be in Tokyo or
vision or whatever into the real
technology right all these new and I
mean you managed to bring these through
these four discrete I would say cases
right they're not necessarily I'm
finding this election that matrices that
particularly have DVDs issues
such a it's such a perceptive reading I
think that when my next book is which
I'm preparing now is called and not
soulful Earth Catalog
which is precisely what you what you
reference the kind of utopia that
researches after the war in the idea of
whole systems basically and our will and
desire to read the world as such so a
lot of them are about that are it's more
about our desire to read the world as
such rather than what it is and one of
the things I'm interested in is
confronting the raw reality of their
reports the engineering reports with the
kind of incessant desire to to create
these types of systems but I think what
you mentioned is a struggle that is
evident in all of the projects that are
documented in the books and and I think
it's we're still battling with this kind
of idea today in the way that we
understand environmental concerns and
environmental problems because their
reality is that environmental concerns
are still addressed through the kind of
desire for seamless integration with a
national setting for minimizing
destructive environmental footprint
based on let's say the book cradle to
cradle which was published in 2000 which
promotes the idea that waste equals food
is one of the founding is it exemplifies
these types of principles and this is
how environmental problems patterns are
letting forget the good guys yeah the
reality is that a lot of the environment
there is again the double system because
the realities of all the solutions
yes are creating more environmental
problems than the original ones right
and they're in the hands of yes traffic
making and make a perforation
exactly you know so absolutely - I mean
that's what I'm saying I'm very
skeptical but and I one of the in
another text book that I wrote last year
for Oxford encyclopedia
I wrote a the history of ecological
design and the first section was dark
naturalism which was kind of outlining
all of these ideas that countered these
goodness let's say but I think that the
the people that express these other
ideas that you and I might be more
interested in are really grounded into
theoretical questions and philosophical
questions and havin transgress into
prototypes and practice and and building
yet
Timothy Morton Don Haraway Jane Bennett
all of these writers that are kind of
advocating that nature has ended already
absolutely
are you coming to dinner we can discuss
that but thank you this was great
comment
I haven't continually struck I mean it's
at one level when you go and you see a
presentation by somebody who's trying to
transfer ecological sustainable thinking
it dollars to see the circular diagram
of arrows that everything is going to be
happy as smooth and I'm going to take
this out and put it back in and it's
going back in it's coming back out
alright so that has a power in
simplicity and idealism and promotion
the expenditure of capital become
invested in that but I see it used all
the time and academic Senate's to invite
people who should be smart I mean for
non environmental problems or well know
for our use for sustainability but then
a more academic and intellectual
argument and I think one of the
interesting things with bringing
Timothy more than that Arguelles as
different as they are is they don't yet
have that kind of negative impact that
has gained an articulation outside of
philosophical discourse whether it's
built Renata's is a different thing for
them to kind of counter the naivete of
this certainty of circular arrow the
nest that is continually cycling in and
being good and of itself and maybe this
is that doctor and maybe this is this is
the one we need to trouble stay with it
trouble disciple and the she says
I'm a compost is not a pianist she drive
I've taught my students by the way they
have to ask questions well this this
didn't want you you want to give us
something no did they put you in a spot
no I should
the other example you chose today to
show us for American examples
yeah why isn't why why they are where we
are and actually us just as you were
bringing up Steve Mennonite I thought to
myself these are projects each and every
one extra jungle but the question is
yeah yeah I I did I swapped the last
case study which I with originally I was
showing an ecological house that was in
England by a left-wing anarchist too
called Graham Kane that used to study at
the AAA so a lot of the projects in the
book aren't like they've ranged so what
I was interested in the migration of
ideas I didn't show any of that and I
think that's not not a good call like
next lecture I'll put one of these in
because a lot of the projects in the
book are homesteading movement
ecological communities both in England
other countries and also recent projects
by the space program like Mars 500 the
Melisa project which is an extraordinary
coalition of the European Space Agency
that they're estimating to finish in 150
years from now naval already been
working on it for 35 so there's there's
a very wide range of projects and none
of them the ones I showed aligned with
what you say I think it's also because
I'm desperately trying to understand why
we are aware where we are and what
happened and intuitively I selected
these American projects to to really see
the kind of a kind of foresight into a
close role of a political and cultural
climate that we're and we're part of but
in there the reality is that the book
doesn't only stop there it goes to show
all of these other projects and one of
the things I was interested in is the
migration of the same kind of
prescription of how you define a system
to represent entirely different
antithetical ideal antithetical
political ideologies
so how can an anarchist from outside of
London and you know Verner von Braun
that was annexed Nazi that was working
for NASA and wanted to kind of shoot
rockets to the moon how could they have
the same kinds of tools to be working
with and why they were espousing because
because Kane was reading the papers of
NASA to build his house and and I was I
was very interested in this kind of
strange relationships between country
cultural practices and military
experiments and the seamless migration
of these types of ideas to to express
the left and the right simultaneously
with it for industry yeah there weren't
you
absolutely look what happened to the
budget full of them when it went in to
draw the city breath exactly I thought
would yeah exactly
so so so this these migrations are very
interesting to tracking and witness and
discuss it were you with article 17 I
mean it is like yeah I didn't put it
because I just couldn't get to the
spiritual that the spiritual eyes were
just like turn burger it is it is
[Music]
yes it was but in a way it was it was
there was something about spiritualism
and I didn't want to put that into the
game I thought the mix the soup was all
ready to put spiritualism in there and
yes and the documentary is done right I
can read the article but I really owe
something our personalities not so
because not so there is not somebody
that I particularly even if any
otherwise but it was precisely a closed
system where he wanted yeah
control of entire society like so yeah
because you've talked about closed
systems it came back to my mind yes so
these are naive also approach that you
could manage you know in other ways
these other means are not be serving
with the hey me technology approach the
model actually a student has a question
but I notice not many models I wonder
maybe what you think about models as
constructions part partial instructions
about site world or speculative
on their own that's a very good question
I I think and this is just a very
intuitive reaction to your question all
of these experiments were built so the
experiment was the build the living
model in a way and they weren't I mean
in in architecture there's there's a
modality of practice and the models
representation of the larger physical
reality canonically right canonically
it's not that it should be but because
these were types of experimentations
like and a lot of them were done not
necessarily by architects but also by
engineers by inventors by
horticulturalists by an
interdisciplinary group of people I
think there was there were living models
like there were smaller sections of
living models that were testing part of
the whole but then it was directly built
so one of the things that was
interesting to me in doing this book and
I did think about it was that the
sequence of a presentation that we have
that we take for granted in the way that
we think draw operators as architects
was completely reversed and there was a
more direct path to action so the model
was was never really in none of these
projects representation of a reality it
was a reality itself that mattered
their raw physical version of whether
something worked or didn't work and how
it would be implemented 1:1 that was it
was the model itself and I haven't
cognitively said that in the book I
think it's a really good point that you
then you're putting on the table but but
I assume that that's that would be an
answer to to your question that there
was no like there was no given linearity
in the way that
that something would be thought of
represented executed but but that pass
kind of you know it became like a mobius
strip in a way and a lot of things were
done simultaneously but but the models
became the the life of things and the
actual prototype that failed or operated
or or worked in parts
where are those people
Makoto yeah yeah okay yeah
and never very good question well I
think it's do you know do you know that
they're replicating the Eden Project in
China they are and it's basically
investment companies companies
entertainment venture capital
capitalists developers that are trying
to kind of create destinations and
architecture plays along that game
obviously so if you think of a place
like the Dubai Ski Center do you know
have you heard of this which is an it's
it's in the Emory somewhere I don't know
exactly I haven't visited but if you
think of this place if you think of
which which creates an artificial
mountain and a ski resort and and a kind
of interior environment and people can
become part of this kind of fake
entertainment experience you know these
are some people that would that would
put in a very big amount of capital to
create such a project the Eden Project
was so successful and I visited that
last year
I went to England and with thousands of
people there were concerts it was I was
amazed to see what kind of a tourist
destination it was for people observing
plants just to feel differently inside a
controlled atmosphere and they're
replicating that in China because China
has very high levels of pollution
right now Shanghai gives daily reports
about the air
to citizens and they're replicating that
facility enlarged by ten times I don't
remember which area but they're
definitely doing that and then you can
think of all even have malls in the book
I have like a few malls and I'm speaking
about hyper reality and this kind of
postmodern spectacle in in the 1980s so
definitely this is something that goes
on but at the same time it is you know
you have Ellen Musk
the space X you have all of this effort
to to go to Mars the European Space
Agency is highly invested in the Melissa
project and these are not just projects
that are that are the concerns of
astronomers in microbiologists they're
definitely creating principles of energy
flows and how to handle energy
production and food crops and generation
that are migrating into the building
industry very quickly so you you you
wouldn't necessarily think that an
architect or an architectural firm would
be interested in in such a question
but when Grimshaw was asked to design
this new facility that it was 20 times
bigger they have to invest in it right
when Amazon decided that they want to do
their headquarters and they went to and
BBJ architects they had to it had to
become praised their agenda so I I think
that there's there's a kind of
widespread interest but it's not
explicitly coming from architects but it
is very much part of the built
environment and development
it's the European kind of if you can
search interviewed the to the world and
he like I'll do the hard stuff like that
if that's something it's happening now
or something you'll be looking at
everything that has been attempted
yeah well in the exhibition that I
carried in a storefront maybe two years
ago there was a VR experiment by one of
the professors and teachers here Farzin
yes he did he did it for our experiments
so so I thought when it when I saw the
proposal for the exhibition that it was
interesting that this kind of a
commented reality VR reality and the
fact that we really are that we look at
the world through our phones right now
and our reception of the build
environment is so fragmented and this
kind of fragmented attention span has
become a kind of new modality of life
and a perception of knowledge I was I
was very much interested in VR I'm not
sure it is it is it is part of it but
definitely the VR is an entirely
autonomous world and and I became less
and less interested in in in this type
of experiment than the the actual
physical raw reality although it is
something that at the very beginning
when I started working on these research
projects I was interested in very much I
don't know if that answers your question
all right it's like to legitimate I
don't have like a like a who else off of
her answer as to virtual reality but yes
yes
[Music]
we can consider and you know refers to
the in their interrelation with VC
funding developers and also the
scientific inputs and outputs when you
consider the spreadsheet with the very
important model financial model the
testing grounds for that you know the
space where your computations are done
big data itself there's kind of aspects
of these to both worlds and statistics
and predictability is kind of the basis
for
[Music]
absolutely I think I think that's that's
a really important point I mean are you
on Facebook do you feel that you know
algorithms like really change the
modality in which you operate virtually
right you only get they change your
algorithm and you interact with
different people so it is creating a
kind of sense of asphyxiation virtually
so I think I think it's that's that's a
very very important question it's not
just and this is this is what I'm I was
trying to get to but I don't know if I
successfully did it
a closed world it's not just about
energy materials and resources it's also
about a modality of operating within a
system that has a perimeter and what
information goes in and out and how the
system is restructured by processing its
own its own feedback basically I think
that's a hugely important question and
online the kind of underlying code
becomes the ingredient of a closed world
just like you have a tomato a vitamin
and a food crop that can become a closed
world in the phyto Tron you have numbers
and Excel sheets and spreadsheets that
can become the ingredient of of this
other kind of world and in social media
you you do you do see that very
evidently and very very clearly and I
think it really curates your experience
the the problem is that and some some
quote some people that do coding and our
experts in coding we're saying that in
our generation because we're old right
we were interested in coding and in
figuring out how things would work and
tinkering with the system and the code
and the new generation is interested in
using the system rather than
manipulating the kind of under
layers of the system and and and if you
want to change a reality a reality you
have to work with these under layers as
well and it's very similar it's almost
like an analogy if you go to the
biosphere the project that the last
project that I've shown there's there's
the biosphere which is this artificial
swamps and lakes and and oceans and
below that there's an endless series of
tubes and channels and and you know
handling units called the Technosphere
which is this underlying the reality
that enables this kind of fake thing to
happen and in many ways I feel like a
lot of a lot of social media are very
similar to that kind of model you know
through code and through algorithms and
they give us a very ready-made you know
benign version of what we are to
interact with promoted by a rhetoric
which is for you know for my daughter
who's for about goodness and sharing
information and change and freedom so
it's it's a very conspicuous I think
this is where as architects we can
intervene because we realize this
section right we see things that that
aren't people from other disciplines
aren't able to see because in the
biosphere if you just draw a section you
can see the world above on the world
below and you can understand that the
world above is sustained by the
Technosphere and how that is a
revelation basically and such is the
case with with the design of social
media as well so this is why at the end
like I was trying I mean I've come
interested I guess in too many things
but this is why I think that as
architects we have capacities to to see
and to to understand through our
perception of space drawing many
different realities of
and it's important that we enable this
type of perception to more than just
buildings
[Laughter]
[Applause]
