so Jingu my partner she's from China and
indeed as you mentioned we we ended up
here in New York and 2008 we started and
we had to find a name and so solid
objectives item burg Lou was born and
the idea of solid objectives had to do
with the idea that we were very
interested and committed to say
solidifying objectives or to engaging
with you know reality with the real with
material with actually constructing
within you know within the field within
society but as mentioned so we started
our office and then this happened this
is not the reaction to us opening our
office but it very much affected our
practice because if your community
building and you know the entire economy
disappears then you know building
doesn't really happen immediately but at
the same time it really opened up a new
space and I think it was actually
because of this also that there was sort
of a space for a new approach a new
thinking we were very frugal very agile
not so and very flexible in a sense this
openness was very much informed by this
as well the fact that you have to be
able to be you know in different places
be able to engage with different
programs different public's different
sites different challenges and so I'm
not going to show a lot of buildings but
I I will say that the first you think
it's gonna continue like this or not
okay
so we build a number of buildings this
is a this was our first Gupta gallery
that we build them yeah okay I'm gonna
do with this one Museum University of
california-davis we did a lot of
temporary structures to freeze Art Fair
and installation in Milan for the Salone
a larger Institute in Hong Kong and also
some homes some very nice homes on
dreamy locations but we were not just
interested in making things we the the
idea also that I think very much informs
our practice and our thinking is that we
want to engage with say society with
with larger issues that are at stake in
society and now we're in a phase where
we are sort of thinking about how are we
going to develop our practice further
are we going to stay sort of within this
realm of artistic environments
institutional work are we going to
continue to build homes like this
because it's another part of our
practice that I think is really
essential which as much more to do with
engaging with the public and finding
ways to engage in conversations and more
complex issues that are at stake in
society and we feel that today you know
in a time where there is like a lot of
anger everywhere on for various reasons
be it you know access and economy to
environment we're wandering continuously
why you know what are we doing as as
architects in relation to this it's it's
tough we you know we talk about we think
about and we're wondering how can we as
architects actually engage with it I was
in Lisbon the other day and
unfortunately in some way architects
continue to be very sort of stuck in you
know a rural stuck in our own sort of
echo chamber completely trying to sort
of continue to you know and need to have
things remain the same so our you know
interest in in say so-called rationality
or say representation sort of an
obsessive you know moment today with
just sort of making sure that your
things look good on Instagram
we wonder if that's the way you know to
have a practice it wants to
engage with with society beyond and so
currently you know we're thinking about
how to how to deal with the public realm
the public sphere what are other forms
of representation you know who are is
being represented we're very much
wondering if this sort of single topic
conversations you know where you either
have a hat or a or a vest you know what
are the ways in which we can have more
complex dialogues and not get stuck so
that within these within these repeating
topics and so what's the role of the
built environment within this what's the
role of stories that can be told cannot
be told anymore what is the way in which
we can address more of these complex
issues today and that's really what we
you know we are actually really
interested in and what is what is
interesting now and so I'm gonna show
three temporary installations that we
have done in these ten years as well
that maybe talk about certain strategies
we have in which you could engage you
know with with more complex topics and
more larger and more diverse say publics
and then afterwards I will show because
now our practice is a little bit
shifting as you said from say furniture
to even them things on the scale of
landscapes and strategic plans which
engages with larger audiences and how
can we use sort of the strategies that
we developed in these temporary
installations as a way to engage these
larger audiences so there's two parts of
what I will talk about three temporary
installations and then some larger
projects we're working on now that you
know are not finished necessarily yet
but do you know ask us to to have these
more complex conversations so ps1 was
early project we did the young
architects program for MoMA and it's a
simple question make a fun installation
in which people can drink beer and
listen to music but it's also difficult
installation as you know it's in the
backyard of MoMA's courtyard and
everybody is watching and this is 2009
so we took cues from both say the legacy
of MoMA as the way the treasurer of you
know the modern movement and modernity
and the idea that we can design that we
can design our world right that we can
design structures and systems that that
organize us as humans and these are
images of Oskar Schlemmer a
choreographer and dance dance career for
it that teacher at the Bauhaus the left
is called Colin dance or pole dance
which basically speaks about the
relationship between you know the body
us as humans and the structures around
us and this idea of the effect of us you
know as a body as a human in a larger
system is something that we try to
introduce into our installation at ps1
which also at that same time asked
questions about exactly the stability of
these structures right off are the
things we design so we we said we're
gonna occupy the entire courtyard we're
gonna make an interior space that can be
experienced and we're gonna we're gonna
we're gonna build a structure actually a
Cartesian grid of white gridded
structure but not one that offered
stability but actually one that is
always on the verge of collapse
that is completely elastic it completely
weak and we're you or we as occupants as
visitors as public are actually
responsible for its stability and then
we designed a bunch of elements in that
it's you know would activate it would
start make this installation actually
move kinetic and always on the verge of
collapse so the entire quarter was
covered in here you see the installation
and so this also brought one of the
things into our practice that I think we
still use which is the idea of play and
the idea of games and an open-ended
in that sense so we you know these
elements to be dropped into this system
there was no there's no rules there's no
there's no sort of prescriptive way of
how to engage with it but because of the
structure because of its elasticity
because of the elements within it it
started to produce completely new ways
of engagement and play and and and and a
sort of operation that we you know have
not necessarily predicted and so this
speaks about sort of an idea of often of
an openness in which you know you don't
design following a sort of very clear
brief but you design a structure in
which things are allowed to take place
and you introduce elements that
stimulate sort of that kind of
occupation and so the you know we have a
whole range of pictures we found on
social media that show completely
different uses of this space and so play
as one element to think about another
product is much less known and much less
represented because it actually you have
to be there that only the it completely
disappeared happen also in Queens in
Jackson Heights not far from ps1 I think
it was a year after which we'd it's very
Guggenheim Museum and the curator of
architecture at that time David van der
lair he asked a few I think what was
five Barroso architects an artist to
perm or of find stillness in the city so
where can you find quiet in sort of the
crazy cacophony of
of New York City and so we have to find
stillness stillness
[Laughter]
[Music]
let's see if we can find it in in in
Jackson Heights I think it's a hundreds
with 167 languages spoken here and it is
it is a lot of people have been it's a
incredibly rich and diverse neighborhood
this neighborhood of transition right
it's a neighborhood through which many
people move into this country and so it
is for many people their first home in
in the US or this you know it's a very
important place for you know to transit
into say American Society and so we call
the installation that trans historian
and what we did is we actually thought
about how can you find stillness or how
can you create space with words we we
spent time in the neighborhood and you
know research the neighborhood and found
a number of different people characters
there's musicians priests writers poets
and that all we we felt in some way
represented some aspect of the
neighborhood and we asked them to write
a story write a short story about this
idea of finding home within a new within
this new neighborhood
I never designed a few very simple blue
stools that we spread out throughout the
neighborhood over a number of weekends
both on the streets and in parks and and
then you could find you could find a
space you could sit down and then
somebody a volunteer would come and they
would come and start telling you a story
I'm gonna listen to a little story now I
think
the story is called fleshing and my name
is will secret
this was bodies first later in New York
and a second apartment before this one
completely brother an arrangement that
work for some times of his brother
resumed his old habit of constantly
drinking alcohol having established
which bar by were the most accommodating
short temper shortly after finding his
brother had torn his second and last
shirt an altercation with the downstairs
neighbor upon each sighted it was time
to find a place of a job yet it worked
this album whose brother old landlord
mr. Lawrence II who had always liked
body despite or in contrast to his
brothers constant inebriation another
apartment was available in Jackson
Heights and mr. Bernstein shorten would
be perfect for Connie and his wife for
the right short week in India this is
where Connie found himself back morning
drinking tea and waiting for his wife to
come back from to tell brothers we
figured that even keep warm and the
caffeine was in his search for a cat
which had gone missing somewhere in a
small apartment she had gone out hours
earlier while he was asleep to buy
groceries he wasn't sure how long you'd
been bigger than us at most two hours
since waiting yet drank by his estimate
three and a half cups of tea didn't not
yet begun to load the macaque which had
not appeared when he said I was food he
had been a suspect that he did not like
this catch release his wife's cap they
found it together decided to keep it
together but it was not his hat
and reservist he's a said that this was
because he let her work each morning
before the Sun rose and arrived back
shortly after sunset
these were crying hours for the cat and
his wife would not have found employment
got to spend them with the cat they
hadn't even technically they should wait
until they thought of something perfect
his wife said had some responded their
names the way that dogs do that
I never really learned that means we
were used to believe in people we keep
animals that didn't know their own
duties the course needs real reason for
nation the cat was that the government
over the bathroom Bonnie had a habits
coming to America of peeing in the sink
he would lock the door behind him and
pull up the toilet see harmony so
everyone outside with your bank and
before the tank and safely assumed he
was using it and then he would pee into
the sink aggravate some time he would
wash his hands come out a few exactly
moving into the apartment
Bonnie's wife caught him in the act they
forgot to lock the door just dusting she
said how did you do that it's unsanitary
to be playing USA in water but Americans
were wasteful BOTS
and then all types losing but since we
caught Barney modify display by
incorporating a point
slush routine a few seconds ever used
the same in his usual fashion gracyk the
water we have wanted to say as he was
washing his hands thought he thought of
something but heard something coming
from the toilet this is sweet
perhaps it was the cat meow we checked
there was something he thought I
definitely have heard something perhaps
it was coming from the shower money
holding her in society there's nothing
this is pointed and with a headache we
didn't inform Bonnie hold down the
toilet cover and Saturn his head in his
hands now this happens not his first
honey the name came immediately when he
saw the tacky don't worry two months old
lying next to a tree by school fine and
put it in his satchel and carry it home
what is terrible is a girl's name is
brother T's reciate Johnny after John
Wayne a real man insisted the songs were
doing it didn't see gender when it aint
animals and babies they were just you
how flesh will be fought over and then
ronnie haxon mothers help Nate the
kathleen gate suicide with him Kojo was
her elegant solution divining the first
ways satisfy everyone I thought this was
a snippet but I guess it's gonna go on
for a little bit I think we get the
point but so the idea and seller was a
number of these we did that over a
number of weekends 13 stories and I
actually didn't ever wanted to record it
I did not want to have any record of
this because it was really about being
there and experiencing sort of that
space at that moment experience that
that's stillness and in a way the way in
which you can use words and language
which is maybe the you know the light
this is all material or maybe the
heaviest of all material but to create
sort of a boundary or an edge between
you know one space and the other and so
the aspect of this installation which I
think we're thinking about now is like
different narratives different you know
fictions different stories and how you
know that can bring people together and
the last and third sort of temporary
installation we did which deals with
issues that we are thinking about in our
concerned about we did for the Chicago
biannual two years ago at at the
Garfield Park Conservatory in in Chicago
so this is not in the main space where
the Chicago by Anna was happening but it
is actually in an area West in West
Garfield Park which is the the
neighborhood was the highest homicide
rate in Chicago which is obviously
already a city with a very high homicide
rate and it is in this beautiful old
historic conservatory which has been
there for over a hundred 100 20 years
and so you come you know you come into
this neighborhood may you come through
this sort of thin layer of glass in this
oasis of you know incredibly lush nature
and obviously the green
they're say purifying the air and I
should say we work together with the an
artist performance artist Anna Parvati
and so together we came up with this
idea of contemplating the air and
contemplating our environment and since
the Chicago by animal itself I think was
was make new history it was very much
about again sort of an internal say
disciplinary and self referential topic
we call this installation lair booth
lair as a sort of joke towards La Rue
Cler and so error for airs sake we
commissioned a composer to write for a
piece for for wind instruments the
instruments that need the air to perform
so this is a soprano a trombone flute
and a saxophone and you already guessed
that the shape of these outfits are you
know the space the air basically that
the musician needs to do perform so we
have to actually adjust the piece the
musical score a little bit because we
couldn't make can't deliver long enough
for the you know one note of the
trombone player and so these these these
coverings they were made out of air
filtering material so there are mesh
that the basically filters the air and
so the idea is that as they perform the
piece as they breathe in and breathe out
they they clean the air and so we're
gonna also look at this for a few
minutes
I could have to
oh my god sorry sorry it's guys still
talking all right good night
wait how do I know my god this was
better yesterday can tell you when I
rehearsed I'm just gonna delete it the
right thing stop here how about that
okay
this is working
sorry
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
so with that in mind we went on a road
trip this summer with our kids through
the Rust Belt and I'm so the reason why
I wanted to show these three projects is
because I think that the elements that
we explore there are now informing the
way we're working on a number of
projects in this area and since we took
our children glamping in Tasmania on
spring break we thought maybe now they
should see some reality and see sort of
other parts of this world in which you
know this reality is maybe experienced
in a different way and also for us
ourselves to actually understand this
region of this country better because it
has such an effect also on our current
political situation and maybe on the
fact that conversations at this moment
between different publics seem to be so
problematic and so all our stops in some
way we have something to do there either
a project or you know we stopped in
Toledo because I need to show my kids
the Toledo glass pavilion where it
spends five years of my life but I think
this region is a very important region
to think about and to understand and to
actually understand the dynamics the
history and and the way sort of it
evolved and so what better place to
start then in the center of power the
u.s. or the New York State Capitol the
Governor Nelson Rockefeller Empire State
Plaza and Rockefeller Nelson Rockefeller
will be present in many of these stories
because he was a very strong and
powerful figure at that moment as as the
governor of new
work Wallis Harrison built this between
1965 and 1976 for two billion dollars
and it housed several administrative
offices of the state and obviously this
is a very particular way of representing
power and suggests a very sort of
top-down position in which the role say
of government you know situates itself
within our in our midst and in order to
situate it so if there are 7,000 people
have to be moved out through eminent
domain and actually people claim that
the reason why Albany you know went into
decline was exactly because of this
project which in some ways very in
humane at that same time or actually a
little bit earlier 20 years earlier and
our next stop was Buffalo and the
Niagara Falls and I will show a little
bit but we're working on there now but
the history of that site Art Park
started pretty much here when in 1965 so
you know in 1956 this old power station
which is right at the Niagara Falls
collapsed and as soon as it collapsed a
lot of power was lost basically no
electricity anymore and so a lot of
local you know Buffalo that region was a
very strong manufacturing center but
there was a threat that all these
companies would immediately disappear
because there was no power and so the
factories couldn't run anymore and so
within a very short period of time
Congress passed the Niagara
redevelopment act in 1957 and obviously
who better than Robert Moses to you know
put in charge to fix this problem so
within four years they built the new
Niagara Power Project which opened in
1961 and where you see Moses and
Rockefeller when they you know open the
new dam and power is back in the region
and this was
further down the Niagara Gorge towards
us Canada it was in 1961 the largest
facility in the Western world and JFK he
celebrated it saying that this showed as
an example you know to the world of
North American efficiency and
determination the determination also
meant that they had to displace a native
tribe the Tuscarora nation who actually
occupied the land where Robert Moses
needed to dig a big lake and so he
flooded the fifth of their land they
fought this up to the Supreme Court but
ultimately the US Supreme Court decided
that you know power and electricity and
the economy was more important than the
original inhabitants of this land and as
they were digging this there needed to
be a site to dump everything and now
we're coming to Louis ten which is right
there this is art park our site and so
this was not a park and it was not
necessarily it was basically used as a
dumping ground and so as they were
building is this this hydropower
installation you know the soil needed to
be left somewhere and so this big pile
of sand appeared in this town of
Lewiston there was an a local
entrepreneur who wanted to organize
outside drama and he said well this
could be a beautiful site there was a
story a script he had written about the
First Nation narrative and they wanted
to have an outside performance space to
perform this and so he contacted the
local state senator Earl bridges to say
can we use the land because the land was
you know state-owned
and Earl said that's a great idea but
why don't we build a full-fledged
theater here the
you know fantastic productions for dance
for music for theater and what have you
like a real large stage unfortunately
there was not a lot of money and so they
decided to go ahead and building the the
project but without Lobby without
storage spaces without closets dressing
rooms offices rehearsal rooms a box
office and most importantly they didn't
have good sight lines it was a really
bad plan that was willed in a way from
you know top down into the income to
this site and so people already felt
that this is not going well and
everybody left and it was ultimately
left in a newly appointed Commissioner
for Parks and Recreation I have to sort
of manage this this project and so they
basically had three options that I've
owned it's either you know stop it
before it was too late and just take it
apart again which would be a disaster
and at least as a PR from a PR point of
view the other would be to just finish
it and see what happens and the other
would be to actually make a large sort
of art park around it and sort of have
all the arts being addressed in some way
maybe sort of reduced the importance of
this somewhat dysfunctional theater
amongst its middle and so they started
this artist residency program and yeah
this is where Rockefeller comes in again
he says well let's let's go you know all
outlets make this a wonderful place and
so funding was there to start
programming and to start bringing
artists in Robert Smithson had died the
year before in 1970 form an art park
opened and so they started a a residency
in his name for four basically artists
to operate in to work on this in some
way pile of dirt or you know new land
and here and maybe the stars even into
our own practice the idea was process
over product so artists were asked to be
there to interact with the audience and
to produce work very much in response to
demand and it was really
a lot of sale and art and environmental
art and the whole environmental art
movement actually started very much
around this art part not everybody could
go to the desert and dig gigantic the
cities or craters and so for many
artists actually a art park was the
first site in which they could
experiment with with the land and so
there were you know some much of actions
like Gordon matta-clark here on the
right and somebody channeling this
collapsed 20 years earlier of the of the
power plant with it were called bingo
and also Chris burden was this beam drop
that he did there but there was also
more sensitive approaches a lot of
female artists working on different
projects in a more reflective way with
the with the land
Nancy Holt Robert Smithson's Widow also
produced work there and also Island Sun
fest with the pool of virgin earth in
which he basically made this crater this
circle and had seeds sort of blow in and
gradually sort of harvest seeds that
were just you know blowing through the
air and having that to grow and he
claims that that's the way in which
ultimately the entire park became green
and so there was for ten years an
incredible here you see the theater and
but you also see the landscape around it
that the artists created over those ten
years and it was for many people many
people in the town and many people in
the region many people in Buffalo the
key speakers a really important place it
was a really fantastic place where they
really learned well they engage with
many different forms of art and so it
was a very strong se civic asset for
this region and something that brought
the community together and then in 1984
the politics changed and funding dried
up and actually the park was pretty much
left abandoned except for that through
the
summer and they have 12 classic rock
concerts and we went to one when it
opened this season which is Sammy Hagar
who had 71 at some point got so
enthusiastic said you know you guys
don't go die on me now because I really
like what I'm doing and I wanted to come
back here the next 10 years but it's
probably another 10 years that both
Sammy Hagar and the audience are able to
sort of entertain each other in that
space and so the new director said you
know our acts are dying in our audience
is dying what should we do and this is
where we got in and I know if you're
happy that there was also thinking about
working on this project but it's very
it's very sweet
it was a very so we went in with them
with West eight landscape architects who
did Governors Island of course here and
also charcoal blue a theatre consultant
from from the UK but work everywhere but
very quickly we realized and so it's
it's also quite interesting because you
don't win with a it's not about a master
plan right it is an approach and you
have to work with people that it's not
like it's so the idea of the master plan
is completely countered the the actual
necessity of this site it's much more
about what are the ways in which you can
engage with all these different
audiences to create something that they
themselves feel is their Park again
and there's a lot of nostalgia there's a
lot of you know listening to stories of
how great you know it used to be and in
some way at some point we also felt that
actually the the the brief was make art
Park great again and and this nostalgia
in some way needs to be channeled and
and sort of we you know we organized
into something that is much more
forward-looking and and and and maybe
also more inclusive and so we also you
know brought a lot of different people
in but certainly also the the First
Nation there's to basically nations that
that you know used to live here and we
speak with them about what the land
means for them and what the history
means for them and how we should treat
the park and and and this site from from
their point of view and also bringing a
new possible partners new possible
artists but also maybe people that want
to start other activities and businesses
actually within that so going through
the entire history also of all these
layers of soil that have been dumped you
know on this land and and and realizing
that this is not nature it's not you
know it's not something that has that
this is it's not beautiful it's not it's
it's this endless sort of layering and
constructing of human you know ideas
over and over the sort of sediment that
on top of
each other and while working we also
discovered that you can turn off the
Niagara Falls which we thought was
really exciting they did that in 1969 to
clean out trash but actually also to see
if they can make it more beautiful and
so this made us also think about sort of
what is our relationship you know how
are we as humans tinkering you know with
our with our planet and with with this
site so there's a lot of really complex
and very interesting conversations that
are currently sort of informing our
thinking and so one approach that we
have and our further developing and this
is sort of the the current safe
framework with which we are working is
to not you know try to beautify or not
to erase sort of its history but in some
way make of all these layers and make
this idea of the artificiality of this
ground really tangible for an audience
and not just you know for people who
really spend a lot of time here but also
for the sammy hagar fan and so one one
thing for instances that we that we
emphasize the truck road that was used
basically to dump the soil and sort of
this terrorist setting we're trying to
to actually make it more clear more
legible that people realize that this is
really constructed land in which you can
experience from the top all the way to
the bottom of the course to these
different layers and in some way show a
so these the the piles the the the the
different moments in time in which you
know soil was left here on this site
we're working with different so the the
other thing that we're developing is
sort of an attitude with regards to how
you know do we now deal with the
environment not necessarily in the sort
of poetic way that land artists work
with much more in a sort of
environmental conscious way in which
also sort of maybe even say ecological
data as part of the experience itself
these images don't necessarily relate to
what i'm saying but they give you a good
backdrop and then we do a relatively
light touch on the other side itself
either we're not going to make sort of
super-heavy new
constructions but we actually create
sort of places throughout the park that
can be occupied in different ways to
emphasize all the different qualities
within the site itself and the largest
sort of thing that we're working on
currently which is also probably the
most complex and maybe and interesting
is that we really sort of integrating
this amphitheater which is going to be
reoriented and and improved in its in
the way the visitor can experience it in
the landscape itself so that also when
there's nobody there it's actually a
beautiful and sort of wondrous landscape
but it also involves is an incredible
amount of conversations with different
people stakeholders and funders to find
new ways in which actually there can be
a sort of a financial you know impulse
into this area and and that's a one one
thing that we realize now the scale
these projects are actually much more
about organizing conversations instead
of designing narratives rather than
shapes or spaces or objects to be
continued we drove on and also we were
trying to tell our kids we were not
actually looking at architecture but you
know we're having fun and we're on a
holiday so we we I will skip though the
holiday pictures ovm we we we arrived in
Cleveland and in Cleveland you see Lake
Erie behind we're working now on the
public library the Martin Luther King a
branch for the Cleveland Public Library
so Cleveland at some point about you
know over a hundred years ago was was
the sixth largest city in in the US and
a very powerful City mostly because of
steel and it has its old downtown at the
lake here at the site where we are
building it was
sort of a second downtown University
circle and it's the end of Euclid Avenue
and Euclid Avenue was in that they
called Millionaire's Row
and here Rockefeller comes back with
this Rockefellers grandfather who was
actually a founder of US oil or Standard
Oil and he built he was one of the most
prominent inhabitants of millionaires
row here in Cleveland over time this
area you know came in disrepair and
overtaken by expansion but actually our
site is right sort of him what is left
from this very sort of rich historic
area that now basically is a hot hot
spot of different histories and it's
being Gris we-well they're trying to
infuse it with new life and new activity
it's not a project that we're doing is
part of that also the Museum of
Contemporary Arts that for sheet design
is also around the corner there and
there's the Philadelphia Museum of Art
which apparently is the best endowed
museum in the country because of this
you know old wealth that used to be in
Cleveland and in the circle you see the
current branch of the current Martin
Luther King branch which was built and
named after him right after his
assassination and on the left you see
how does my vision as open public and
for porous space with a certain civic
presence and on the right you see how
it's currently where it is actually
quite well used but it doesn't have sort
of this I mean there's just not a lot of
people on the street that sort of occupy
this this this on fee land or not
sorry walk the portico in between and so
now a developer has given is given the
opportunity to move the library
the corner so the library is good to
hear to move over here but built so that
he can build a building there and also
he can build a building on top off the
library the new library that we're doing
so it's a very complicated process again
where there is a public component the
the cleveland library and there's a
private component which is this
developer that together have to figure
out a way to build one building you know
at the same time with two different and
contradictory programs we spend a lot of
time incredible amount of time with
different groups in the area that you
know use or will use this neighborhood
or a branch library because there's you
know many different demographics for
whom the library all has a very
different role or function within their
lives and through these workshops and
sessions you know we developed a number
of observations which maybe are things
that if we all think about it
collectively we can also figure that out
but it is very important if you do that
together with with the public and with
the people that will ultimately use in
this space so but obviously the the
library is very much changing from a
place where you go to find a book or to
find information to actually a place
where you go to find each other if you
want or to find access to I would say
civic society there's very few place and
it was really interesting to learn we
visited all these branch libraries for
you know how for many people this is the
last life line if you want towards jobs
towards information towards you know
being able to participate in our society
now so this idea of the last civic place
we wanted to sort of clearly separate it
from the private development upstairs so
the first thing that was really
important is to sort of make a roof in a
way or a canopy that really divides it
from the the building above and then
show this public space is a very open
open Institute and most importantly I
think on the inside we said we make one
big table the entire library is actually
organized around the table and everybody
is
welcome at this table on the table
houses you know places to work but it
also it has books it's also acts as a
stage it acts as a place to hang out and
so the entire library is being developed
around this sort of large single table
that obviously you know works very
symbolically as well
currently we are you know negotiating
with the developer how much space he
needs for his private lobby on the
ground floor to bring people into the
apartment above and how much space the
library itself has again ongoing so now
we are in design development here next
stop Columbus Indiana yeah some people
some people new who's been there good
good
alright everybody should go also it's
very nice so Columbus Indiana is a very
particular small town in the middle of
Indiana and so it's it's you could say
it's just a town but it's actually
really special down and it's a special
town because of two people which is
urban or Joseph urban Miller and his
wife Celia Simmons Miller
and they were in many ways exemplary
figures for how one you know if one has
power and wealth could actually engage
with you know our our environment born
in the beginning of the century 1909 and
he died in 2004 mr. Miller he you know
was born into the the family already had
a bank and had industry his uncle or his
great uncle it started this company
called Cummins engines Cummins was their
african-american mechanic who was fixing
their car and in the process invented
the
diesel engine and then the Miller said
well why don't we start a company a
diesel engine company they named it
after the mechanic so it's called
Cummins engines after him and it's now
the largest diesel engine manufacturer
in the world and it's seat is in
Columbus Indiana so for mr. Miller it
was not just important to you know have
a great business but also to create a
fantastic place for the entire people in
basically the whole town everybody was
involved in the factory but also beyond
and so he was he built basically a lot
of and I will show some of the busy he
said every public building in this town
and he would support the architectural
fees he would make sure he said we get
we're gonna get the best architects here
and I'm gonna pay you know for their
designs and and they built every public
structure there with one of the you know
with it with the leading architect of
its time it was also very strong civil
rights activists actually and he worked
together with with Martin Luther King to
organize the march on Washington and was
at some point people wanted him to
become president but he always stayed
away from that they actually always stay
in Columbus Indiana and so obviously he
was also supporting the church he had
Elias to Saarinen's built churches there
so on the left father allele and on the
right Eero Saarinen to churches
I am pay that the the library and also
he had Kevin Roche very much involved
doing a post office doing a number of
buildings but also the plants itself so
that the basically the factory itself on
the right is here Kevin Roche
designed factory building and so this
idea that you can actually construct
with good architecture of really civic
society I think it's very much and you
know within his well that's I think the
strongest part of his believe in it and
its legacy he also built his own house
this is 1953 Saarinen designed the house
it's sort of a classical mind grid if
you want organization very modern at the
time with skylights on those sort of
grey lines coming in and example shear
are doing the interiors and you could
say it's really a sort of a you know
most exemplary home of mid-century
modern modernity actually Kevin Roche
was for the project architect there and
then kindly did the landscape and so the
senior Miller died in 2008 and at that
moment it was sort of unclear what what
would happen with this legacy what would
happen with their legacy and what would
happen to Columbus and this and its
relationship to to modern architecture a
number of years ago they started
Columbus exhibit Columbus which
basically asks architects to do an
installation or do something and it
responds to or thinks about or helps us
think about the role of you know design
within the public sphere and what you
know we as architects can do in in those
dialogues and so we were asked this year
to do an installation and that's the one
I will present now and so we like to
make maybe or you know sort of bring
history or bring these narratives into
the installations themselves and respond
very much to to the to the site into the
brief and so we took in a way the sort
of patterns of shear are and here you
see zinnia herself actually embroidering
them and also the idea of the landscape
by Dan Kiley into the into the
installation and when we visited the
house we learned that they're going to
be plant
the hedge this is the hedge around the
Miller house designed by Kylie with
silver this sort of staggering layers
but they are like a they divide
basically the public and the private
realm and we just we we are now sort of
made a promise to ourselves that
whenever we do a temporary installation
we think about what happens afterwards
so that we don't create more waste that
just goes into the dumpster and so when
we heard that they're going to plant
these plants the the hedges next year we
said why don't we have sort of a pre
life of these hedges why don't we use
actually the hedges themselves as the
installation and so we approached the
Miller house and their gardener we said
what you know what are the the plants
are gonna put in the hedge I said can we
can we make can we make it installation
with them and then we donate them to the
to the house and so the installation we
proposed and built for columbus exhibit
columbus this year is called into the
hedge and it speaks about sort of this
idea that you can make the hedge a place
where you can explore because the hedge
normally divides right it separates but
wouldn't it be nice if we can go in and
experience the hedge as a as a social
place in itself and so we're on the
corner of next to the courthouse in one
of the most public as areas of Columbus
we made this large organization array in
a circle of the of the hedges that then
are then they're floating where they're
hanging if we don't plant them in
they're actually just sitting in sort of
these big baskets or or yeah bags and we
then activated with places for sitting
and occupation and hanging out and so
this is it from above and here's some
more from above
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
okay do more in so Indianapolis from
Columbus we went to Indianapolis
Indianapolis we are involved in another
competition this time we collaborate
with scape architects for very
complicated scientist II downtown
Indianapolis and on the left you see a
large structure the crane Bay which is
800 feet old industrial structure that
is the only remnant of a very large site
103 acre site and that has been a place
in which initially carriages were
produced but mostly it was a stamping
plant which metal stamping bell were
basically car companies produce steel
components that make the car so Chevy
has been here since the 1930s and while
you see how sort of a job a place for
jobs for four six thousand people in the
in the area mostly actually in this area
next door called the valley and
neighborhood where most of the workers
lived and worked in 2009 the GM was
bankrupt or was going through bankruptcy
and the plant was closed and all the
jobs disappeared the building the
structure itself was built as designed
by Albert Kahn and people maybe know him
as the architect of Detroit's at the
same one who really developed and
improved industrial buildings built many
many many industrial buildings all
around the world and he transformed this
from a wooden structures into steel
structure with daylight really improving
the quality of the life of the workers
in the factory but here you see it as it
is now with the crane Bay leftist its
only remnant and then there was a
there's a developer who bought the land
and he proposed here on the left
a business park so with just some bite
the generic office towers and then ranae
and Jane longtime residents of the
valley next doors third generation
workers in the factory said this is not
right and they got involved and they
started to talk to the city and I said
we need to do something that is much
more you know respectful also much more
thoughtful and much more integrated with
the neighborhood itself and that is when
what sort of triggered the competition
so these people they really said we need
to we need to really think about how can
this not just be sort of sort of
isolated Park would actually really be
much more inclusive and be much more
offer much more benefits for the people
you know that actually were very much
part you know of the history of this
site there is another component which
has to do with the remediation of the of
the pollution because also there was a
lot of polluted water but I don't
exactly know the technical specificity
to see that you have to ask Kate ourf
but we are we are working on the sort of
architectural components and the
activation of this of this site with
public little public impulses and also
how to deal with that with that crane
Bay itself there's also a bridge being
proposed to connected to downtown where
there is more activity happening but we
are working with this crane Bay which
doesn't it's not a monument it's very
long and we need to think about how to
bring new life into this structure also
over time it's not that you can suddenly
just say this is gonna be a museum or
whatever you need to find ways in which
there's also enough funding and so
develop strategies for how this building
can gradually have a new life and so
we're working you know bringing in
different programs different users
food-related businesses performance
related businesses in art at an art
space and in a sort of small twist we
take the historic structure and in a way
bend it or pry it open if you
towards the facing towards the downtown
and where the bridge arrives creating
sort of a new say welcome into this into
this neighborhood again this is still
ongoing and I wanted to I'm not going to
tell more of our trip but you know if
you look at all of this obviously this
has a lot to do with the automotive
industry and a lot of jobs that used to
be there they all disappeared and this
brings us to the last project that we're
working on and currently building which
is on the other side of the wall in
Mexico in Guadalajara or ba kua hot dogs
right over here like we're in the city
of Leon but this area is called where
all the jobs went all these jobs in
automotive industry many of them went to
this area in in and around Leon and
that's one of the fastest growing areas
for migrant workers and so there is
something in Mexico called info novita
which is like a Freddie Mac and Fannie
Mae sort of organization that offers
mortgages to the lowest income groups
but this has produced a very bizarre
sort of urbanism because they don't
necessarily build housing but they say
you know under the keys in these
conditions you know we can offer a loan
and you can own your house and this has
produced endless sort of landscapes of
this kind of housing very far away
outside of the city centers because
there the land is cheap enough for
developers to build within the sort of
tight constraints of these of these
mortgages and so these areas very
quickly turned into this kind of spaces
because basically there's not enough
money to bring you know the trash and
the the the cleanup the big trash pickup
there or actually have schools there or
you know have even transportation there
and they're often left sort of semi as
ghost towns at the periphery of the city
and we got involved through somebody who
had seen some of our work here but
mostly also was thinking maybe we can
help in having different stakeholders
because a lot of different people are
involved in this in this process and
project in how to have them figure out a
new sort of typology that could happen
in the much more city center so can we
help that the different stakeholders
imagine a vertical typology something
that actually happens much more in the
city centers where the land is more
expensive of course but so in a way that
these people actually have access to
their jobs have access to transportation
and - yeah the the benefits that the
city offers and so we designed a game
that could be played by the different
stakeholders here in lyon so it's it's
City Planning that's also the developers
it's the bank system the construction
companies it's the housing say residents
organization and we asked them to just
we asked for two different sites and we
asked we gave them glue and pieces of
foam and scissors and literally
something that we maybe do every day but
these people together had to sort of
answer to brief and try to through
making these different proposals
actually on you know learn and
understand what were the what was at
stake for them from their point of view
and in that way everybody was able to
actually articulate and think about you
know what for demos important but also
understand what is important from
somebody else's point of view and it was
a success and then they said well that's
nice 1aq guys do one and so we are
working now on 55 units in one of these
sites that we has as a test-case
site where the total budget for the
entire construction is 2 million dollars
for so that's 55 units the house that I
showed in the beginning was two and a
half times as expensive so you could
build more than a hundred units in
exchange for one of those homes with
housing and this is maybe also coming
back to the beginning you know we we
don't just want to be involved in say
museum
and sort of high-end areas we very
deliberately have been trying to also
get you know into things that actually
you know there's more of maybe in
society and have a bigger impact on on
everyday life and so one of the things
with housing which we are excited about
that we're working on now is that we
think that the single or the double
ordered corridor is one of the most
dreadful spaces one can imagine right
the journey between the street in your
front door through a double loaded
corridor is quite unfortunate in our
experiences so we're always trying to
figure out can we break it or can we get
rid of that here you see the development
of the scheme which is luckily possible
because of the very mild climate in the
layin we could actually have the
circulation on the exterior make some
sort of courtyard organization and then
here on the right we see how we sort of
weave it between the units we didn't
want to make a massive block we wanted
to in some way break it down so that
people could also recognize you know
where in the building they were it's
quite said that there was quite a fear
that people don't want to live in
vertical housing it's very much that the
tendency of people building their own
sort of housing at the periphery of the
city and so it's like how do we make
sure it is enough that people you know
are willing and are interested in living
in such a larger communal building two
courtyards and some porosity that I will
speak about later where there's common
spaces where the where the community can
get together and entrance over here
marked at its highest point the unit's
themselves all two-bedroom and
three-bedroom of course quite
straightforward and since we have this
corridor along the units we didn't want
to have people stare sort of straight
into your room and so we rotate the
windows that light comes in but not
necessarily everybody is looking inward
here you see the the plan of the second
floor so you
they're underneath in the ground floor
here's the staircase there's this open
walkway around and this another
staircase it goes all the way up in the
building and here's one of these
communal spaces shared spaces um more in
the building so we work together with
the local Housing Authority and we did
basically all the design they did the
construction and documents we've been
working with them and skyping with them
on the sort of a daily basis and this is
the nth design and we thought we make a
precast concrete panels the facade only
needs to be eight centimeters so the
thick single layer because of the
climate actually there and so they said
that's great we're gonna do it then we
went to a precast company and they said
we can do it and we asked for a mock-up
and they said you guys should come and
see and they made them walk up and this
is the mock-up here on the right and we
said that's strange it's precast why
would you pour it standing straight up
that doesn't make sense and they said
yeah we tried something else it really
didn't work and but actually when but
human you know after a long conversation
they said you know you know what it is
it's actually only one company that can
do it and they're in Guadalajara and
they have to you know cast it there put
it on the truck drive you know for a
number for four or five hours to lay on
that we need to Crane we need to install
with the crane and so the cost of
installing one panel it's the same as
employing 30 workers for 30 days right
and so then we said well it doesn't make
sense right it doesn't make sense if all
the budget goes to this one company that
is not even in the in the area and can
we not figure out a way to employ an inn
and bring in the you know the community
itself and so we ask what is the what's
the heaviest weight the most way that
the single worker laborer can carry
which is 17 kilos and so we worked with
her with a block company to develop a
custom block that allows for this
complex sort of
meandering to negotiate this meandering
a geometry which is exactly 17 plus so
that the wall actually is divided in
five and so they can stack and built
this wall and then we did all this
customs actually that bob was very
important to thinking about this is here
at the faculty but to do you think of a
shape that actually allows you know many
different settings so in order to
negotiate the girl you always have to
sort of adjust the angle and that's
where we came up with this not perfect
pentagram or Penta form shape but just a
little bit off that allows sort of to
negotiate all these different settings
so here's the mock-up for the second
time much better and much more exciting
so this is the the wall on the left and
then also we were able to make windows
out of steel welded together in local
shops in the neighborhood of where we're
building with a very simple elegant
detail of how to hold it open two types
of windows that are not being made so
this is the updated render and
representation and some nice images for
the mayor that he can show what he's
doing but he doesn't have to wait that
long because we're under construction
now and should be finished next year so
that's it for now
[Applause]
