I'll start with you his few thank-yous
and they're just to say that we will
start with a screening of the
documentary of Italian architecture
biennale but we have with us tonight
Matt McCallum of Mississippi group who
made a documentary film that will be
screened tonight getting this film last
November was a wonderful surprising gift
as I didn't expect anyone making a
documentary about 2019 I have lots of
interviews in in a week I was extremely
exhausted after building up the
exhibition at the Estonian Museum of
architecture in Italian so thank you
Miss TV thank you Matt for being here
thank you Samir Zaki for taking part in
the ministry podium tonight
Samir is a neurobiologist and expert at
the neural correlates of the experience
of beauty and also love and desire he
coined the term nor aesthetics and is a
professor of neuroscience at UCL thank
you the Tarot Nakajima for being with us
tonight
the Tarot is a fellow at era an
internationally recognized leader in the
design of planning of cultural venues
and developments a big expert in
building acoustics and he is also a
conductor who was trained as a violinist
Hanif Cora is sadly not with us tonight
as he takes part in a conference in
South Africa in dhaba
and due to the coronavirus many
participants canceled their
participation over there so the
conference was rescheduled and hanifa
still in Johannesburg instead of back in
London early this morning
Thank You Catherine Forester for being
the head partner of this event
continuing abb support in me and in my
subject I'm very grateful to ABB
sponsoring generously the catering this
evening thank you I wish this mini
symposium to focus on our science behind
the experience of beauty but also ask
Hanif Kara entity or Nakajima it's
people who work daily with architects
and very familiar with the contribution
to reflect on their observations of our
profession it's cultural bias against
the old aspiration to beauty since
Beauty met us anew but the cultural
buyers are still deep and I'll quote an
if-statement a bit later after the mini
symposium you'll be able to enjoy the
food and drinks as well as power stones
and installation over there and behind
you and the talking trees of Tallinn we
installed first time after starving at
the top 2019 and very much thanks to HTC
wife who sponsored Paulus installation
that captured the very experience of
being in and surrounded by six out of
the eight projects exhibited at the
table the reason it's here this
insulation is that experiencing a design
project in a virtual reality
installation is a wonderful tool to
actually share from early sketches of
projects the very experience of being in
a wonderful tool to design a long when
aspiring to beauty besides all the other
purchase in parallel you will see on
these Queens slide show about the
Italian actor should be an ally and the
catalog and the ad magazine more
information and visual information will
be there both complementary of each
other the books on sale as you know and
the sale will take later place in the
next room behind you thank you today a
team supporting all these activities
thank you ever French thank you many and
the head of the a public program Thank
You Liam green the public programs
coordinator and thank you Tom
from the audiovisual Department thank
you they a bookshop for organizing the
book sale thank you all for coming
tonight
I see lots of friends and I'm very
grateful a local gathering in days of
worrying about the corner virus hope you
will enjoy the evening
so thank you very much and just before
screening the documentary I will ask
Matt to come here I saw you earlier here
you are thank you I'm not gonna say too
much but thank you again yo for
organizing this all and my name is Matt
I'm from me Stevie were just a
collection of students throughout Europe
and the rest of the world who produced
s-- interviews documentaries with
architects and designers we were lucky
to exhibit at tab and I'm sure you'll
enjoy the documentary thank you very
much why does beauty matter
that thought of question I was afraid of
[Music]
it's a big question
[Music]
Wow that's the difficult question
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I'm very aware that most architects
don't think the beauty - and so it's a
very complex issue and I just wanted to
bring it in I go up in Tel Aviv and I
grew up in their 50s and 60s as a
younger person and their Israel was
still very socialist country and the
look of things didn't matter really
completely didn't matter it was part of
you know the culture but still what
matters is content not form not the look
of things there's a expression in Hebrew
that said it's very common in Israel
don't look at the jaw the ways you know
but at the content and the content was
important when I go up I said no I
wanted to do architecture because I
wanted to do things with make the world
more beautiful and then when I study
studying architecture it was completely
irrelevant beauty matters because I
think it's quite abstract quite often
which I kind of like it's really hard to
define and it keeps you questioning what
it is I think it's a really big question
but it's something that when you find it
when you discover it it gives you the
greatest feeling that you can imagine
you know so I think it it means a lot
and that's why so many people are
inspired by it
Wow beauty is important for life and a
part of future Wow the beauty and the
usefulness could be well integrated and
I'm always trying to make such a
beautiful integration
well my profession is about beauty so
mathematicians no ask a mathematician
why does it do mathematics then he will
answer you with 100% certainty because
of beauty I do
mathematics because it's beautiful
beauty matters because beauty is the
opposite of what I call the literal the
literal includes any form of knowledge
and the only actually two forms of
knowledge that exists are either
reducing a thing downward to its pieces
or upward to its effects but beauty
isn't like that beauty has to do with
what's intrinsic to a thing and it's
that which is the thing that is not
reducible in either direction beauty
matters because from a neuro aesthetic
point of view because it satisfies the
brain it satisfies in a number of ways I
mean of course it it does matter and
this is kind of yes that's the head
curator Yale or NSS this kind of
unspoken thing that outside of anyone or
any of the creative disciplines it gets
thrown around a lot you hear people say
that things are beautiful every day
usually but within they create the field
usually not it matters because everyone
else who's not creating or who's not
designing or creating whatever it might
be buildings or objects or films or
constantly referred to it as a real
value for things in their environments
so obviously it does matter and that's
it so if you put effort into something I
think inherently there's a reward at the
end and within that there's a there's a
natural sense of care and in that care
comes you know love and within love
there's some some beauty somewhere some
people say Beauty bit us now it's so
much heavier subject but actually it's
all they're all important and I think
that that good architecture day if it's
not I think sustainability without
beauty is failing it's not you know and
I think everybody knows that because if
we take all the boxes of you know
building you know it's a we take all the
sustainable requirements if the building
is ugly we're not successful so people
know that but you know if you look at
the words and competition and juries and
judgments people don't even know how to
talk about beauty so it's not a category
it's hidden category because we're still
not choosing terrible-looking building
the thick of the boxes but it's so
undiscussed
and became so kind of irrelevant that we
have to bring it back to be able to do
to learn how to talk about it opposite
of beauty wow that's a challenging
question opposite to beauty
is politics okay that's really ugly I
mean that's pretending it's making
making shows lying politics is the
opposite of beauty yeah because I like
to see the world in a positive way so
even if it is not beautiful yet well we
can make it beautiful
the opposite of beauty is not the ugly
but the literal the literal is the kind
of understanding that thinks a thing is
nothing more than the qualities it has
whereas for me both the beautiful and
the ugly have to do with splitting the
easy relationship between an object than
its qualities so they have a kind of
tension between them the opposite of
beauty well I'm not sure it has one the
opposite of beauty is certainly not
ugliness even though we do have we do
find interesting correlations but also
very interesting differences in terms of
brain activity during reports of beauty
and during reports of ugliness
[Music]
I carry this subject with me for quite a
while there is a troubled relationship
between architecture and beauty so
beauty became an empty word it's sort of
bourgeois not progressive you know it
has all the bad connotation and I think
it's still there because the cultural
bias is so deep at the end I think every
architect in his heart know that beauty
matters architecture is a bit
complicated thing and you have to
include lots of people into it if you're
designing a huge building then there are
tens and tens of people are influencing
the process and if you make a piece of
art then you can do it almost alone and
no one is bothering you and you make the
choices not the ventilation guy not the
energy calculator not the construction
engineer not the client you don't have
the client you're the client so that's
why I love I like that
personal approach in that matter of
course beauty is very important but
beauty is not the only one priority of
architecture design for me I feel beauty
come out through the integration of the
whole complexity of the world into one
architecture in a very simple ideas for
creating such a diversity and so I in
the process I starting point I respect
the whole complexity of the world the
complexity of the project in the
situation
and listen to everything in a sense and
then try to find out how we can yeah
integrate even though the whole
situation is very nicely complex and
diverse finally we have to make
something one project so this is kind of
the process of the integration but not
simplifying the situations like
keeping the richness of the complexity
and try to find the amazing viewpoint
through which we can we can see the
whole world really harmonized the use
value of a building should be
aestheticized Immanuel Kant didn't think
architecture was a very high form of art
because it's contaminated in a certain
sense with usefulness but I think
usefulness can also be aestheticized
in its own right generally the idea is
that artefactual category is dependent
upon the biological category and we
might at first want to assign
architecture to an artefactual category
and keep it there but if we look at how
the brain responds to architecture and
the way it responds to biological beauty
there are many more similarities than we
might at first expect and so unlike say
furniture design or tool design
architecture fulfills a very interesting
middle ground between the extremes of
biology and sort of like a machinery it
is difficult to speak about beauty to
have a conversation about it because we
consider it a very subjective matter
more and more there is attempts to to
try to find what is it and to try to
find a common ground from the
neuroscience of the psychology
however I mean I don't think one needs
to create a universal rule I'm going to
think something quite terrible but I
really think it's true for people to
change their mind or if we want people
to believe in something we we feel it's
right and but it's fresh and new it
takes sometimes a whole generation to
die to have the next generation to take
it for granted even a cultural bias is
very deep
it takes more than a day or two months
to change you know to change the feeling
the thoughts the the responses you know
because people act against the terrible
beauty for so long that you don't just
say oh now it's fashionable to think
this way it's not it's something much
deeper it's not a stylized strand or
triangle it's something really deep in
the way we think it's really part of our
culture this is not necessarily
something that you search for you know
you not say you know here you go this is
the project that we you know presenting
and it's beautiful because it seems to
be a statue of school yeah when I was a
student of university in a summer
holiday I made a trip round trip of
Europe and the first place was Paris I
landed in the morning time and then I
took a train to come into the center of
Paris come out from the the enter of the
subway onto the street and then I was I
was really impressed by the beauty of
the city of Paris in the morning Sun
that was the moment I still really
remember as a really strong reality your
life and city itself and whether light
and yeah the combination of everything
created such a amazing beauty and I take
at least one month every year completely
off from the architecture and go to my
favorite place Tokyo and stay there for
one month and walk like 30 kilometers in
a day with my camera from the huge chunk
of City the world's largest urban sprawl
and almost and that's my vacation and
that's my method to find new things and
new beauties
[Music]
what I was trying to achieve in terms of
the exhibition is to you know there was
a task for the different exhibitors so I
selected the architects and and was they
got a task right which was to come up
with the habitation project right
because we are the plan was to look at
beauty through the lens of habitation I
was very keen to wrap it all up with a
certain atmosphere that enhanced the
expression of aesthetics the vision for
habitation today or tomorrow is not any
more the image of metropolis the 1930s
you know they kind of hollow New York
with airplanes and all the different
transportations and all very mechanical
and all of that the new technologies of
the past but actually a lot more nature
the intention was to to enhance a
certain atmosphere which was very
important for me and then we got another
thing which were we were lucky to apply
for a going to have the VR experience
which is for a lot of us quite
interesting but it's not just the notion
oh I see a headset I'm happy to go into
the 3d situation it was really about
understanding that the projects better
so actually what you experience is to
get into the project in a different way
way that just section plans renders 3d
on the screen and out of law in fact by
definition something being virtual means
that it shares the attributes of
something without being completely that
other thing by definition is referencing
something else so if you have not
experienced that something else you're
not fully understanding
yeah
[Music]
yeah so the project is called the ven
room and it speculates on what our
domestic lives and our homes will turn
into when they are vented reality
becomes something that normal people use
every single day we speculate on that
the computer monitor and the smartphone
will disappear in common use in the next
15 to 20 years and will be replaced by
spatial computing basically that all the
computation platforms that we use from
social media to productive software ever
will be spatial and therefore also all
of our social activities that are
digital open to the reality was
particularly appealing because it had a
significantly lower barrier to entry or
we worked to create a lower barrier to
entry then typically you have with
robotics or machine learning which have
a very high technical overhead and it's
very difficult to both teach design and
to teach the kind of fundamental
knowledge that's required to pursue
those subjects whereas we find that with
augmented reality it's really engaging
for people to work with their hands and
to be crafting things in a slightly more
traditional way while also engaging with
the technology behind it the villian is
produced by steam bending timber and
it's a little bit punk in its attitudes
towards say detailing which is just not
at all important in that project it's
it's rough and raw and it's it's super
steampunk in its relationship to
technology you know we're doing things
by hand with old analog tools but we're
using this like let's call it like a
magical headset which shows you all of
the information that you need to
construct something wildly complex I
guess we are trying to offer a vision
for an alternative way to think about
designing and may
which is much more democratic so it
opens up the accessibility of digital
models to people who maybe aren't
digitally literate and that is a real I
think that's really important vision
because we're at risk of losing a whole
lot of material expertise and knowledge
and skills by automating everything or
by doing everything through digital
modeling and it's also very important to
keep in mind that we'll be today call VR
AR is not a technology that came out of
nothing it is a natural progression of
virtual media that has been developing
since the very first one so you could
even include the non digital or non
electric ones such as sculpture and
painting but if we do include the early
analog ones such as photography and then
leading up to the motion picture the
television and then the computer monitor
they're all the same project and AR MBR
it's just the next step I guess we don't
intentionally try to create work that we
don't like I mean we like what we do
that's why we do it yeah I think
functionality in itself is something
that we probably focus on early stuff
just like how everything is gonna work
and then studio explorations of the
meaning and virtually everything that's
going to be useful WT somehow image our
work really looks at simplifying methods
and taking craft but using kind of
digital models to find ways in which we
can use repetition and use certain kind
of technologies to encourage those
crafts to make something totally new and
unique and I think VR and updated
technologies such as that may help
concretize help us make more sense of
some of these more abstract thought
experiments that maybe haven't had that
much tooth in other disciplines outside
of philosophy it may help with discourse
across disciplines just to help
make sense of of those more abstract
ways of thinking it's a personal project
for me so far it's probably the most
personal thing I have ever done in a art
form because it describes the
environment which I was growing up like
more than 10 years I spent my childhood
in a huge housing block of LA's number
which is part of Tallinn and for some
reason it matters to me still some here
in Tallinn I was part of the Italian
architecture Biennale to bring a project
called Musa city which is a project I've
been developing for the past eight years
and the idea is that we work with local
musicians from Tallinn to each create a
piece of music inspired by different
location and a different building for a
long time I was kind of curious about
the idea of commissioning music based on
architecture so the idea that you could
have a soundtrack to a building but the
secret is you know you need a smartphone
with our app and you go to the location
and then you can stream the music
so the basic is your sense of the
building and the musical response to it
one of the world that we love is
ambiguity and you know Soviet luck or
work sometimes been described as ugly
and it seems to be surprising for us
because of your scene we don't really
perceive it this way but with you know
this time we actually treat it as a
Content you said I work exactly
I gotta further confidence to go about
it through finding scenario science and
talking to mathematicians and other
disciplines that actually beauty matters
to them they never stopped believing in
beauty you know the part of the idea of
the symposium was one of the ideas there
was to bring the neuroscientist the
philosopher the mathematician and the
for test to argue and discuss the the
subject because they all all of them who
came in believe in the return of beauty
or in the beauty that never disappeared
or in the the importance of it I was
invited here because I believe strongly
that beauty should be at the center of
velocity and that goes very well with
what Yael wanted the conference to be
about and I'm here representing Sameer
Zeki and the neuro aesthetic point of
view and some findings from the UCL
laboratory of neurobiology mathematics
is not the science it's art why is that
because when things falling into place
that's what happens mathematics you
you're trying to find some order and
when things fall into place that's
beautiful that's when something just
right fits right into the like a puzzle
that you find a piece of puzzle that
fits just right you feel it's beautiful
and that's what happens in my profession
so and I bought them to make the
architects who are not confident about
the subject who I still have much deeper
cultural bias against it I hope that
this scholars will make them more
confident just make them think about it
[Music]
and a lot of people who say amputees say
anything it's a you know nice detail or
not that's not beauty beauty is not we
heard in the symposium by different
people and different disciplines beauty
is much more profound and beauty is much
harder to get to achieve I mean and and
so and you know say people refer by the
hair beauty because it's all discussed
and they think of Renaissance cause
Renaissance was talking about beauty of
the fraction and I live built you know
that it's not the beauty today so as I
keep saying beauty is not a singular
idea you think could be many different
things know things but different
aesthetics we all know that we are aware
of it
aesthetics are changing but we know very
well when something is beautiful when
something is not beautiful beauty is
about truth about fitting into the
world's beauty is about hidden order
there is some hidden order that you find
and this order is something that fits
into the picture in this case in this
sense it is true it's truth about truth
I think we shouldn't say we have like a
one Beauty and everybody should go for
that this is not this is kind of the
misunderstanding I think we we can find
a lot of different beauty and all of
them has kind of amazing values on it in
the natural world and in the diversity
that keeps the natural world coexisting
it's the differences that create those
those moments of beauty it is very much
a subjective word which is why I think
it's been such an interesting conference
as everyone's got a very different
opinion to what Beauty might might mean
I think beauty is one aspect of
aesthetics so aesthetics is a larger
philosophical discipline that interfaces
with other disciplines such as
neurobiology it signifies the
stabilization of perception in an
otherwise unstable world
it's a collision of different ideas and
to me the best or the most impressive
beauty is when you get disparate things
clashing so a mixing of different ideas
and cultures and that to me is creating
the best beauties
no one can define beauty but we can
categorize we can have a lot of
characteristics so as I keep saying it
just like love people understand that we
cannot define love in five words but
that lots of characteristics so I think
it's a big subject to come back to
[Music]
so it was my cousins who was asking me
in the late-1990s you talk about what
you like but is there anything you
really hate as an architect and my reply
was 20 century focus on architecture on
the practical utilitarian socio-economic
and political issues treating aesthetics
as if it's not part of the architecture
challenge content was satisfying and
more significant along a lack of
perspective visual culture so you saw
this already in the film so I will skip
it that question led me to my PhD and to
this book published in 2010 asserting my
observations of the architectural
discourse the products is that good
architecture and brilliant buildings are
still mostly judged by the capacity to
produce an attractive aesthetic
experience are the architects became
inexperienced in talking about beauty
they haven't been consciously engaged
with it for quite a while for thousands
of years art was about aspiration to
beauty so what here the tree what were
the triggers through the 20th century
for such a deep cultural bias that unify
architects against aspiration to beauty
what is that
turned that word empty nevertheless
sorry I think it jumped here
architecture's aspiration to beauty was
leading the visual arts up to the 1920s
early modernism generated significant
new aesthetic
nevertheless by the early 1940s
explained in the 60s by Reyner Banham
the British extraction historian
aesthetic tendencies were eliminated and
the modernist scene became mostly about
form for the function and apologists the
three historians were Gideon Mumford and
so Tory's architecture became strongly
conditioned by utility materials
construction and economics aesthetics
and subjectivity were two terms first
time interrelated with with the same
document written by Baumgarten who
coined in the 18th century the word
aesthetics to mean taste or sense of
beauty thereby inventing its modern
usage the tight statics with a personal
attitude that's rejection of one reduces
the other as was reflected through the
writings by historians of architecture
who share the critique and an anti
subjectivist approach undermining the
influence of individuals on our culture
and we can see it in all of their
writings books the objective subjective
conflict was enhanced by different
phenomena leading to the
intellectualization of design process
500 years of scientific progress and the
appearance of numerous new technologies
and hence further trust in rational
thinking increased use of abstract
visualization of informational data in
diagrams and graphs for the 20th century
democracy public opinion look took over
individual taste and power miss van der
waals influential statement objective
limits and no subjective license or
critique on the hegemony of the I often
undermining the importance of aesthetic
judgment in
visual thinking in architecture the
human sense of vision has become the
most slandered of our senses since the
Second World War and the cultural bias
went deeper Marcel Duchamp chosen
everyday objects paved the way for
conceptual art were work that was in the
service of the mind as opposed to a
purely retinal odd intent and only to
please the eye the shrimp associated the
eye with passivity the eyes of the skins
by policemen who were the book by
velasca where he acted as a critique of
Western ocular centric tradition the
titles in the books captured well his
approach for example the narcosis tini
listing eye retinal architecture and the
loss of elasticity that critique of the
hegemony of the eye or the original art
were based on the wrong all the
information out there for hundreds of
years
as a visual image is just impressed on
the retina like on a common film yet our
sense of vision is dynamic and not
passive I always think mechanism was
understood only since 1978 for the
question that no one had an answer for
hundreds of years what is that what is
it that all beautiful works have in
common
Jackie's findings suggested the answer
he discovered in 2011 that there is a
single set of characteristics defining
beauty and it actually comes from the
brain the only thing that all beautiful
works of art have in common is the
common denominator of the many different
experiences of beauty and it was right
in our brain and not in the work of art
or in nature as was regarded before we
know immediately when we experience
beauty and the intensity of that
emotional experience can be quantified
to its findings by 2014 made me wish to
meet him and discuss beauty its findings
through a
my tests reflected on the activation on
the activation correlating with the
experience of four types of beauty which
all take place in the same area of the
emotional brain visual Beauty musical
beauty moral beauty and mathematical
beauty we have been we have been meeting
regularly since summer 2014
discussing the visual brain and the
experience of beauty in the context of
neuroscience and architecture in the
volusia nary context they determine the
significance to the recurrence of
pleasures including the pleasure of
experiencing beauty for the very
survival of the individual beauty is a
critical determinant in the progress of
civilization exactly through days of
climate crisis certain questions are
often eyes
how could you indulge with pressing on
the return to beauty in the midst of
Anthropocene in the state of ecological
emergency of course we do of course we
have to not an escapism or indulgence a
typical response based on cultural bias
but in need our brain thrives on beauty
without it life is a misery we cannot
simply define beauty as the experts in
our science and mathematics which was
the very two disciplines that contribute
most to the science of beauty these days
and to our understanding of how relevant
Beauty is to human life health and
knowledge the humans need to see is not
for survival but for gathering knowledge
about the world we live in
humans are visual creatures 1/4 of their
brain is a visual brain our brain
we see color we see human expression
Miller the historian and philosopher of
science confirmed through his study
intuition was revealed to be synonymous
with visualization Albert Einstein
claimed he visualized ideas before he
could express them in writing Bolivar
Sachs wrote in his autobiography doctors
almost lost their visual intuitive
diagnosis skills its professor on the
other hand was intuitive in the extreme
he observed understood that diagnosis
before doing a neurological exam and
even before the patient open his mouth
just a note by observation now doctors
look at factual reports such as x-ray
MRI still visual and lost their reliance
on observing appearances courts are the
Japanese film director draw our
attention to that loss there so Saleh is
a film that reflects on the loss of our
visual skills to understand nature
visually a survival tool lost a whole
body of knowledge lost in architecture
the experience of beauty is there in
diverse since we can since we can
suppress an aspiration to beauty
culturally but not neurologically we
cannot turn off our visual thinking
since when we design as architects we
constantly sift and tweak to arrive at
beauty surely depending on our design
intelligence and talent yet since most
architects don't aspire to beauty or
discuss it added its added value
cityscapes became more and more and
uniting this was kind of Kara we
that with time what can emerge out of
this cacophony in a United fashion is a
mutual desire to escape ugliness at many
levels and an embracing of differences
to deduce the productive relationship of
greater creativity and utility rather
than of distance engine theory of
relativity was quickly and widely
accepted in 1915 not least thanks to the
sheer beauty of its mathematical
expression for with diagraphs claims
that there is more scientific evidence
than ever before that mathematical
beauty plays an important role there the
characteristics of experience of the
experience of beauty as mathematicians
suggest are surprised magical effect
novelty profundity economy clarity
elegance expresses unconscious
perception of order everything falls
into place give a sense of pleasure and
satisfaction we can characterize the
experience of beauty yet we cannot
define it in simple terms the meta
mission with matt amis mathematician one
hour only explained in his book poets
and mathematicians share a desire for
beauty in both discipline the secret of
generating beauty is that the message is
not completely understood a sense of
beauty is born in the unconscious grasp
of notion we experience beauty when we
receive a strong message whether
emotional or intellectual while
comprehending it only subliminally isn't
it fascinating that beauty in
mathematical equations is a sign of an
underlying logic order by itself is not
necessarily beautiful in order to create
a sensation of beauty
we need something beyond order the
sensation of beauty by the support
arises when order is suddenly revealed
in this order while the time Beauty
fermentable poetics in architecture was
repeatedly embraced was the pursuit of
poet
in architecture a substitute to the
tabooed world beauty a backward to
beauty without mentioning the denigrated
world Gaston Bachelard wedding of space
arrived to fill the void over the 60s in
architectural discourse and I like the
quote the point does not confer the past
of his image upon me and yet his image
immediately take root in me it was fair
friend poetic architecture where he
talks about the sense of place achieves
through being engaged in a dynamic
dialogue between the room outside in the
room inside through the year and as in
brussels nordic profit norwegian
pavilion below the object said the
object said was moved around the room as
the son moved outside so quiz question
no bird suits published the edge and
it's low-key very much influenced by
conversation with fur fan and philosophy
you honey philosopher wrote an
influential important text on the poet
sized imagery the pursuit of poetics and
architecture yet in time he kept
questioning the architects deliberate
visual intention in leading to poetic
architecture claiming that artistic
meaning is existing shal rather than
ideational i cannot agree more that
poetic is an emotional rather than
intellectual but question dismissing the
ideational Lawrence Reich discusses how
her poetics might define as the
accumulated experience of place and
space advocating through examples of
ideas driven smaller practices a trust
in the architects intimate landscape
meant escape skills talent and all that
form the platform for poetic design
my own holiday and I quote here from his
article in a magazine to us you are
beauty not important because you are
attractive but you are the attractive
you are attractive because you are
important
you ambiguity challenges and defies
default noise neutral and bias design
decisions that do nothing to progress
improve and empower architecture in
today's world beauty as a cultural
production is not random
it is autobiographical architecture
beauty is directly even if
subconsciously informed and dependent on
his/her culture and whole internal
internal landscape also of unemployed
also or unemployed Paul Virilio used to
tell his students an updated version
should read co-author or an unemployable
there is no incompatibility between
authorship and teamwork in that we do
now the government's are claims that
human intuition is much richer than
logic in fact the cerebral cortex in
which the flame of consciousness resides
in is packed with unconscious processes
it would be erroneous to assume that
intelligence is necessarily conscious
and deliberate
he argues that intuition is more than
impulse and Caprice it has its own
rationale it is aesthetics and
architecture and it's pursued through
the design process that fuses utility
function nationality technology economy
and poetics emerged metaphysics art and
simple symbolization craftsmanship
authorship ownership a fast moving truck
about 2010/11 architects craftsmanship
was clearly coming through manufacturing
reflecting on a meaningful change or
meaningful change
it's the very
textual drawing is the craft culturally
though inconsistently with a prevalence
and this objective is claimed but the
return to the author was their
authorship in architecture as a music
turn quickly to ownership
especially when files are easy t-shirt
and content is added or deleted the
upshot is a complex reality while the
open source design makes it even more so
nevertheless individuals often expect to
be credited for their contribution so 1
2017 artificial intelligence researchers
spelled out the significance of adding
human intuition to AI a generative
design tools act through pure logic and
lacking like and like intuition robots
are good at precision air petition
humans are good at perception awareness
and decision making
hence AI researchers develop developing
hybrids that augment robots with humans
augmenting digital games with human
intuition architects do too these days
but most still find it difficult to
share their biased terminology and
antiseptic TVs psychology beauty in
augmented age or post digital age are
all relying on human judgment
hence it is no surprise that Beauty
matters a new the use of post is
somewhat misleading as digital artists
interest as designers has evolved
whether than abandoning digital
exploration the term post digital was
first heard around the year 2000 in
relation to music as the novelty of
computer-generated work faded by 2016
the post digital became a category in
architecture
as opposed digital has evolved pocket
actually it brought a wider community of
Architects under this umbrella the
digital practices along those who mostly
use digital systems to process rather
than generate design the post digital
the diverse stylistically signals a
departure from formal continuity and a
move towards an assembly of parts
so personal expression ever since German
Expressionism was interpreted as
irrational imposition the continuous
stream of architects are interesting
interested in pushing the boundaries
architectural is similarly to an spelt
sig will also suggest the only thing
suggested the only thing we have is our
individuality that's what we have to
give to the world architecture is the
most public of Arts he said the American
Ukraine born poet Ilya Kaminsky claimed
in an interview this year every real
point is a private poet but if they are
a good poet their language will
powerfully be powerful enough to speak
privately to many people at the same
time architecture also has the power to
speak to individuals nurturing and
preserving their differences and chloral
acknowledge their similarities while
giving identity to collectivist cultures
thank you very much for organizing this
meeting and for serious discussion of
beauties over the past three years I
think she deserves the credit for
pushing beauty into or the concept of
future into architectural thinking in a
big way this meeting
in the coming few years if it hasn't
already which I think it has now you
will notice that the the respondents in
the film had it had considerable
difficulty in understanding why Beauty
Madison and it's interesting that the
title of the seminar is not why Beauty
matters an architectural why
architectural beauty matters but why
Beauty matters an insignificant
phraseology because it implies that
beauty in general from all sources
matter the difficulty that people have
had tonight in in defining beauty in
fact shared by most others so see the
personal thing but I think that we can
define beauty in a rather simple way if
we go back to the evolutionary and
psychological reach and listen to what
Sigmund Freud had to say about one thing
which is pleasure
so Pink Floyd started by asking the very
simple question which he asked us in a
very nice way he said what do people
seek in life and his answer was
happiness and that happy this is
probably from civilization and its
discontents what decides the purpose of
life is simply the program of the
pleasure principle this principle
dominates the operation of the mental
apparatus from the swords there can be
no doubt about its efficacy now the
principle of course for Freud being
Freud and was not be sex but in fact
include other things like eating and
drinking and and
being a nice landscape so if one had to
satisfy the principle and the title of
this book beyond the pleasure principle
in German is loose in sheep loose in
Germans the double meaning of desire and
also pleasure and the significance that
would become apparent in moment now this
is a very very fundamental starting
point for understanding why Beauty
matters because the pleasure that we
experience always correlates with
activity in a given part of the brain
which is in the orbital frontal cortex
all right it's Caesarea so whether you
you win something or we would like to
chocolate or good food whatever it is we
have there is activity at this part of
the brain so you can localize the
principle to a given part of the brain
which does not of course act in
isolation which is lots of input from
other parts but it was critically active
whenever people experience now I want to
tell you about the experiments which I
will briefly describe I have to be
extremely brief in describing the
experiments simply that you get people
to look at things which they find
beautiful and you look at the activity
in their brain when they experience
beauty each person of course experiences
different kinds of you before so you
think then you look at the brain and
what happens the brain very simply is
that cells in any area which is
specially active their metabolic
requirement increases more blood is
drawn to that part of the brain and the
cameras around the head in in magnetic
resonance imaging can detect the
difference between oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood because they've got
different magnetic properties and hence
assign activity to a particular part of
the brain and also give you the
intensity of the activity in that part
of the brain so if you ask people to
look at visual stimuli or listen to
music research you find the different
parts of brain become active with
decision you have to pass the brain
shown there in white and
music you have the temporal cortex
quadric which is active shown in in
green if you ask what are the parts of
bread which are active when people
experience visual beauty or musical
beauty the finest with visual beauty it
is again the medial orbitofrontal cortex
antecedent experiments I could describe
it I'm not going to I hope you take my
word for it that this area is critical
for the indeed during the experience of
pressure it's also critical for the
experience of beauty and of course
beauty is not cannot be separated from
pleasure separate for beauty but duty
cannot be separate from any more than
reward can be separated from a beauty so
if you ask what are the brain which are
active when people experience the
musical beauty but seem to view some
excerpts again you find the same area of
the brain so this is a conjunction which
shows you that there's a given part of
brain which is active when you
experience musical beauty which brings
us to the question that it's not you're
a biologist to us but I said artists are
in five Bell who was he said if you can
tell me what is common experience is
beauty so you've essentially solve the
problem of aesthetics and I believe that
we have only in Europe article terms
solve the problem of these settings for
neural settings which is what is common
to all that we experience of all the
ways is pretty beautiful
what does common in terms of brain
activity and it is given
the brain the medial orbitofrontal
cortex which also happens to be the
pleasure center of the brain but this
area is active with other types of Fuji
- including moral beauty the second
question
since the time of dominating services
can this settlement ever be quantified
in the answer is yes they can because if
you look at the video from the cortex
you find that it is more active when
people something to be more beautiful in
other words they have to which if there
is more intense when you experience
something as more beautiful so when you
experience something else rest beautiful
we have no question now let me just
summarize three questions why Beauty
matters Fugit matters because it
respects the seeking of pleasure the
pleasure principle that Freud emphasized
by the wave ride emphasized it of the
co-founder of empirical these settings
and after the founder of my college
whose motor was maximus it says the
maximum happens for the maximum number
of people answers duty matters because
it is what satisfies the principle in
neural terms
it is a can answer the question of why
the title here is why Bellucci matters
not why architecture of these matters
what is common to all things are
experienced before
well since before have as a correlate
activity in a specific part of the brain
which is quantifiable with respect to
declared intensity of the experience
the third one is of course last point is
that it is quantifiable so it's it's
scientifically accessible no you can see
[Music]
as I said is a German word which can be
translated to me which is a double
meaning it doesn't have it in English
the desire and and desire of the
definition of the principle is because I
did the experiment in Japan with
Japanese colleagues so you ask people
what they desire am i in terms of
objects or people or events you find
again but the activity occurs in the
media over to frontal cortex and this
activity I was I was worried is what it
was events or with persons over the
objects they're asking people to rate on
a scale of one to ten people they find
very desirable or the events they find
very desirable and you find there's
activity in the media orbital frontal
cortex with the experience of desire and
that activity also is quantifiable so
the more desirable an object or an event
or a person is see more intense activity
in the medial frontal cortex so we are
now I mean here to to to saying look
what we are
the principle of Sigmund Freud can be
used to define why Beauty matters not
 years but why Beauty matters
because it satisfies something very very
very large part of the brain which is
the part of the brain that is satisfied
that correlate with with the experience
of pleasure and of reward I can't think
of a more precise definition of why
Beauty matches that's available today it
is extremely important this is the same
part of the brain is active when you
experience beauty derived from a highly
cognitive source namely beauty and
mathematics so again what you do again
you ask fast magicians it's a message it
has to be met which isn't because you
cannot take people in the streets at
night and say if you find a mathematical
formula beautiful but if you ask
mathematicians who raped mathematical
formulae they can read them for you in
the scanner and you don't find that
there's some some mathematical form
you've just so beautiful that they come
out in tears and they describe to you
the emotional reaction they've heard was
goose pimples and disinfect all sort of
things and the the equation which all
mathematicians have found most beautiful
is the the equation of identity equation
which my colleague in the study last
year described as the mathematical
equivalent of the of Shakespeare's
soliloquy in Hamlet right now from such
a highly cognitive source as opposed to
a sensory source was inserted in the
brain does
activity analysis gained our friend save
media over the frontal cortex and once
again the activity law is proportional
as parametrically related to the
declared intensity of the experience of
fusion because mathematics has been used
by architects and by sculptors almighty
michelangelo for two poly crisis in
Greece crisis thought that you could
design the perfect human body and this
is the reference of putting practice the
perfect human body by by measurement
takes diagonal take the square root of
that and then multiply the gain again
gain and this was it not the golden
triangle it's not symmetry it's
something else and that is the
difficulty in defining bujji application
of mathematical principles didn't
produce bodies which were in fact quite
remarkable of course this was my god
athlete which is apparently
unfortunately in the votes of the
British Museum is a remarkable piece of
work again all done by mathematical
means what these mathematical means are
nobody really knows they have been
employed
since that time including Vitruvius the
truth is after all walls
inspired by Paulo crisis and to come
with the Vitruvian principles which
they're not used to the Trivium
principles to translate into the perfect
human form this is the the Vitruvian Man
of Leonardo which is detective Damian in
Venice it is something by the way others
have tried to do this like jeweler not
nearly as well this is based on
mathematical principles no mathematical
principles what are they for principles
I think we have to unlike Leonardo and
Albert he and Vitruvius know these
people
I don't need measuring instruments
because measuring instruments are in
Maya high so he dispensed and emphasized
idealism just as others such as
Botticelli for example the three graces
of Botticelli are really idealistic
before there are this support if you
look at the three graces of Rubens at
the National Gallery or in the Prado
you'll find that great painter the
Rubens was he was an images of painter
it was not an idealistic thinking and
the results are not necessary as the
Three Graces in the Primavera
of poetry now the greatest of them all
whose measuring instruments was in his
eye was of course Michelangelo and this
creation of Adam is surely one of the
most idealistic
depictions of the human body there has
been in Western art Michelangelo himself
said I don't know I don't know what
mathematical principles I employ when I
create this but what I'm doing the human
body what I'm doing architecture I
depend on it that dependence the
dependence principles although I don't
know what they are and this is quite
interesting it's quite interesting that
the you have to satisfy certain
mathematical principles to find the
beauty in a mathematical formulation and
then you get activity in media over the
frontal cortex just as the painting of
the nerd-off of Michelangelo sheriff of
Michelangelo they hated each other who
has given so many people architecture I
am totally innocent in field of
architecture and no buildings are right
and let us remember that Michelangelo
did say I depend upon mathematical
principles to create beautiful buildings
I don't know what they are but I know
that I depend on them and he and Bernini
of course were the creators of see also
pizzas toothache and cancer now look at
this do you see
[Music]
the open arms into the Basilica of st.
Peter welcoming the weary pilgrim who
comes from far to find solace when he
raises his heart and mind to his creator
as he sees it for her greater it is not
only the entire concept which is
mathematically based but also the
details so if you go through each of the
colonnade if you look at the at the
columns this is idealistic and the
Pantheon which I rather like and I
especially chose this picture because
this makes it look more joyful than it
actually is it's a somber building when
seeing in the cloudy day but the detail
inside also and it is not surprising
that Michelangelo setups of the Pantheon
that it was constructed by humans but it
was constructed by something where
extra-extra humans now control such so
here is building in which people have
used mathematical principles which they
know nothing about in terms of G so if
you were to ask them what are these
mathematical principles we said now is
that mathematical beauty correlates with
activity in the same part of the brain
which which which is active when you
have when you experience musical or
visual or moral beauty or preaching how
many of colors also the same path brain
which is active when you experience
pleasure and reward because up to a
point is a self this is beautiful and
others will find before and indeed they
were right to internally compare that
with another building which should
welcome the patient anxious to find some
help
inside this is in the Santeria in Paris
decision all right you can see that this
is not a building which approach was
pleasure at least I don't think I would
so you can see that the application of
these mathematical principle which also
principles of beauty is of great
interest in architecture as is in
construction of the human body now I'm
running out of time but I want to say
one thing people assume as a meeting you
want to stifle discussion about beauty
to simply say but that's all subjective
because there is no discussion because
no subjective is that really true so if
you look at for example who in this
audience who here finds this one ugly
is there anyone who would describe this
woman as ugly and who would find this
woman I would like to have on this it
does they won't have a comment on this
thank you so much it's biological big
huge click typical but the woman is
beautiful and not appear to to gender
bars here is a Japanese vector I think
if you so subjectivity really is not as
it's not a good term to use to dismiss
discussions on beauty because
subjectivity is is not for Biological
Beauty I mean I've shown you three
examples I can show you examples of
human bodies and where you would agree
this is beautiful so subjective we
decided not by dismissing it but by
person who then asks many people how
beautiful you rate this to be on a scale
of one to ten if we find that 90% of
people find it beautiful
then you has to conclude it's no good
people saying to me but but some people
find this ugly well of course there are
seven of us there's a bell curve and
some people fold after all some people
find the people very attractive it
happens very very people in one culture
biologically
in one culture but also because it
balances the beautiful in others this is
not quite so true of architecture
because it does depend upon learning
greater extent so the the mosque here in
Istanbul I think is very beautiful but
perhaps other people for temples or
media in Barcelona has come for much
criticism I think it's quite romantic a
beautiful word I think but it has won a
prize
I find it peculiar 3 because we do not
have four buildings artefactual things
or transfer materials as we do for
biological materials and this one which
I find great I think he's the greatest
architects of our time Frank Gehry has
also been described as the worst
architect in our time some people don't
find this Museum in Bilbao but let us
consider the fact people have visited
BAU since the creation of this before
and more people go for the buildings and
thoughts inside so I finished by saying
that all centers around this this part
of brain media orbital frontal cortex
the pleasure and reward center and also
as it happens the center of the brain in
which activity correlates with the
experience of beauty regardless of the
source and therefore gives you pleasure
and reward and happiness and that's why
Duty matters
well thank you for having me here and
contribute is very important I think an
interesting discussion my name is
Tatyana Kojima even fell off of era I
have the pleasure and honor of working
almost exclusively on arts culture and
entertainment projects as yellow
mentioned I bring forward a history that
started with a career as a musician
that's a conductor and over the last 20
years I've had the pleasure of working
with some of the greatest architects I
think around which has been an education
and exploration sometimes interesting
discussions and the struggles I have the
pleasure of leading a team of Arab that
focuses on arts culture entertainment
with me we are planners designers arts
professionals musicians architects and
really try to bring forward I think the
ideals that over up himself put in place
around holistic architecture and
holistic planning and design in this
field
it asked actually quite often I'm a
scientist an engineer or an artist and I
tend to not like to answer direct
questions so I say why do I have to
choose in actual fact I think this is a
very interesting empirical question for
acoustics in general as a place as a
science that started barely hundred and
hundred some-odd years ago with the
measurement of phenomena and trying to
understand what's happening through a
period of
generating credibility I think
repeatability of that phenomenon being
able to plan for it time I think we're
where we are which is very very
interesting around thinking about why we
want to do things and the intentionality
around it and we in our practice
actually talk about intention and how we
feel a lot which is somewhat I think
something that many people would not
expect of a team and ever of course this
looks quite familiar I think to some
this is what acousticians are supposed
to be doing we think about reverberation
time we think about coverage we use
models we do and we do all that we're
very proud of the tools that we have and
we're very proud of the way that we are
able to leverage technology to
communicate better to be more robust
reliant and all of that as we get
towards the subject of what we're
talking about today we have been
discussing more and more how we talk
about beauty and sound and character and
identity in what we do so this is from a
project that we did recently in
discussing with our clients but also
with the architect what sort of sound we
wanted and we have been doing a lot of
work in looking at how we talk about
sound how do we actually express the
people who aren't how do we actually
create a sense of connection with people
with musicians around sound and the
sense that they want it to be beautiful
they want it to be meaningful they want
it to be memorable
and yet we don't want to create two
environments ever that are the same so
that the sound of one place one
experience has
context it's not the sound of another
and if you think about it our feeling is
that for a place in Shanghai should not
be sound the same as one in London one
in Sao Paulo each should have something
from which we can draw to create the
environment which musicians can use to
express so this was a place in China and
ultimately we found inspiration in
communication through an our artists
work Chinese artists work to actually
express something of the intensity of
colors the nature of the colors the
softness of them and yet of that color
that for us started to talk about an
elegance and richness but also a sense
of float that allows a sense of mystery
magic storytelling allegory that there
should be a brilliance and a detail to
that color something that's soft enough
comes out it's our job of course then
apply all the tools we have to create an
environment where when an orchestra
plays or a musician plays you can
actually feel that you may not think
about it but you can feel that that
actually if you play the same musician
in a different Hall you get a different
result it becomes a symbiotic
relationship of the occupier in the
context that creates a specific beauty
working on a project at Munich where we
have the honor of being the acousticians
for the new concert hall music Munich
working with the Bavarian radio Symphony
Orchestra which i think is one of the
best orchestras in the world and we were
asked what sort of sound do you think we
should have
and this is a very interesting question
because most physicians would want to
say something about time these are terms
that we think about about our answer
when through the same sort of work that
most and many architects would go and
think about about context about where
these people came from trying to create
a sense of expression of beauty and
sound and actually beauty was a set word
that we have used here that actually
speaks to where they are Munich is
different from Berlin
it is a context of people who love to
spend their time outside they consider
some songs from northernmost city of
Italy there is a delight to spend time
outdoors so if we want to create a space
for music that feels like it belongs in
Munich and not in Sao Paulo Brazil or in
Berlin then it should have something of
that spaciousness of that color of that
light at the same time if we look at
some of the buildings that represent
periods of history in Munich there are
something about richness to texture
things you touch certain highlights that
we felt that we wanted to capture in the
sound as well it's not all one big mass
of neon color in sound but rather
something that had a stability to it a
sense of timelessness but there was
there were things that came out and in
depths of color this is how we're
talking about beauty and sound today and
this is we see as our mandate to deliver
and this may all feel a little bit
fantastical but we have had the pleasure
of actually reading for this sort of
thinking for many many years now this is
a hall that we've done hidden from staff
in Poland where we were very interested
in a sound
quite frankly like it had always been
there this is a city where the
population before and after the Second
World War was completely changed out and
when they repopulated a city after the
Second World War the city's cultural
leaders decided to focus very much on
what had happened in baroque times in
medieval times that there was music
making there was community gathering in
that place for that time and there was a
sense therefore that I felt that you
really had to create a place and the
sound could not be a new sound it had to
be a sound that had this sense of
leaders sense of stability sense of
timelessness that actually also overlaid
with a fresh contemporary market city
mentality and what has been wonderful to
actually watch is how many people there
talked about it being something that if
you'll forgive the pun resonates with
who they are the musicians from around
the world will actually go there to
travel not because it meets some
[Music]
neutral ideal of beauty war of sound but
actually it's something that is
beautiful but specific beautiful but
localized contextualized and that it is
a place where that sounds you could only
go there to create that sort of musical
experience for those people and the
people who are there think that is
something that has meaning and is
memorable
another project which is one that has
great meaning for me as a work that we
did with Pablo where somehow we managed
to create the most integrated piece of
architecture and sound as a sound nature
of sound
I've managed in my career today this is
a project in Denmark there is an obvious
discussion about water and what you see
this is next to the water there is the
obvious discussion about the light and
clarity of a northern city in the way
that those spaces work but there's a
playfulness there's also a sense of
creating something that has special so
that the people who are very comfortable
in their life would come and experience
something unusual something memorable
something that actually is a change and
we wanted to do something in music that
was the same my goal here was to create
a space that was so intense so memorable
that it would shake as comfortable out
of people and become something that um
what's so mersive that it would become
almost roguelike
the sound here is very reverberant it's
fairly loud
it's very immersive and it actually has
a huge amount of colors and in my mind I
always remember of my film called Speed
Racer which nobody ever saw but anyway
one that has a lot of neon lights and
exactly the opposite of all software
actually it's very intense fast moving
it feels like you couldn't touch the
sound so y'all asked me to reflect on
the nature of beauty and that
conversation and we had a discussion in
the team
and we find that it's very interesting
that in looking back on the work with
the architects we have had the pleasure
of collaborating with this work comes up
very often that somehow in explaining
what you want to do you have to justify
it
I think we we see someone differently I
think there is a question of
justification there's a question of
explanation
there's a different emotional feeling to
that difference of storytelling and some
of the great architects we've worked
have actually don't justify they tell
stories they tell stories to connect
with the clients and with the
communities about what they intend to do
I think the word that actually has a lot
of meaning for me in particular in my
profession is actually magic we used to
be the dark arts and I suppose to a
degree I don't mind that because it
keeps me away from justification so
effectively I think we have to be able
to have the rigor to be able to justify
and explain the storytelling abilities
to be able to create comfort and have
people come along with us but there is a
degree of that magic making that I think
sometimes simply doesn't have the intent
courage whatever work we might use to
actually be able to go beyond
justification and explanation to
something else it is possible that that
it's about something about this that
there is a responsibility an awesome
responsibility that comes from creating
something that has a permanence
and in reflecting on that I have to say
that we have interesting if somewhat odd
situation of being creators of an X the
possibility of an experience
and the fact that it is something that
has an ephemeral T to it but is equally
permanent and I have to recognize that
architecture has that sense of it has to
be something that's permanent that it's
not just a new experience it's not
something that has the freshness of the
ephemerality
that you have to be able to live with it
and community has to be able to work
around it so I think we have to
recognize that it is an awesomely
responsible and difficult challenge but
I do think at the end it has come down
to also what we want to achieve what
we've been hearing it really has to do
with with that there is need to
recognize that beauty is something that
is important to us as human beings we
talk a lot about the fact that we create
with our design and creative partners
and our clients we create spaces
that allow us to be communities we talk
a lot a tear up about the fact that
people live in cities and cities are
very important and that's undeniably
true but a city without places where we
experience things together actually is a
place where a lot of people live we're
creating communities our buildings our
environment is shaping who we are and
what we say about who we are
somewhere in that I think has to be
beauty and somewhere and that has to be
that conviction that we want to make
this a better world burning questions if
not I have some news to me that you can
actually
see the premise sound you hear is a is a
relationship between the sound that's
created emanates from the instrument and
you're not only hearing direct sound but
sound that reflects is modified it's a
symbiotic relationship so the same
ensemble playing the same organ I
actually had the privilege it's very
interesting to travel with the same
group of artists from all because that's
one of the few things that you get one
of the few ways that you can sincerely
and perceptually experience that
difference the performance the orchestra
will sound different but more
interesting the musicians will play
differently because musicians are
especially on tour when they move they
are always reacting to what they hear so
they play in a small room they practice
they go into a big stage what you'll
find is that they're playing
subconsciously changes not even
consciously subconsciously changes
perhaps also neurologically or
physically their sense of space changes
because they feel like they have to play
louder because it's a big room or they
feel like because the sound moves
differently you have to play slower or
your heartbeat is different and so your
sense is the different if I were to give
you a cushion I was a very very precious
body
now say to you I want to hear it sound
differently to different churches
whatever it is what does the metric that
you use to the so the metrics that have
evolved in acoustics over the last
hundred years we use all of that
basically most of them from the way that
the sound decays reverberation time is
about how to sound the case and you look
at at different slices of time as as you
will appreciate the brain actually can
actually look mal gamate the multitude
of information that comes to us and we
interpret it in our minds so that's one
part of it how we perceive it Sirica ly
and laterally is another part of it and
then we have metrics for strength and so
on and effectively we can analyze
different facets if you like four facets
of the class by using different metrics
and the problem that I I often talk
about is those metrics are extremely
important those are are measurable tools
that we use but actually it's a little
bit like finding the secrets of the Bach
fugue by analyzing the fuse you
understand how much you're comparing but
you can't recreate it that way so the
creation process then can't be I want a
reverberation time of two seconds and
this and that it actually has to be I
think what sort of sound do we want and
understand that actually the choices we
make cannot generally mean you can't do
certain things but equally has to come
from an understanding that different
geometry different genre their volumes
shapes materials change what we hear and
if I'm really naughty I'll say color
changes what we think we hear and
texture changes that which means that
actually my work and that of
architecture is pretty much inseparable
thank you
yes I was appreciate we're in our second
question last question is could it be in
your research and your examination of
the brains of various individuals test
cases that those test cases are already
corrupt because they come from maybe
different places they may be educated
differently and is there is there a
premise that beauty or the understanding
of the way the neurons fire in the front
frontal cortex is inherent in our DNA
and it's simply passed down from
generation to generation and then once
we are growing up as children it then
becomes modified
to our own appreciation his eyesight was
fading he want to take off very much
they call it another old man's head can
you see the yes sir Simon can you please
take off I was thinking about this two
or three days ago because I've been
listening to better the years for years
and I can't begin to tell you how much
pleasure it gave me over the past this
is after four years of listening to it
and how move the walls to tears by the
Benedictus and the past those were just
wonderful so now the one of the reasons
why I went and this is in part in answer
to your second question or maybe circle
and I can't remember the
the reasons I went engineer aesthetics
really is a lot I got from a young
Japanese guy whom I've never met who
wrote to me saying professor I know
nothing about the Christian culture I
know nothing was a virgin mother I know
nothing about Christ but I went to these
and Peter's Basilica and so
Michelangelo's Requiem in marble and
came out in tears can you explain that
to me that was a man who's got noses
partially answer your second question
but let me extend you meeting you ask me
to what extent certain booties depend
upon culture and learning and upbringing
right well baby's six weeks tend to
orient prefer actually towards peaceful
phases they orient towards faces at
several hours after birth on the whole I
think I think that certain signs on wall
which is up to us it's very unlikely
that anyone in any culture is going to
find someone was one I hear and what I
hear beautiful there's not going to
happen and Francis Bacon the English
painter when he said I want to give a
visual shock what did he do he mutilated
faces and bodies but never objects if
you look at his paintings the objects
are not perfect but the face and boys
are mutilated so I think that there is
it is the experience of beauty is in
parallel computing faces bodies is
really resistant very resistant to
changes now I have done experiments in
which I have subjected people daily to
deformed faces and the activity in the
brain signaling that there is something
happening about it never goes away
but with deformed objects it does appear
the second question so the third one
because of ugliness there is a tendency
that attends it to regard ugliness as
the other end of you chain but others a
different category it is beautiful and
not beautiful and ugly and not ugly
so ugliness tends to to engage a
different part of the brain which is the
amygdala that's their own second brain
which is engagement is fear and terror
and avoidance not knowledgeable enough
to be able to be very very doctrinaire
about it but i think that this is
mistake regard on something which is not
good for me as ugly different categories
can I contribute to to may perhaps
random thoughts one is that there's
something odd in in what I do because
everybody has a different opinion about
what they hear in a concert hall and yet
consensus pills as to whether it's a
great acoustic or not most people that
go and listen to rooms that we've
designed don't know what they're
listening to they may not even describe
it regarding sound they'll say I was
very moved by the actors performance but
actually if you couldn't hear it
wouldn't have happened so they might be
actually looking at something else and
of course it's irrelevant something else
but it is not the whole picture
so I find there's something quite
interesting in your question about the
sampling because I do think I agree that
my experience would correlate with what
you're saying that there are there are
things that across cultures are
considered beautiful and yet of course
my basic premise is that we as designers
can also try to actually appreciate the
differences of that cultural programming
so this is quite interesting the other
thing I wanted to mention though is that
as much as we do talk about beauty we
find it a almost an unhealthy and
unhelpfully vague term in our work
because when we're trying to describe
the character the characteristics the
personality of the spaces we're trying
to create
beautiful is actually not very
differentiated right so you can't say
actually we wanted our Glee sound
doesn't make any sense because actually
you know of itself they are clearly not
polar opposites because you can have a
car ugly sound that's created in a
context where otherwise it's beautiful
so there is a scale issue and more
interestingly I think that actually we
look for we have a tendency to need to
talk about things to actually define
what beauty is in this context and
therefore again I I don't think that
it's about ugly it's I think the
opposite of beauty is probably the
anodyne that they as a thing that has no
personality no intent you see something
if you tell me it's beautiful and I
check to see this activity in your
medial prefrontal cortex then it is
beautiful but if you tell me it's
beautiful as I find no activity that
you're lying
I must it's something that out of our
good position but I remember in our
earlier conversations that I was so
pleased to hear yet the sight in the
brain where we experience ugly ugliness
is the same site in the brain we
experience disgust I was so pleased and
and and then beauty is where we
experienced the romantic love and desire
and all of that so it's like in two
different parts of the brain because
when we when we grew up as you know
architects through education I heard it
so many times by our teachers different
teachers different I think when the
world bricks to actually have a
fantastic I and write great on and you
know there was a period that it was so
common to hear yes it's ugly at the
beginning then it becomes beautiful oh
that the kind of shifting of ugly to to
beauty was like almost a cultural kind
of trust belief and I think that there
that's why I was so pleased it's not
possible it's not I mean the corner
I was very pleased at the you know if it
was effort lino I'm how man who who came
with his you know the literal is there
boo didn't you
so yeah I want to ask you oh yeah so do
you see beauty is something that is
subjective it's specific to me and to
where I am now and to time bound or
culture bound or is it something more
than Eric that is you know one beauty
for me is for everybody and I think we
might close this question is distill it
to and I'm an engineer so can you train
a computer model to tell you this is
beautiful or this is not beautiful well
I mean the computer model is dependent
upon the human input so at the moment I
mean I'm not able to ask you a question
if you had a computer which is totally
independent of human input choice thing
could be designed and at the time the
question can be answered I cannot answer
it now because I've talked to people
about that and they also work with it's
not human input on the first part of
your question the what I'm disputed with
biological beauty but what do I mean by
pilots could be do you human faces
beauty of human bodies the beauty of
landscape beauty of animals the beauty
of the kinetic beauty I think on that
there is very little subjectivity quite
a lot objectively on other things I
think there is a significant amount of
variability I've never seen it in
buildings and cars
buildings perhaps a bit less because of
as I was quoting Michelangelo depends
upon certain mathematical to respect for
certain mathematical principles but with
cars and with trains and with forks and
knives and chopsticks all that it can be
quite a lot of variation but I think
yeah I think that I still remember while
teaching and there's the moment of the
patroller reviews and every school of
architecture the body very familiar they
bought it in others and there's a moment
where and you know sometimes around the
table are sitting the tutors the you
know who really often hate each other
and don't respect each other and each
one is fighting for completely different
agendas and all that and then there's a
coming a portfolio and a project that is
is really so strongly beautiful that all
of a sudden everybody agrees this guy
and so I think when things are so so you
know we argue about a little bit when
something is really strongly very
beautiful even in architecture not just
biological your date is something that
kind of we agree more than I think it's
also interesting that you can find the
agree that something is beautiful
without necessarily liking it I find
that in that sort of context I find
sometimes that you can agree that it's
significant and as beauty but you can
separate what you would want to do
yourself or even possibly a place you
want to live in it's a complete separate
thing and I think that's quite
interesting that there is a process
there that you recognize there is almost
a reaction to it but it doesn't have to
align with intellectual process which
for me suggests indeed that if there is
something that is quite universal the
question coming from there ever yeah
thank you so much for bringing this
conversation da I think the conversation
around ideas of beauty and aesthetics is
an important one a very important one
and yet when I saw your video a few
months ago when you gave me a privileged
access and and what I loved about it
the multiplicity of voices that you
brought together with very different
ideological positions in relationship of
what that is and means because in fact
there are no answers to some of the
questions that have been posed to these
fabulous forum and yet I can't avoid but
remember some of the things that
throughout the history of architecture
we have been discussing it was 1952 when
River actually asked all its members a
very simple question not devoid of
ideological and static power that's a
dual systems of proportion make good
architecture easier and bad architecture
more difficult yeah that has to do with
issues of mathematics it has to do with
issues of proportion and has to do with
particular Villa's or understandings of
what beauty might be in relationship to
given structures of static mathematical
understanding and I think that that was
a very interesting question following
second world war where everyone was
trying to somehow externalize their
principles by which we actually existed
try to produce forms of belief if you
want outside of the subject the idea of
subjectivity for the last 50 years or so
was one that was relegated we constantly
tried to engage with architectural
discourses very much based with ideas of
the rational of the objective of the
Cartesian if you want and anything that
had to do with the phenomenological was
always if you want approach from a space
of suspicion cognitive science has
allowed us to enter that from a kind of
scientific point of view and allow us to
actually start thinking about the
subjective from a different aspect but
so aesthetics in the school over the
last year
has been discussed in in terms not only
if you want or motto is designed with
built and designed with beauty built in
truth towards that have been used today
and yet they think that what beauty is
and what truth is today is exchanging I
don't believe that beauty is something
that exists that there is a kind of
Platonic space that we have access to
through either a mathematical model or a
neurological model but in fact it is a
politically constructed and built space
that does refer to particular cultures
bodies and and if you want the way in
which we relate ourselves to each other
and to our bodies now I have a very
simple question after all these
conversations that has to do with I do
believe we have a responsibility as a
generation to produce an aesthetic
project an aesthetic regime that is able
to respond to some of the most important
and relevant questions if the modern
movement managed to succeed as a
movement is because it had maybe not
directly by a project of conversation a
static project associated to an
aspirational project the modern movement
we could say that was aspiring to be the
best for the most for the least and when
some nice characters came with five
points about how to actually get into
the modern project we all somehow amo
subscribe ourselves and believed it was
an aesthetic project that had nothing to
do with a political one yet right now we
were trying to answer issues of climate
issues of sustainability generosity
equity and so on and yet we don't have
an aesthetic project attached to it we
don't have a sense of beauty attached to
it in fact beauty is something that
someone like Donald Trump will talk
about with a lot of authority like a
baby that actually probably will look
immediately to someone who actually he
will consider to be beautiful
including a particular architectural
static an architectural regime a
neoclassical one that he tries to impose
to all the government buildings so
within that in mind I would like maybe
to talk to something that is more
present and urgent and I don't know how
to respond because if we are to actually
ask ourselves how does a community that
like the architectural community in this
lecture hall at DIA that has constantly
tried to experiment with questions of
aesthetics understanding that
Vladek alas that exact the ones that
liberate us from the inherited the
structures of power and beauty to try to
produce new ones and canny ones in which
we can be more free more equal more us
what do we answer to trump so I would
like the panel maybe to somehow think
about what does one answer to Tran when
he's asking that all those buildings
take into an equivalent Renaissance
symmetrical beautiful architecture
Sameer you can start that we can go in
order that doesn't matter I think I
think you've dragged in politics into
this of course it has to be dragging
some politics into this and I think
politics is important consideration but
certain things which which we have to
understand first of all we are talking
about beauty not about the art right you
are different I mean Picasso's Guernica
is a very disturbing piece of work and
wonderful piece of work but it is not
exactly very beautiful we see you're
disagreeing with me doesn't matter much
agree with you does not matter the fact
is that it is there are two people here
you and me allow me to finish you and me
who have got different opinions about
that which means that there's no
universal appreciation that had a
beautiful work but I would agree with
you if what you're saying to me to be
the important piece for immensely so
I'm talking really about biological
beauty I don't think there's that much
of a subjectivity in volatile beauty
that probably a lot in in artefactual
beauty of course serious mathematics is
an objective and I think that you I
consider mathematics to be in the
biological pleasure mathematical beauty
because you see the wondrous wonderful
ways of sharing the importance of
biological beauty because mathematicians
as long as they understand the language
of mathematics be they're Japanese or
Chinese or English will understand we
appreciate the beauty of mathematics
because they can't ask can't Emmanuel
can't ask what does the beauty of
mathematics resided and his world in the
fact that makes sense he did not ask the
next question who does and what doesn't
make sense to well I'm going to give you
the answer it makes sense to the logical
system of the brain and the logical
system of the brain in the mathematician
in India and in Afghanistan are the same
that's why they are agreed on and that's
what it is objective
I'm not complaining I'm saying I am
saying we're talking about different
ideas that st. you have myself you had a
long question so I'm a very brief answer
I think that we do have different ideas
I'm talking about biological duty as
being non subjective and and as being
subjective but I'm adding to it that I
can determine what you find it for and
what I find before by simply looking at
two things one is whether you declare
this before and choose winners activity
neocortex it just suppose that you have
a discourse before being in the politics
into question but what I'm saying to you
is that if you want to go to the
primitives of beauty there are inherited
templates such as the proportions of the
face that are critical to to respect if
you want to find a face beautiful just
symmetries which you coach are critical
for you shaking your head but to show me
a painting show me somebody who took
what I hear and what I hear and one
knows here who's beautiful show you that
then you convince me why
I said I did say that I given to you if
that's what you want to sing you read
into it fine
regulations or suggestions but I can't
really engage in this week I'll tell you
why because I don't know what chums
ideas of beauty are and nobody has told
me what Tom's idea that video of once
once you expose them to me what is
beauty which is a cardio beauty in in in
buildings maybe what is that his wife is
certainly quite attractive and beautiful
I can't engage in this discussion I
think
[Music]
[Music]
our planet would make us Spartan but
maybe if we didn't know any better
indeed why not I mean there also we have
to think that we're gonna do mate so we
have to find somebody we're making that
giving us pleasure stimulating the
pleasure centers of gray indeed if we
had different gravitational
characteristics with mine we might
change but schools we don't somewhere
somewhere answers to whatever yeah a
little anecdote am i eliminate I always
visit some friends I'm not an architect
he was an architect and his wife was an
architect and we were discussing a
building and most of us disagreed there
we most of us agree that this building
was ugly and then he's and my friend
who's an artist said no it's a really
beautiful building and then his wife
said is that a building he being taught
should be beautiful and I thought that
was really interesting because I think
what we value and the context that we
learn things might influence why regard
is beautiful and maybe the architectural
profession does have a very you know has
a community of thought there is actually
quite monotone sometimes in that a lot
of people seem to believe come from the
same value system and I think probably
one that I agree with but I did it did
strike me that that value system was
quite uniform throughout the profession
of the ones I've met the judgment of
what was beautiful a more aesthetic
style is inappropriate furnace or
something but I think in architecture
you know as we keep kind of saying that
you know each time has its own beauty
and beauty is not the varnish on duty
it's not the one beauty it's not the one
kind of set of proportion it's not the
one thing it's the variety of it and and
I think you know it's all open to you
know to the now and to the truce now and
you know I think certain things still
feels beautiful to us even though it was
you know there were
dine done 500 years ago runnin is ago
but of course we are interested you know
the the novelty and their the newness
and fresh thought and the ideas are of
the now and so I know it's one answer
your question because you're coming from
you know a much more kind of political
agenda and and and even taking the the
world aesthetics to kind of different
almost different territories but I don't
see the differences I think that you
know what is if a project is done and
it's a project and it's to be built or
not to be built
you know there's we are you know I think
the portfolios we see we know when
something is beautiful and but not
discussing it not talking about it not
you know yes maybe you're discussing it
here in the last you know here
intensively but there it's not out there
yet so I'm not an architect but I'll
permit myself to comment on your
question by adroitly avoiding the
political aspect for a moment I I wonder
to parts of your question one is whether
or not there is necessarily an
imperative that there is a generational
aesthetic voice not sure actually I
think sometimes sometimes these things
are the result of forces and sometimes
there are confluence and sometimes yes
somebody some group of people sat down
in a cafe and wrote a manifesto and it
turned out to be pretty good right I
think that's fine but I think that
that's that's one thing I think that the
the reality is that there is a wide
range of work being done around the
world in any given community some of it
good some of it biscuit architecture
some of it less good and we all have
different opinions about it but let's
say for a moment that we generally have
a sense of what's really good what's
acceptable and what's maybe not so good
but actually the the commonality
actually is pretty good the the effort
to try to make that better I don't think
because it comes out of from smooth
or whoever's mouth should be denigrated
that effort I think has a has a value to
it but I also wonder sometimes whether
we are consistently considering what are
the causes of some of that because let's
face it some of the work that is
completely cost driven completely
unresponsive and looks like that
Hospital photo we saw was signed off by
somebody of your profession
and number one somebody might be proud
of it so let's be careful of that but
the other part of it is that it actually
is a profession that actually I think is
a deliciously diverse but also one that
is sometimes a bit hypocritical of
itself if I may say just as - that is to
say we all want to work we need to live
we have clients we need to get paid
that's just a reality of it and I think
that we have to be conscious that as a
building industry I don't know that we
are consistently doing things the way
our better selves would like and then
when somebody wants to create order I
think it's it's a human so it's probably
inherently somewhat flawed but I'm not
sure that you should fight it just
because somebody wanted to make the
effort actually or a tribute to make it
necessarily bad just because of its
source so that would be my slight
comment on that I have my own opinions
about anybody's desire to create order
and now the particular order they want
to create but I think the dialogue is
more important and then I think we all
have to try to live up to what we say we
want to do
what we get paid so we get paid for form
following function we get paid to be on
time we get paid to be sustainable but
no one ever says we'll pay you more if
it triggers the beauty front part of my
brain and it and it also triggers the
beauty since within a percentage of
people that come and visit or see it I
think if you're very successful that's
fine and that's what you do get paid for
that magic but until you prove yourself
and you become respected enough to chart
as a quantifiable kind of skill and
service and until we perhaps have a
conversation about out one of our
responsibilities being that beauty and
that being quantifiable as an element of
the brain that's triggered it that the
conversation isn't there to allow us to
be paid and therefore there may be many
the conversation needs to continue and
grow so that it's something that we're
truly rewarded for when we get time to
explore and and and beautiful houses
before buildings but before paintings to
be to ourselves to be attractive
[Music]
Maria tell us the greatest single fall
time I mean she was paid for what for
being a woman or being having slim -
with pain she was paid long she had
beautiful voice and she said my voice is
gone everybody else knows my voice is
gone so I'm not sure I agree with your
premise that's I totally agree because
lil I reflect that but no no no because
because Lily reflected on a problem in
our profession and because we don't talk
about what we might be excel at we don't
you know beauty is not discussed what is
being discussed all the time with the
forum full of functional you know it's
going to very basic and and and that's
what people think what architects are
doing and that's the way it goes and
it's it's it's very sad and I know from
the profession you know that she
reflected on something which is very
true I think I do think that there is a
subject here about setting X getting
clients to actually expect more for you
I also think that I have to reflect on a
friend of mine who is I think a great
architect and one of his talents is
actually to really digest and do
everything the client wanted but in a
way that the client doesn't expect and
that actually is supposed to talent in a
skill so I have to say that working with
wolf bricks for example the ability for
hey that he has to tell stories and get
people to want what he wants to do is
one of these great skills right and we
we are all we are all in a situation
where yes there are some basics and if
you allow the conversation to be only a
that then that's what it becomes and I
do think this is one of those things
where the profession has a tendency to
have people who will say I'll do this
for you or hit all your boxes it'll be
cheaper instead of the profession as a
whole saying there is more to life than
that and I think that's that and that's
a reality of our human existence but at
the same time I think a question for a
profession where if we're not careful as
much in engineering as an architecture
we will get automated we will get
reduced and what's left as value is your
point of view your ability to create
something beautiful yet cetera because
that actually is the one thing that
cannot be automated if it is the sole
thing of course there are other features
I mean in an architect when you design
design building hundreds of other things
not just the beauty I want to provoke
people here this gosta buildings of soft
Pompidou in Paris it was conceived
structurally badly conceived so they
should have to shut it down every super
few years what yeah I feel like I have
to defend the building
can I ask a question yeah for Sammy in
terms of natural beauty can you say
something about the subversive yields of
beauty things like supervised reviews of
beauty histories like our stories like
Dorian Gray yes and how Beauty can
office Kate intelligence obvious Kate
intelligence for example how can it
receive us people to pursue it in spite
of various practical difficulties a
beauty in itself is a subversive thing
yes sure so it's never a source of truth
then we´ll never source of truth people
people are so so enamored of beauty that
they are prepared to trample upon reason
upon everything else to attain it so it
is absolutely the guide to truth I think
I'm sorry but I think we have to stop it
now there's a catering and organized and
yes and opposite me the room will be
closed by 10 o'clock and there was a lot
of effort done for that so if there's
any finishing lines to be able to give a
slightly different point in you're about
to point to Beauty I know people who I
know that time I think they will done
[Applause]
