hello everyone and welcome to the summer
D lab extra series this year we're very
happy to welcome Satya Bhushan for our
first lecture and we've known each other
for a very long time and Shoji is a
studio master in design research lab
graduate program at the AAA and he's
also the co-founder of the architects
computational research team called and
he's a he has completed his MPhil in
2016 in University of Malta now he's
working towards his PhD in eth3 and
Sergey has great expertise in several
ranges of subjects touching on
computation programming mathematics
geometry rationalization optimization as
well as advanced fabrication so please
allow me to say welcome to SH a.j and we
look forward to hearing his research
[Music]
[Applause]
yeah thank you leaf and thank you for
being accommodating for this light
earlier start to lecture series and
thanks also for the invitation as a leaf
mentioned we have we studied together so
we kind of really know each other for a
long time and so there's been like parts
of our careers that like have had
synergetic synergies let's say so today
I have a focus because it is the D lab
like of course I will focus more on the
digital design and fabrication aspects
but I would just like to start off by
giving it a little bit of a context at
least the way we approach it in code and
also in Zaha and further into our
collaborative networks and so on this
particular essay resonates a lot with
with me and like in
general I think it should resonate with
like most people who have been involved
in kind of technical research for a
while because on the face of it it
sounds like we have to educate our
clients and just tell them how things
are produced but it actually sa actually
means a whole lot more like it kind of
suggests more participation trying to
bring users to get them to participate
in the design process get them to
participate in what is actually produced
so it's not like you know empty words or
like flowery words to try and sell
whatever you design to to the consumer
but like to make a consumer active part
in what is produced and he Walter
Benjamin wrote this in 1934 and it was
in the context of like literary work and
comparing like novels with like
newspapers but I think it's as
applicable to digital design and
fabrication today because we are
similarly in similar crossroads so
there's been an extensive amount of
research like perhaps in accelerated in
the last decade or so in on this topic
of digital design and fabrication and
code is part of this community and so a
large part of what we do is indeed
research but we also do a equal part
applied projects try to push boundaries
like one step at a time
we also increasingly partake or
participate in exhibitions and in
communicating what it is that we do and
like trying to get feed back into our
design processes and lastly we also
develop in
kind of in-house talent like it's not
that we just hire specialists we are a
bit like a Barcelona football club in
that sense like we try to nurture and
grow talent in house and also nurture
and grow our collaborative network
because a research team or any
architectural team is only as good as
its collaborative network so of these
like I will only speak about the
research part like and a little bit
about the projects I mean through the
projects I will talk a bit about the
research and for the last bit like there
is a small exhibition that's opening in
the building center like just five
minutes from here
those of you interested or those of you
still interested at the end of my talk
you can go take a look so as I mentioned
like a large part of the last decade
that the code team has been active like
we have focused like many other
colleagues and extended networks mostly
on the production aspects the physical
aspects the scientific aspects and so on
and so forth which most of you would be
very familiar with since you're here
doing the D lab and it's also
technological and very in-depth in that
sense but oscillate like we are also
realizing along with like the rest of
the fraternity in the sense that like
it's about time to ask what where does
all of this lead to what what can we do
already with like this increasing rate
of extraordinary progress that the
profession and discipline has made so in
that sense again like the essay as I've
mentioned like resonates a lot because
we're beginning to think like you know
how do people consume architecture and
can we incorporate that in the way we
produce or can we utilize all our
research in the production aspects to
address some of the opportunities that
lie in bringing users into the design
process and
production process so so there is this
kind of slight tension between the
production aspects the physical and the
science with the social and the
storytelling aspects and so on and so
forth so and we actively aim to suppress
technology in in whatever we produce
meaning like there's a lot of technology
that goes into it but like at the
outside we're not actively talking about
it anymore so in that sense all my
affiliations are kind of not by chance
it's over by deliberate consideration
that like half of my affiliations are in
the design world and the other is more
in the kind of let's say research and
scientific or research and then more
narrow scientific sense
so what other disciplines and
professions actually do this dichotomy
or manage this dichotomy very well
computer graphics and animations are
perhaps the most beautiful and and clear
example of this because like when we
look at a movie whether it's animated or
not they're by now in this in 2018
there's a lot and a lot of Technology
not only in the camera but also in the
direction and in the although all the
digital technology that goes into making
a movie is extraordinary like it's
perhaps even more than than most
buildings and and it also it's
cumulative like so when you look at snow
or other movies like you're not like
really thinking about like you know the
physics of snow and like all the
hundreds of researchers and
mathematicians and like others who have
like slaved over all the technical
aspects closer to architecture like it's
again not new like in in the 17th 18th
century like perhaps best exemplified by
like Gaudi like there was lots and lots
of fabrication aspects there are lots of
structural aspects into the that went
into the work of Gaudi and his
contemporaries again he didn't invent
like most of these it's cultural
illusion that like he had access to like
ways to calculate structural behavior
just through geometry and geometric
calculations like the drawings on the my
left show but when it was about making
the building it wasn't about like how
things were fabricated that was only a
part of it right like there was like a
lot more to to to Sagrada famÃ­lia than
like like the cleverness in like cutting
stone or the cleverness in arranging
stone in a structurally meaningful and
structurally efficient way so and the
same can be said about like like the
other 20th century phenomena of like the
Maison Domino and like how it's like
spread through through all our cities
it's it's not only because you know
kuboos EA came up with this diagram like
and kind of made it accessible to a lot
a lot wider audience but also because it
went hand in hand with like
technological progress the trade schools
new ways to calculate behavior and new
materials like reinforced concrete and
like new patents and how to use concrete
along with like reinforced reinforcement
like so all of this was like exciting
new world in the 20th century the same
way we are like super excited about like
robots and AI and data and geometry and
form finding and so on and so forth so
it's helpful to look back into history
and see how these two aspects like kind
of go hand in hand
especially in architecture one couple
like that has like a profound influence
and our serve as a constant inspiration
are the aims called the Eames is Ray and
Charles seems like they had like a
prolific 80 odd years of career and they
also started somehow in this way like
they bought this patent of like forming
wood from the US Army set up a company
got the machine into their living room
and then the rest is history now Eames
chairs like sell all over the world like
for incredible amounts of money and but
they were also another
earliest investors or pioneers in from
the design world to invest time and
effort and collaborative develop
collaborations in the use of software
like particularly Mathematica and also
production processes exactly the same
way we're we're doing now in the 21st
century but and again this diagram is
from the Eames what that means is like
at the top at the very top is what is
what they were looking for a vocabulary
a design language that relates to
materials and technique so in other
words it is like I know did it this is
like if you add digital to that it is
digital design and fabrication but they
were also quickly to understand that
like that you have to follow that up
with like understanding the social part
like how families behave or how they how
people interact in communities and so on
and so forth you also have to consider
production systems economics financing
servicing and so on and so forth like so
and what's very interesting for us is
like their career like kinda ended up in
like looking at houses and like how
people use they only made one house but
with the idea of their ideas like kind
of work more profoundly influencing the
entire case that house movement so that
that's the kind of backdrop to to to the
presentation like this idea that like
we're spent like the first eight years
like looking at developing our language
digital design and fabrication language
or vocabulary of materials techniques
and now we're like adding to that or
attempting to add to that like social
understanding and utilize our recall
ready rehearsed language to address like
some some more more social opportunities
and communal community building
opportunities so as I said I will only
touch upon the social part like towards
the very end like most of the
presentation is indeed about the
physical
aspects the research aspects and
particularly about geometry and how
geometry can be a common tool a common
way to many people to collaborate
compared to like let's say more
numerical studies that have a very
handful of people can understand
geometry and physical things like a lot
of us can understand intuitively and
therefore contribute collectively to to
the design process and also to what is
actually eventually produced so there is
idea that we can draw from history so
it's in that sense cumulative and idea
that we can draw from many different
disciplines in that sense it's computer
it's collaborative and ultimately we are
adding the term architectural geometry
architectural to to the idea of geometry
to because it will be physically
realized unlike several other geometric
aspect which are more mathematical in
that sense just a brief again like a
background like in the twentieth century
like they were like increasing use of
NURBS borrowed from the automobile
industry and as most of you know like
there are three major ways to represent
geometry on a computer NURBS meshes and
images and NURBS comes from the
automobile and like the aviation
industry and like architecture also
inherited this from from that industry
predominantly in the in the 20th century
in the late 20th century they were like
many buildings and perhaps the early
success and and
of rhino for example it was based on on
that paradigm of using NURBS a lot like
but most of our work borrows from the
computer graphics community the movie
industry and we use meshes almost
exclusively but not not entirely true
but like let's say predominantly we use
meshes we are also increasingly looking
at like image image based ways to
represent geometry why because like
images are easy capture a lot more
detail like so you've never heard of a
cat scan that is like represented as
NURBS why because human bodies and other
things are not just smooth objects there
they have a lot of a lot of detail and
like so images in that Center and you
can also consider hybrids but like for
the sake of this presentation let's say
most of the work that I will show will
fall into these predominant either the
mesh representation and also a little
bit in the image representation so why
use meshes for example well because it's
fun these kind of things like the that's
one of the reasons like computer
graphics like really fascinates me and a
lot of the people in the team is is
because like geometry and math and
programming can really be fun and as
soon as you can like leverage and
understand what's going on you can like
then you know use it for less like more
boring applications like architecture
like like here facade optimization and
like paneling and blah blah blah like
curvature based paneling in the sense
and also to make sure all the panels are
then like flat and like you can join
them all nicely together and like you
can bolt them together so there's not
twisted so all of these things are
enabled because you're using meshes in
your because we're borrowing like the
stuff that's like 30 to 40 years old in
many cases and some are like really
literally released like two weeks ago
like in
in in a different community so we just
have to borrow and and make it our own
so yeah so and that's how like you know
we view complex geometry like not as
something that needs to be optimized and
rational like complex is actually good
because curvature is good in in more
more cases than not like curvature is
better than flat and so how do we
leverage new ways of making to actually
physically produce that curvature so
again we're boring a lot of the
technologies and terminology from from
the computer graphics industry and
particularly when it comes to use of
meshes and so hopefully like buildings
like these or at least sculptures like
these get built that's and again I won't
go too much into the the boring
technological technical aspects just to
say that like we are not alone in this
and we're not pioneering any anything
other than like just looking into the
right places and making and forging the
right connections so all these research
groups across the world like from
Carnegie Mellon to TU Vienna and like in
Asia and and Tokyo and so on and so
forth are using meshes like when it's
coming to the production of buildings
they're beginning to use meshes in in
conjunction with nerves so like why not
join them and begin to utilize a lot of
the emerging research and so again the
term architectural geometry is just
using meshes that are aware of how they
stand up
ie they're aware of gravity and also
they're aware of like how they might be
physically realized so it's not some
arbitrary curvy geometry that has no
idea of gravity or no idea of how we
event so geometry which is like a
designer's problem is architectural
geometry if geometry you allows the
engineer to rationalize for you then
that's not architectural geometry that's
just geometry that someone's having fun
with
at least that's our definition so we
collaborate we want to collaborate with
like all these people and all of this
extensive emerging knowledge and that's
that's another reason to look at meshes
leading research organization like the
one that I'm where I'm doing my PhD at
is like also a like you might already be
using Rhino vault and caramba and like
whatnot they're all meshes mesh based
technology so you can actually begin to
see that like you know lots of
researchers like with with 10 10 plus
years of funding they're looking at
investing heavily into meshes so it's
only a matter of time when this becomes
more mainstream in architecture and also
like in you know pioneering engineers or
like advocating the use of this like
honey Takara I don't know how many of
you know he was one of the founders of a
Katie that helped Zaha Hadid Architects
like realized several several seminal
buildings interestingly also people from
other disciplines were now coming into
architecture like this guy mark poly is
like one of the exceptional geniuses
let's say he sold FaceTime to Apple and
now he's interested in architecture
don't ask me why but he's also like
interested in in in in augmenting meshes
with like fabrication related
information structure related
information environment related
information like aesthetic information
like curvature flow and so on and so
forth
and of course these these two guys like
you I am sure all of you know and they
are also beginning to switch to use of
meshes and mesh based technologies and
and also they're demonstrative projects
like when these kind of stunning
prototypes I mean they're they're soon
to become buildings this was in first
one was in 2016 in the Venice Biennale
and the next one was in 2017 and so you
can like just join the dots and we can
see in the in the next five years where
things are going to go and
but for us like what's really important
is not so much the technology alone like
we really want to understand the
technology but what we want to really do
is to explore the space of solutions
like all of these solutions here are
like valid in some way or the other in
certain structural conditions but what's
what's what we see here is this universe
of possibilities so design then becomes
like how do you search through this
space for the more appropriate one for
your given set of constraints for your
given set of opportunities and so on and
so forth so the the images images on my
right like it's from my PhD advisors PhD
Philly block and they're all
compression-only geometries ie different
kinds of domes and walls so you can make
produce all of these with just brick and
and and the the more tensile ones I'm
sure all of you recognized there from
the engineers of Rey Auto in 1960s from
one of the first computer programs that
was used to do form finding they also
came up with the math behind it and so
on and so forth so then they called link
with link widths and sheykh and so to
this day like these their method forms
the basis for a lot of the form finding
that like you might do using like
kangaroo or any or Rhino Walt and so
underlying that the numerical method is
from from the 1960s 1973 okay so to that
then like what do we do with that like
so the gist of it is geometry like this
the main action or the the main strategy
to address structural and fabrication
constraints is to basically move the
points of a mesh
until certain geometric conditions are
met for example if you want a stretch
fabric all parts will have like negative
curvature or zero mean curvature let's
say minimal surfaces so which means like
you move the points until that curvature
condition is satisfied and if you want
to make it out of paper and things you
move the points again in a slightly
different way until it becomes you know
a certain Gaussian curvature is minimal
so the main takeaway here is that like
you move points until you are satisfied
and how you define satisfaction is the
key key key strategy so for example with
shell structures like which we have kind
of invested the early part of the team's
efforts into here's here's like
something in action like this was from
like 2007 or 8 or something but you can
see that like the user manipulates or
the designer manipulates like like a
kind of caged geometry and behind the
scenes like these points are being moved
almost real-time so you can see so
that's that's one example of like moving
points until certain curvature
conditions are met or structural
conditions or environmental conditions
so on and so forth
this is usual strategy so having done so
like it becomes very easy to produce why
would why did we do move those points in
that particular way because we could
then describe the same piece of geometry
on-site physically by just stretching
fabric along the rails so and then there
is like a physical meaning of
fabrication meaning to the geometry and
that's like one of the aspects of
architectural geometry is that like that
geometry is aware of how it will be made
and it's aware of how the forces
affected let's say and
and the last person on the in this
series like I would totally recommend
you to like to watch that
it's called geometry instructure like
Kris Williams who was like a professor
who was a professor in but like in one
of the pioneers who helped foster and
partners build the British Museum
Library when Caramba and all of these
software wasn't available like he wrote
a piece of software to enable and it was
only a two hundred kilobyte piece of
software but like you can see the impact
its had on on the profession like the
modern Lee the British Museum and then
like 15 years later there's like Kings
Cross station and then there's a
resurgence of shell structures
everywhere is because of pioneering
efforts like Kris Williams and others
like other research organizations that
are pushing this paradigm anyway so for
us it was like very simple like so you
want to generate that geometry that way
you just unfold it cut cut up the panels
give it to a tailor they stretch it he
brought the fabric on site and then we
stretch stretch the fabric across across
across the pipes which are also manually
bent again how do you make sure that the
pimp pipe is bendable you move the
points of the curve until certain
curvature conditions are met that it is
only singly curved or though all the
arcs lie on a plane and so on and so
forth so this moving points is the key
strategy no matter what you do and so
and then like you just stretch the
fabric and then put concrete on it and
and this was like done already several
years ago with like with hardly any
digital fabrication almost all of this
was manual but like we still think this
is a very useful example like - - that
you can use digital tools in interactive
ways you don't necessarily need to be
only in a high-tech environment to
actually deliver these complex
geometries and this
this was in India like in 2009 or
something and again made with like a
handful of labor and over like just ten
days and you can also it's also very
scalable that's one of the key aspects
of like parametric design or digital
design is that like once you can make
something at a smaller scale you can
literally do the same at us in a much
larger scale here the pipe is of course
bent in a more professional more
engineered way and everything is more
calculated but like the principle
remains the same you just bend pipe and
stretch fabric and then then you know
you have a restaurant underneath this
this building open I think in 2014 it
was the architects and in the serpentine
extension to the Sackler gallery again
so geometry is key but like an why is
geometry key here like this job if
someone told you that this is entirely
compression meaning you can make this
curvy geometry on entirely stand without
any glue and without any reinforcement
like only in stone you won't probably
believe it but what's important here is
that like this and all the importance of
Philip block and his PhD and the
research of block research group is is
trying to open up like this numerical
calculation to kind of geometric
intuition like so the bottom right
diagram already tells you the forces if
you know how to read it tells you the
forces that are going to be active in in
the geometry and how do you get that
diagram that's also very clever it's
purely by construction you just take the
geometry that is projected down and
rotate all the edges and then you
already get that of course there's some
numerical aspects but like because a lot
of this is like geometric operations you
know it becomes more accessible to
designers
and and and so at least that's that's
why I what originally faceted fascinated
me about Philippe's work was was the
geometric nature of that entire field
it's called graphic statics and it's
again not invented in the 20th century
it's like goes all the way back to
Newton and others who use geometry to do
some of their physics aspects okay so
and it also correlates very well with
like physical reality so if this model
stands up or doesn't stand up you can be
very sure that like that the bigger one
is likely to fall and kill people and
but like if you somehow managed to make
it stand without glue obviously things
these become not just a representational
model but that you can literally begin
to scale this like so if you scale the
geometry up you can also imagine the
forces are gonna be scaled up in at
least quadratic or cubic way so that so
that's like also physical intuition like
and you can correlate like physical
behavior with like geometric quantities
whole lot more easily than like physical
behavior with color like an or physical
behavior with numbers so that's so
that's again like so this is again
collaborative work with like block
research group and these architects like
that we're trying to extend this things
that we do in workshops like like the D
11 etc is not just one way traffic so we
take those ideas and I kind of try and
scale them up like add to that like our
magic sauce and kind of you know hope
hope to construct some of these things
in the near future
again it's meant to be only compression
and like made out of stone without much
reinforcement once we do that like we
try to apply similar ideas to make a
small chair in stone and carbon
reinforcement so the black areas are
where there's more tension in the in the
shape and so you put reinforcement and
the white areas where the stone that
were armed or compressive let's say I
mean it's not exactly a mapping
one-to-one but general idea again we're
trying to combine like some of the
furniture ideas from Wagner and like
with like the structural ideas from
block research group and and then also
craftsmanship in Italy and Switzerland
like to kind of produce some of our some
of these shapes so it's it's digital but
it's also handicraft in that sense or
traditional craft and also CNC milling
digital fabrication doesn't necessarily
afford usually always means there's a
whole lot of more manual work so and
it's a similar story would like this
thing 3d printing on top of like a kind
of hot work cut mold start to finish
this was like about three maybe six
weeks designing making to installing so
and again there were two startups that
collaborated here one was in Denmark
called OD Co that does the only thing
they do is use a hot wire cutter mounted
on a robot to cut foam and then a I
build which is a start-up here in London
like they print in plastic again
mounting extruder on to play on to a
robot and they print so when we decided
we decided that these two companies
should collaborate they're never known
of each other and so we designed this
piece so that we can enable that
collaboration so on the one hand the
base geometry on which the printing
happens is hot wire cutter Bowl meaning
it's made of straight lines and then
obviously you have to stack all of these
pieces together and so on and so forth
and on the other hand like the curly
geometry is more adherent or more
conducive for printing because printers
don't want to start and stop especially
if they're mounted on a robot so you
want the job the path to be as
continuous as possible so all we did was
make this little
simulation game of like pushing wire
into a contained contained volume and so
it naturally has to curl and so we did
that digitally and and then if you can
do it on a flat piece of box you can
also do it on a curved box which is the
diagram on the on the bottom which says
you take whatever is happening on the
flat region you just map it onto onto
the curved regions and then the robot
like in like you know you'd rotates the
drum then like it just prints and
there's a video at the end of this so
you'll see them with the more details of
it like that so here's everything taped
up and print and things printed similar
story with like another favorite topic
of ours is like curved origami very
related cousin of like straight line
prismatic origami and again this has
like a deep history like an
architectural II one of the interesting
aspects that this was it was taught in
the Bauhaus as there was a textbook a
little textbook of like folding these
kind of shapes the black and white one
and then like mathematicians and artists
in MIT and elsewhere began to pick this
up now and like and then those also
another topic another feature that is
underlying most of our work is that like
many people are interested in these kind
of topics it's like on the one hand
they're mathematicians like the the the
this bearded guy who was more known for
compression algorithms that go onto CDs
and stuff like but he was interested in
origami and he's made seminal
contributions to that David Huffman and
also artists like Ron Resch they also
made like seminal contributions to the
field so again it's already
collaborative knowledge and historic
knowledge so it's one of the aspects
that interests us like similar to shell
structures curved origami is another
topic which shares this these kind of
features plus there's increasing
interest in in the computational
recreation of this and
the mathematics behind it and so on and
so forth but at the base of it it's like
very very designer intuitive like it's
so simple that you just cut paper and
lexcorp it and then you fold and you get
like really a curvature for free on top
of it like you get like the entire
design space for free like so it's like
a massive so design then as I said like
becomes like which what these do use
tools and how do you choose that like
you kind of have a directed search
through design space and like four to
two years we we used to run this
workshop in in the DRL students just did
this 2d to 3d conversion manually like
drawn 2d and fold on paper and then if
you can fold in paper you can scale up
to acetate metal so on and so forth so
they used to do lots and lots and lots
of these little paper models and then
like one day they suddenly start scaling
up but this is the process you do in 2d
and then you fold right and if it is
extraordinarily surprising this entire
piece like rocking-chair that one of the
teams did like it comes from one single
piece of paper or plastic or any flat
sheet there but the real bigger scale
one obviously had to be joined together
by folding half of it because the laser
cutter couldn't accommodate like a three
metre sheet as I said like and then we
did the exact same 2d to 3d
hardly any anything digital here we
explored this in paper on physically and
then like we literally measured measured
what was in paper and scaled up the 2d
drawing and that's how we produce a big
3d thing like by scaling up the 2d
drawing like so we there wasn't a
digital representation of this until
very late
so almost all production drawings were
like just scaled up like manual drawings
like and cleaned up a little bit and not
in Rhino and AutoCAD so again built
in India with just a laser cutter and
like 35 students built over or made over
like three to four hours each for each
of these eggs and that's what I did my M
feelin like to to try and cap understand
somewhat geometrically what's going on
or how do you understand curved origami
and and so the basic principle again is
very geometric there's no I mean there's
a lot of physics but it's physics
abstracted into geometric conditions the
only thing you only two conditions you
need to be making curved origami is that
the strip's they need to be flat so all
the great strips here all each of the
squares need to be flat they cannot be
twisted and where the squares meet they
all all the angles around around that
around that vertex need to add up to 360
meaning you can flatten it so these are
only two geometric conditions and you
notice there are no crazy physics
calculations here and with a little bit
of programming you can ensure again by
moving points that these conditions are
true that like all the faces are flat
and all the vertices the angles add up
to 360 so the key idea move points until
certain conditions are met and in this
case the conditions are these two
geometric conditions and you can see
that as soon as those conditions are met
like it unfolds perfectly and then like
you can produce all the nuts and bolts
and like you know get you get your
minions to make it and so on and so
forth so it's and again like you can do
it in paper and like do a smaller one
like and in this case like we we did
this slightly more complicated process
because like we had to simultaneously
unfold 400 panels and make sure that the
boundary is aligned like so you couldn't
unfold it once because then the next one
is going to be affected so you have to
simultaneously ensure that all 400
panels are have these conditions that
like the faces are flat and the vertices
all those pinpoints and that the angles
add up to 360 and so so that's the
difference between the pain
and the gray ones that like when it says
perturb G equal to zero means move the
points until those in curvature or the
angles add up to zero and the rest is
unfold you check for things match and
like production things and then we
folded that this time with like 80% of
the panels are folded by a robot 20% was
too big for a robot so we needed like
smaller human hands and then they were
all bolted together this was for the
2012 when is being are they yeah okay so
continuing with this idea of flat sheet
material like so this is already 4 years
after 2012 like all of these curved
parts are actually produced from flat
sheet material and inside these are like
standard aluminum box sections and from
our side this this entire project was
like about three months and there was
like literally one person working on it
at any given time so that's how much
profession has progressed like all the
previous ones used to take like five of
us and like you know working four months
and so on and so forth like like by now
there's so much knowledge in the in the
community and so many tools that like
you can really see that digital
fabrication is coming coming of age
becoming more mainstream again the same
principles are similar like you somehow
generate whatever design process you use
you generate a net of points points and
lines and then in this case move the
points until all the beams are torsion
free or until they're they're not
twisted so you will see that so here's
the points points and lines version or
the mesh version of that geometry and
pink means lots of twists and you will
see that you move them a little bit and
these are like literally centimeters
moving some of the points barely move
and already ensures that everything is
green and once that is true you can
literally make everything that is based
on that underlying geometry is
developable
and if it means if it's developable then
you can unfold it and you can use a
laser cutter to skin skin a skin the
structure let's say so that in general
that's the that's idea and yeah here's I
don't know how many number of panels
unfolded so again to say like little
bits of moving of points makes the left
side of our geometry which we call
that's our designer job it ensures that
like everything on the right side like
downstream construction and fabrication
and shop drawings everything it becomes
so much more simpler like infinitely
simpler because like the left side is
ever so slightly different from your
initial like random or whatever
arbitrarily drawn geometry so and so in
that sense it has fabrication
rationality embedded in the geometry and
therefore insures that the downstream
processes are more smooth and more easy
to do if we hadn't done that
moving up points the right side
everything would be like super twisted
and like and the budget would be going
through the roof because everything had
to be then made custom and so on and so
forth so you can see how the profession
is progressing from making everything
custom to just changing the design ever
so slightly so we are incorporating a
lot of the downstream construction
aspects already upstream yeah as I said
this is the fabrication always means
lots of manual labor this in this case
they're welding and grinding some of the
pieces similar to 3d printing this is I
will end with this research topic which
we this is part of my PhD that I'm
pursuing again with block research group
again with the idea that like how do you
understand 3d printing especially
printing in concrete and clay in a kind
of intuitive way so how do you generate
shapes how do you generate shapes that
are 3d printable or highlight 3d
printing capacities and how do you
understand how material behaves in when
it is 3d printed so one of the the main
intuitions here is that like if you
scale down masonry structures earth
structures unreinforced masonry if you
scale them down you can perhaps begin to
understand intuitively how 3d printing
works not plastic 3d printing but like
printing in clay and compression
dominant materials so that's that's a
general intuition so you scale down and
make the bricks little bit squishy
virtually and in the digital space and
you you get some kind of idea so that's
so that's the idea here like the lots
the physics of two rigid bodies meeting
is like well studied for both
computationally and and also in general
physics to that like you just make the
bricks a little bit skooshy and if you
can understand the relationship between
two bricks you can understand the
relationship between two rows of bricks
and once you can understand relationship
between two rows of bricks you can then
begin to understand relationship between
multiple rows which in many ways is what
is 3d printing right it's always layer
by layer yeah so that's that's the
general structural or physical side of
the things and then then there's also
how do you create those layers the
typical 3d printing process is this you
model some arbitrary shape and then you
cut it up you take it to slicer Cora
whatever so but like the printer only
cares about the pad like so you have
gone through this like weird process of
generating some shape and then cutting
it up and it's and you don't even know
where that line is gonna be on your
geometry because it's another another
piece of software and like you're not
actively visualizing these lines so the
second intuition is how do you generate
shapes layer by layer so to inverse this
process where the geometry is you build
the geometry in layers so you highlight
or emphasize so the overall geometry is
implicit and you are make explicit all
the the paths what is called the task
graph is the path that the robot or the
machine will follow you make that
visible to the designer and make make it
visible in the design process not as a
after process and the one intuition here
is like we can represent those paths as
boundaries of images like in Photoshop
when you do find edges you can literally
use that algorithm to represent the
entire piece of geometry like a CD scan
as a stack of images and when you want
the paths or when you want to show the
paths like you only find the edges of
that image and this has several
advantages and I will only go through
one one of the main advantage is that
you can blend in in images and you can
literally use Photoshop to design 3d
geometry because it's very easy to blend
images as you know and it's much harder
to blend like geometry of a rabbit with
with the Taurus for example right like
and that that's very hard to do in
measures it's super easy to do in in
images so you - we choose to use image
representation and not mesh
representation for one of for this
reason and then we highlight the layers
because that's what designer should be
aware of like the relationship between
layers and that's so and then you can
begin to literally design all kinds of
complex geometries by keeping track of
how the layer layers evolve from one
layer to another so one circle becomes
two and like so on and so forth so you
can see here all you have to specify is
the start and end and you do the
blending in image space or as images
and the curves are doing their thing and
then you get like this this is rather
hard to do you can definitely model this
in in meshes but it's almost trivial to
do in with images so you just blend the
the image on the Left f2g and like the
geometry evolves from A to E and so you
can see like this has several advantages
so you only have to specify at the top
as three circles and the bottom has two
circles and everything else in between
becomes natural consequence of blending
from one image to another and and then
once the process is so simple you can
like really like explore a wide range of
like shapes that make it very which
highlight one of the key capacities of
3d printing even though it's layer by
layer like you can like do all of these
complex geometries and complex
topologies so each of these 3d prints is
basically represented by two images one
on the top one on the bottom and
everything else is like a blend
interpolation between them okay so to
conclude a large part part of like our
research is in the physical but also to
abstract the physical into geometry so
that it becomes
I'm Anubha a vehicle for us to
collaborate with engineers with
mathematicians with clients with because
everyone understands geometry or more
people understand geometry and then they
understand physics so if you can like
then abstract physics into geometric
properties like of curvature of light of
out light bounces of reflectance these
are all geometric properties and then
everyone can have have a say and then
that's so that provides the substrate or
the the kind of technologies for our
next phase to really bring consumers
into the design process so by by already
rehearsing all of these geometric based
language so if you remember the Eames
diagram over the last decade like we
have tried to rehearse like a vocabulary
of of materials and techniques and how
to make things and we built our
collaborative network to be able to
design freely again not just not to
disregard all the beam stuff and all the
other usual aspects of delivery we have
a separate team doing that these are
very very important aspects of
construction but we are more focused on
the early part of design and how that
can all of this geometric all of these
complexities can be somewhat abstracted
early on in the design process so this
is generally we are very optimistic for
the future because every year we see
these kind of pavilions like get bigger
and bigger and bigger and more and more
people in the world are doing these kind
of things including you you might put up
something at the end of the lab outside
like so and this is this is a status quo
and
and we also think our contribution to
this is this little gallery for
mathematics that we that we did in the
Science Museum in London where again all
of the things that that has been
rehearsed has we have tried to suppress
that a little bit so everything you see
in this image is some application of Vol
all the research things that we are done
so for example the benches were hot were
cut the fabric stuff is like a kind of
tensile structure we also studied how to
put the seam layouts you can like
randomly put seam layouts wherever you
want you otherwise they would the fabric
will wrinkle so all of these things was
feasible with a very small team in a
very small time budget the entire design
for the phase was like like maybe two
months and then like start to finish was
maybe 16 months it's a small gallery but
like there are over 200 objects and so
in the next phase we want to pay more
and more attention to the people and
less - so we want to take for granted
that like we already know I mean of
course that research is gonna continue
like in the in the discipline and domain
but we are slowly trying to fifth focus
to begin to understand equally
computationally and equally irrationally
how people why are these two people
standing there
why not over there you can begin to
leverage some of the same kind of
thinking and technologies from other
disciplines some of the math from social
science and and and data science and AI
and other things you can begin to
leverage to study equally
computationally and equally rigorously
what what the user experience of spaces
is likely to be and how you can maximize
that so
that that's a general outlook let's say
so with that I will stop here and I will
play a video for you thank you very much
[Applause]
where's the video and if you have
questions I can take them
[Music]
the streak of playing a video I learned
like a few years ago so there's no
questions and I quietly escape
[Music]
[Music]
again maybe in across all these videos
you will see that almost all projects at
some stage will involve the strategy of
moving points you start somewhere nearby
and like then move it until you are
happy and then you start again so it's
it's I mean I'm kind of trivializing
like all of the the the the several
communities of knowledge that is coming
together and is evolving but like I just
want to give you an intuition about it
and I don't want to try and trivialize
lots and lots of people's work for the
more technical bits and that's specially
the structural bits as I said you should
watch the or come to the lecture by
Chris Williams
the previous project like it was
literally us doing the manual
fabrication in 40 degree heat in Venice
we're climbing up there like putting
bolts so for those of you think that
like people ins I have like an infinite
budget actually not we are genuinely
interested in this and so we put put our
who put our efforts on the line to see
some of these things through its it's
not that somehow magically like people
throw money at us you know that that
doesn't happen to you it doesn't happen
to us it doesn't happen ever
also this one it was literally everyone
from the three teams like AI builds
Oracle and and code literally putting
their their physical effort apart from
like machines and like programming
things and just because it was genuinely
interesting to and exciting to do this
not because it was like some kind of
scientific demonstration right they were
just a joy it was fun to collaborate and
and then try and do something and it
this has become one of the most popular
pieces of in our exhibitions almost
entirely by accident because we had no
idea what's gonna in all these projects
we had no idea that like if things would
actually materialize so it we almost go
into all of these projects like not
knowing how to produce things and then
relying on risk-taking but like
calculator risks and like early on like
we built a collaborative team and we
know amongst the team like there has to
be the necessary knowledge to actually
physically realize this and design these
kind of things well so it's not that
like you know we already have all of
this knowledge and then we're applying
it we use these projects to generate
knowledge like so by taking risk trying
to do like what is usually not or
consider done doable or like too
expensive you forcing people to
collaborate and be clever and that's
that's a key message I want to convey
that like if you understand things
geometrically many people can
communicate and
and you build a collaborative team first
and the results will follow so with with
with your D lab efforts I would say
that's that's what you should take away
the most apart from knowing how to move
some sliders you know that's important
too but yeah thank you
[Music]
okay
[Music]
what you've seen today is quite
interesting but my question is whenever
when we apply this to an architectural
skill I still haven't seen the
relationship with the context I'm saying
this because I'm from Saudi Arabia
yeah I'm in Riyadh and it has three
projects there yeah and a million other
architects and our problem is that every
building is becoming an iconic building
yeah so we have a visual clutter yeah I
mean they're lovely buildings but they
don't come together yeah you should give
all the buildings to us you won't have
clutter no that fair point that as I
said like it's it's there there was by
my definition and a necessity that like
all of this technology and and the
technical aspects are not trivial so the
discipline and the profession and
various aspects have to come together to
begin to address the more true concerns
of architecture like which is how do
people how does architecture how do
consumers of architecture how they can
be participating in the production and
so we can then actually produce what
they want rather than kind of just
telling them this is how its produced so
that's that's why I said that like these
these kind of deliberate suspension of
disbelief for our period of focused
endeavors and efforts across the world
not just in one architecture firm but
like in academia in
and collaborative and cumulative ways of
working is a necessary step towards
actually addressing all of these other
concerns so now even so we are saying
social concerns but like or social value
propositions but like engineers are
equally looking at saying ok now we have
understood all the math or enough of the
map and off of the material behavior
like can we now make it more
environmentally sustainable like so so
it's it's now beginning we we think that
we should begin to address these other
concerns and they might relate to
context and some might relate to
environment some might relate to
cultural context I might relate to
communal context and so on and so forth
so give us a few more buildings and wait
a few more years that's that's my answer
have another okay all right thank you
[Applause]
