I guess it began in January with a
conversation around the idea of homeland
as a place of origin or a space of
autonomy and it used the reemergence of
nostalgia and romanticism or the role of
maps as a form of self portraiture and
the rise of populism across Europe as
tools to navigate our current condition
last month the second conversation on
the notion of border as an arbitrary
line drawn on a map to demarcate one
sovereign territory from another discuss
ways in which this line could separate
or connect or could be erased altogether
actually earlier today in this very room
we had a workshop with students on how
to obtain settled status if they were
you citizens and that's a kind of
ongoing issue that the school was facing
to actually avoid the topic of tonight's
talk exodus which is actually a very
urgent concern for everybody I think
within the UK and so tonight's lecture
around this topic looks at what happens
when you trigger a mass migration from a
single territory exploring what it means
to flee to live in exile or to uproot
your life through its social political
economic and environmental impact and so
we hope tonight that we can discuss new
tools for survival forms of nomadism as
well as what happens to the place that
is left behind or actually just hope
that this doesn't happen at all
and the kind of themes that I've
mentioned and the series as a whole are
framed as part of the larger uncertainty
that actually surrounds our future
relationship with the EU and if this
that we take as our starting point for
tonight's conversation as we constantly
redraw and redefine our edges because in
the process so too do we be negotiated
and our relationships with the outside
world
so in terms of tonight's speakers sadly
Madeleine reasoned of has terrible flu
and couldn't make it and there was a
point earlier today where I thought
potentially nobody would be able to make
it because of various travel delays so
I'm delighted that I'm not alone at this
table but actually one thing that she
said to me when we invited her to the
talk was that she was keen to
participate so that she could rant about
brexit
and because having made the UK her home
for the last 50 years she now feels as
though she's about to get tough doubts
and she never got a British passport and
is frustrated by the level of
uncertainty that surrounds her kind of
future and so we're disappointed she
could have made her but hopefully we'll
get her to be part of this in some this
project in some way in the future but
joining us tonight are yon villain
Peterson who's an egg graduate who
founded specialist operations in 2006 as
an independent research and design
office that develop strategies and
shapes processes to rebuild resilient
urban and conflict-affected environments
his work often takes place in areas
where an involuntary departure from
one's homeland has taken place as a
result of conflict so tonight he'll tell
us more about that and the work of his
practice and then we also have Germann
doc Abram Rob who's a professor of
post-colonial and decolonial studies in
the school of global studies at the
University of Sussex she's the author of
several books including rethinking
modernity post colonialism and the
sociological imagination and is here
tonight to talk about her research into
British citizenship and how it has come
to turn some citizens into immigrants
based on the color of their skin as seen
in the recent Windrush scandal the
series was made possible with the
generous support of the Embassy of the
kingdom of the Netherlands for which we
were really grateful and before I hand
over to tonight's panel I wanted to just
give the microphone to Kern from the
embassy who'd like to say a few words
about the series so please join me in
welcoming him to the a good evening
everyone my name is Kuhn hiking I work
for the Dutch embassy manager just said
I need you thank you very much for
organizing this florian as well and
panelists thank you very much for
showing up and making it all the way
here I just wanted to make make it clear
that you know the Dutch embassy is
supporting this desktop because for us
it's important to always point out how
similar our two countries are the
Netherlands
okay we call ourselves Nazi neighbors we
just want to make sure that we keep
telling the UK we are neighbors we are
friends and that will remain when it
comes to architecture of course we also
have a lot in common
just the way we we look at design and
architecture is it's very similar and
both countries are also facing similar
challenges that I think architecture can
play a role in in finding solutions
brexit might not be one of them but
there's plenty solutions that
architecture can come up with so some of
the biggest challenges for both our
countries for the Nazi neighbors
Netherlands and the UK are climate
change which I think architecture can
play a role in a dramatic increase in
lifestyle related diseases which I think
can play a role in all the population
that has special housing needs people
moving from smaller towns to from in
rural areas to the big cities which is
migration and of course the main topic
of tonight
Saphir political instability elsewhere
in the world and a lot of people moving
having to leave their homes and trying
to find a house somewhere else so these
issues cannot be solved by architects
alone or special planners alone but I
think you can you guys all of you can
play a role in in solving these issues
for example climate change means we need
to build homes and offices that are much
more energy efficient and it can
withstand harsh weather conditions from
extreme heat to flooding and heavy rains
and in some countries even hurricanes
and those kind of things
and crucially that is just that is just
to to adapt to climate change crucially
we all we I say we architects all of us
let's say also have a role in avoiding
this climate change and preventing from
eating up anymore and that is to build
houses in this in this case build houses
with less energy input and use and reuse
materials and find materials that
don't require so many resources and so
on when it comes to demographic changes
like increasing an increase in all the
people with specific health needs
obviously there's also a role for
architects we can use your brainpower to
build homes where people can grow old
and healthy so yeah stay healthy for
longer let's put it that way and other
health issues caused by unhealthy
lifestyles I don't think architects can
do anything to stop us from eating junk
food but you can design homes maybe that
make the the healthy option the easy
option for example taking the stairs
instead of the lift and those kind of
things is the migration issue I think
let me go to the migration issue there
is migration from rural areas to big
cities as I said that's that's an issue
how can architects help to keep smaller
towns more attractive and that you know
the smaller towns where people are
leaving how can they keep that
attractive and and how what can they do
to to keep housing in the ever more
popular cities affordable and
comfortable but then there's also the
migration due to people from war-torn
countries which is I think what we are
going to talk about mainly tonight I
don't know what architects you can do
about it but that's why I'm here I want
to learn these things I want to hear
where do refugees find a new place and
can they call it home what can what can
architects do to help these people feel
at home what happens how what happens
what they leave behind with the area
that they leave behind issues discussed
tonight and I'm really looking forward
to it
and I hope you all enjoy the talk
[Applause]
yeah welcome before we have our guests
of tonight speak I thought it would be
interesting for a second to contemplate
on the title of tonight Exodus obviously
very loaded title
it was Rams graduation here in 1972
Remco and Mattie did all the
illustrations there and he chose
obviously this loaded or to the dramatic
title as the it's the second book from
the Old Testament and Exodus speaks or
what I hope tonight similar to the
sessions we had before it's also think
about what's the role of the designer
indeed in here and how can we how do we
act and so Exodus when I was thinking
about it has to do with the desire to go
elsewhere for a better and say economic
or religious idea so the search for
freedom it is about you know going to a
place and in some way we were talking
about it a little bit can we talk about
hope today like can it be about can we
design a place that actually triggers
Exodus or is it something where we
should avoid exodus from happening I
think that's the question of you know
what's the role of the designer here are
we are we stimulating an exodus or are
we making a place so attractive that it
triggers other people to leave or are we
able to keep places in a way such that
an exodus doesn't happen and I also
thought for instance is it just mass
migration because of say climatic or
economic conditions or how does the
brain drain from certain countries that
come to study for instance in other
countries like are those also parts of
Exodus or anything I hope we can have
sort of a more expansive discussion but
maybe we start first with I think some
very urgent issues that drive Exodus
today and I think you're starting yeah
thank you well thank you thank you for
inviting me to come and speak here today
I'm not a architect or a designer I'm a
critical theorist and so hopefully what
I have to say will help inform the
discussion from that perspective I
wanted to
some thoughts in relation to each of the
key themes that have been presented
within the title for today's session and
perhaps in a way going in reverse order
because the last bit was about
questioning post brexit relationships
and the first thing I want to say in
relation to that is that I think it's
very unlikely that post brexit
relationships will be radically
different from pre bricks at once I mean
one of the ways that or one of the
things in relation to that is just that
if we look at what's happened since the
vote to leave the European Union there's
been an extraordinary rise both in
racism racist incidents and xenophobic
incidents across the country and in a
way there's been a return to the
language of the 1970s the language of go
home of using the sorts of language that
had been deemed to be not acceptable for
the last 20 years suddenly is vocal
within public debate and within the
civil sphere and the explicit auntie and
it's sort of layered now with an
explicit anti-european
sentiment and also specifically aunty
Eastern European sentiment to the extent
that we think about the changes that
have happened in terms of the vote to
leave the European Union I think one of
the things that we have to be clear
about is that what's been unleashed as a
consequence of this it's not something
that occurs only in relation to the
European Union but it builds upon
particular layers of sediment addresses
'im that have been constitutive of the
public sphere within Britain for the
last 40 or 50 years and so in that sense
there's not so much
I don't think brexit is really about the
EU it wasn't because there's a
democratic deficit within the European
Union and its institutions that we
decided to leave there was no grassroots
movement to leave the European Union it
was effectively a populist moment that
coalesced around anti-migrant sentiment
that was used to sort of push this thing
through so that's one thing that I
wanted to say in relation to that the
other way in which I think that that the
post brexit relationships won't be
radically different or at least they're
not in the minds of those who are trying
to push brexit through is that when we
think about the ways in which people
thought about
how we would reorient ourselves in
relation to the world after brexit the
first thing that people went to was I
know we can re-establish Empire 2.0 do
you think well actually those of us who
have any sense of empire 1.0 we have
absolutely no way that we would
contemplate such such a thing and the
asymmetry and expectations I think is
just quite extraordinary so when trees
the may goes round the world and wishes
to establish trade deals she wants other
places to give her everything whilst
giving nothing from Britain in return
and so that was one thing then in
relation to the question of home I mean
one of the things is that whilst home is
often conceptualized in terms of where
one is from for many of us it's been
something from which we've been
alienated displaced and which we've had
to create and recreate any number of
times and one of the most common ways of
thinking about home is often in terms of
thinking about questions of belonging
but I want to suggest that we look at it
more formally in terms of thinking about
home in relation to questions of
citizenship that is home is where you
have a legal entitlement to be in your
rights are protected or rather they're
supposed to be British citizenship for
those of you who may know this already
wasn't established till 1948 so the
first time British citizenship is
established in law in this country is
1948 at that time this is a period when
India has just gained its independence
and establishes its own set of
understandings around citizenship so
Britain establishes its understandings
of citizenship in relation to this what
it sets out within the British
Nationality Act is two versions of
citizenship one is that you would be a
citizen of the UK and it's colonies so
there was a shared common citizenship
whether you lived within the UK or
within the colonies that Britain
continued to have at that time or then
you would be a Commonwealth citizen and
to be a Commonwealth citizen you had to
live in a country that had previously be
in a colony of Britain and was now part
of the British Commonwealth
in 1948 Britain gave British citizenship
to over 800 million people together with
all the rights that you would have so
the rights were shared they were common
and they were indivisible so people had
the right to come to Britain to make
Britain their home and to live and work
within Britain and you might think why
on earth would any country give
citizenship to 800 million people
particularly in light conversations that
were having at the moment
well I remember at the time that the
direction of movement was from Britain
to other places it was not from other
places to Britain Empire is a
formulation that's established on the
basis of migration
if white British people hadn't migrated
to other places Empire couldn't have
been built it was only in the post-war
period that people from other places
started coming back coming to Britain
and it was at that point that suddenly
concern was raised so was this whole
thing about well you know I know we gave
you all citizenship but we didn't
actually expect you to come
so once darker citizens particularly
started to come in the post-war period
there was absolute concern about the
fact that you know moral panic around
what was called coloured immigration
this led to the establishment of
Commonwealth immigration acts to take
rights away from darker citizens so
there was no way in which Britain could
re-establish its forms of citizenship
because it would have created too much
trouble politically because this was a
citizenship that was common across it
and its colonies and so what it did was
institute new forms of immigration that
would separate out the real citizens I
the white citizens from the darker
citizens these acts were passed in 60 to
68 and 71 and they effectively created a
second-class version of citizenship for
those darker citizens who did come to
Britain many were excluded from coming
and by 1981 people were affected you
know that was the end of this broader
expansive understanding of citizenship
to focus citizenship only in terms of
the island itself so it's this history
which have only been able to give you
very very briefly that create
a double a two-tier system of
citizenship it's this history of
citizenship that enables the British
government to try and deport darker
British citizens to try and strip
citizenship away from those darker
citizens who might do things it doesn't
like and its sanction is to take
citizenship away from them that's a
racialized form of citizenship that I
think is unacceptable do I have any more
time all yes so then I just wanted to
say something about the issue of
migration and Exodus as you were talking
about nothing extra says it's an
interesting sort of concept because as
we were sort of saying earlier often
it's presented as going towards
something that's better and their utopia
possibly or whatever but in effect what
are the reasons for people leaving
people don't generally migrate and
particularly in the numbers that that
exodus seems to suggest without there
being some event or something happening
that forces people to leave so the
current Exodus that we're seeing for
example of people who've been made into
refugees from Syria is a consequence of
war it's usually war famine destruction
climate change will be another aspect of
this that forces people to to move and
it was those same processes that were
actually part of the creation of Empire
initially you may or may not know this
that to the extent that we talk about
migration in the present across the 19th
century through to the early 20th
century 62 million Europeans left Europe
and move to parts of the world that have
now been colonized to the Americas to
Australia to South Africa to New Zealand
and other other places as well
62 million these people didn't move and
live according to the norms and rules of
the societies to which they moved rather
they annihilated those populations
dispossessed them of land and built
their settler colonial states on the top
of those processes so when we talk about
migration in the present in pejorative
terms we really need to look at our own
history in terms of the way in which the
world has been shaped as a consequence
of European movement
and to recognize that if people in the
present are moving they're often moving
as a consequence of the legacy of empire
for them having been to create a
situation that makes it unlivable where
they are so it's not that people come
here because we're so wonderful and part
people come here because we made their
places so terrible and if we want to
address that then that's something that
we need to take seriously one last thing
I guess adapting anzaldÃºa in terms of
this question of borders and tying up
the different bits there's a sense in
which I'm talking to you as a British
citizen now I didn't cross any border to
become a British citizen the border
crossed me I was made British by Empire
and now Britain wishes to expel me in
that sense I face a double displacement
in terms of thinking about questions of
home or thinking about questions of
belonging this is the only home I've
known but it's one that's never accepted
me as a citizen but only a
second-generation migrant and as I've
said on a number of occasions what makes
me a second-generation migrant when
every member of my family that could've
held a passport has held a British
passport in holding British passports
that isn't something that I'm saying
here as an aspect of anything other than
the fact that this is an empirical fact
and it's evidenced by histories the
historical processes of empire building
that created many of us as citizens and
who the state then seeks to deport and
one of the ways in which it seeks to do
that politically is by rewriting the
history of the state this state the
British state has always been an
imperial state not a national state the
fact that it was an imperial state is
what created the subjects of Empire in
to the citizens of Commonwealth who had
rights to come here the rewriting of
this history that presents Britain as a
nation is precisely what makes me
metaphorically homeless and perhaps soon
empirically so
[Applause]
yeah thank you it's great to be back at
the AAA when I when I graduated from
diploma unit 10
London was in quite a thermal past the
7/7 bombing a lot of new anti-terrorism
measures were introduced to the city and
formed actually quite a very interesting
the United which eventually became at
the graduation project but again now
being back we live in perhaps more even
more interesting times and I've been
asked to address the topic of exodus
through some of the work I've done since
in five minutes time so it's both
complex projects and a complex topic so
I will do my best time I would like to
give a brief context of what I've been
doing since I left the AAA and there's
primarily done projects that deal with
nation-building so in essence quite a
direct relationship to the identity of
her of a brexit argument which is going
on I have done so in Iraq and
Afghanistan primarily so mostly worn to
own countries facing the excess and this
is this is one example you see on the
screen but a lot of these projects they
go beyond questions that belong to the
more traditional realm of architecture
so I hope I can demonstrate to some of
the samples you will see a wider
position to go beyond the realm of
architecture as a designer is actually
quite crucial
I recently came back from Iraq he is he
the image of muscle the second largest
city in Iraq that faced tremendous
devastation after its liberation from
the Islamic state in fact it's the
largest urban battle after Stalingrad of
world war two so it just gives a kind of
sense of scale and the challenge one
faced with a kind of you would say an
involuntary departure involuntary exodus
from one place more than 600,000 people
left left the city and I've been
recently asked of worked with the UN to
draft a reconstruction plan for the city
incredibly challenging about not going
into detail but you would almost say
there's a kind of quite traditional
image we got to know post 9-11 where we
we have serious destruction of large
cities because of the ongoing war on
terror
I will take you to Afghanistan to
address actually the question not other
kind of exodus as an end state but more
as a kind of what is what is happening
as a kind of process of transition
meaning what is happening to cities when
they transition from conflict to peace
and perhaps that gives maybe some some
warnings or answers lessons to be
learned when that process happens in
Reverse meaning going from a relatively
peaceful country to a country that
potentially faces the threat of civil
unrest so just a couple of examples what
our city is facing here here you see the
kind of result of 35 years of war the
people who couldn't leave are left
behind in this case Afghanistan Kabul
and you might expect like people fleeing
war but for the ones who cannot they
will traditionally go to to the city to
avoid insecurity or economic hardship
and so the the cities especially Kabul
exploded in this in its growth and you
would expect that kind of influx of
people to be settled the sudden influx
of people to be settled in in
settlements much more ad hoc urban forms
but this is an image from the northern
part of where you see it can tremendous
great yet it's not planned and one of
the remarkable reasons for that is that
three quarters of Kabul after the
Taliban period is designed by very
powerful warlords very powerful
influential figures so it's actually
individuals who shaping
the city - to a large extent so they
work for the people and ironically it's
that is it it's a surface being provided
which the state could not provide so
individuals start to take the place of a
kind of central central government and
here's an example of this entire
neighborhood you see is is being laid
out in a very design manner in a great
manner by very famous Afghan warlord but
there are also other issues happening
obviously there's a tremendous social
reshuffle meaning people new people gain
political influence generals who fought
the war come to the front people are
appointed to very influential positions
and they want to manifest that position
in part through architecture and you see
an example of that architecture the
problem is that in the same time where
people try to manifest a new social
status you also see that there's because
the world is a kind of tremendous
departure of knowledge expertise and
even work force so in this case this
architecture is totally alien to the
Afghan culture it's borrowed from
Peshawar Pakistan delivering a kind of
problematic misfit so here you see an
example of it windows have to be painted
black because of privacy issue balconies
have to be board up because women cannot
be seen from street level they are
inhabitable during wintertime because
it's so cold and so you see here a kind
of but nevertheless this is emerging all
over in in Kabul because this is how
prosperity is being seen at the moment
so here you see the kind of mismatch
between local culture and and something
which is inherently broad or in
important another example is that during
Taliban time a lot of activities were
prohibited among which wedding
ceremonies
so after Taliban period a new freedom
emerged in the city and now you get this
monumental wedding halls popping up all
over the city more than hundred of these
have been built since since the collapse
of Taliban and what is interesting that
the scarcity of ground and resources
have now been pulled into this kind of
buildings and kind of new economic
models because people make a lot of
money renting out these places so a
large part of the city has been
sacrificed to to kind of opportunistic
business model and you see for instance
wedding row of more than 2000 people
which is now very common and and and
taken taken part of what what could be a
more useful
organization of the city post
post-conflict
I could go on end this on all these kind
of forces that start acting on the city
and redefining the city in a way we live
as a result of this war and conflict but
this is also part how how do you shape a
world for the ones who are left behind
and then this notion of stability comes
in this once again Afghanistan I have
traveled a lot a lot there to look at
the kind of reconstruction and
nation-building that was happening in
in the country and it's actually truly
remarkable if you look about the efforts
by the international community which has
taken place here map of Afghanistan with
a lot of dots there are more than
hundred twenty-eight thousand projects
and programs undertaken in the country
so schools buildings clinics roads you
name it they have over the last 17 years
they have been created and built there
so to give you a sense of scale the
Americans alone have poured in more than
17 billion US dollars rebuilding this
country so in an effort to stabilize or
rebuild the livelihood of the people
there what was shocking and and
remarkable - to me it's also the reason
why I engaged in this project is that it
despite the scale and and the the number
of projects that have taken place the
architectural discipline or the
architectural profession hands designers
and planners are not involved so a lot
of projects are delivered through the
military through the diplomats and a
much lesser extent - to NGOs so that the
almost total absence of the special
discipline and in one of the largest
reconstruction missions ever
most reason for me to to see if I can
contribute as a as a designer especially
when it became clear that the legacy of
such investment was problematic so how I
did I did I do that I went to Oregon
province that was the province governed
by the Dutch they have been there
between 2006 2010 to rebuild this this
project this province the Afghan
province and I started visiting as many
projects i I could this is to basically
find out the status of the project what
is the impact of the project and more
important like if the project is
successful or not and what are the
underlying reasons why some of the
projects fail and others are successful
and this is a kind of interesting one
interesting examples where a new police
post is being built along an important
Road but because of the location on the
bottom of a hill from security point not
so very advantage they had to build a
temporary post on top of the hill
overlooking the the police powers too
and to secure their position so this is
a very simple example how designers or
even you know placemaking could could
contribute to more sustainable projects
I've been fortunate to collaborate and I
think that's one of the the main issues
to set new forms of collaborations I've
been fortunate to work with the Foreign
Office to Dutch Foreign Office they were
very keen on some of the findings to
collaborate with the Dutch defence and
deliver some of the findings and this is
the the Dutch parliament in
egg to deliver some of the findings to
the politicians there and they were
actually the Dutch were brave enough to
look at their efforts in Afghanistan in
order to learn how future missions could
be more sustainable and and integrate
design thinking and designers in future
endeavors
so there's a kind of new semi new role
carved out for designers within this
kind of complex international missions
maybe a final point I quickly number of
points I still would like to make this
war context might seem very extreme in
relationship to brexit but in essence
what was happening in conflict affected
the environment is is the kind of
emergence of a kind of tribalism and and
you you you you see that almost
happening here in Britain where the
argument of breakfast is incredibly
tribal people are fused with the idea of
being remainder or or lever and when I
spoke to a top EU diplomat last year at
the military conference he said there
only two kind of Member States of the EU
he said the small ones and and the ones
who donate yet and do not do not yet
know that they're small and I thought
that was quite fitting and and so so
brexit is I think it's hardly about the
relationship towards the EU but much
more relationship to itself
this picture was was taken as a passport
picture this is how I travelled in
Afghanistan this is not the kind of
dressup exercise but this was a way to
travel relatively secure be viewed local
population and and and set new forms of
engagements and I think the reason why I
find it very important is that it
enabled me to go to territories were
very few Westerners if at all ventured
so it enabled me to come up with with a
kind of content which was relatively was
unknown and it became kind of instrument
for the kind of future reconstruction
missions the final thing is like I think
architecture is inherently optimistic in
nature and even when it's sometimes
quite hard to be optimistic when you're
standing at Musel and see all the
destruction or you see the kind of
efforts are that are not so successful
and when you look at the kind of dire
conditions that the brexit may be
promises us I think it's a duty of the
architect to come to contribute in a
kind of constructive manner we
increasingly live in a world where where
there's a kind of search for very easy
answers to rather complex problems and I
think as an architect who is not so much
foam focused or not so much object focus
but really engage in can have certain
kind of processes that are happening how
that how these processes can be shaped
and how you can contribute as a designer
to these processes I think it's it's
quite quite crucial to help shape the
kind of informed debate it's also like
help shape informed decision-making for
instance in regard
international missions or how how cities
in conflict are really being rebuilt and
of course to counter certain kind of
pessimism and and and and and the
relatively fact free arguments that seem
to emerge more often I think I would
leave it yeah great thanks well I think
it's a very thoughts that we can discuss
and I think that first actually my first
question would be to you two I was
wondering can we can you construct
without being colonial I mean when we
see this map of Afghanistan and we see
these efforts I was I was really
wondering when you hear your minimis
peak and what is the role you know of a
designer in such place is it our role to
intervene is it our role to go there and
design even with the best intentions or
is that not the responsibility of
somebody educated in the West at a
Western school with a certain mindset I
really I'm really conflicted with this
question about how to act at this moment
specifically after what you laid out as
sort of inherently the act of building
is colonial
hmm well I mean it depends in what
context and with what notions of consent
as well I mean it's that aspect of I
don't think that thing or things have to
be judged in their context and so I'm
concerned about this issue of good
intentions I came up once before as well
and we know we're good intentions
leaders or what the road to hell is
paved with and so in that sense I'm sort
of worried about that and who gets to
participate in the conversation about
what gets to be constructed in any
particular place and so if we're talking
about this as an aspect of doing
something in other places what's the
motivation for doing it what's the
possibilities that have to be available
for us to be able to do it and what does
it mean to then go and do it and so to
unpack that slightly I mean it is
possible for us to go to most places in
the world and do stuff it is not
possible for most people from the rest
of the world to come here and do stuff
and so what does that a symmetry then
mean for what our responsibility is to
other places I mean I think that's the
question that we have to ask ourselves
in doing this so what I want to say that
something was just inherently colonial
or you know I'd want to sort of talk
about specific specifics in relation to
thinking about that question are those
part of the conversation you have for
instance with the Dutch government
they're on like if we talk about the
word mission already for instance it's
like an interesting yeah wording
but I I quite an amine I quite enjoyed
this schizophrenic nature of that
obviously there's a lot of politics
involved even to go to
she's like Afghanistan yeah there's a
level of self-interest but there's also
genuine attempt to rebuild something
which is inherently missing very banal
life securities and III enjoyed the the
difficulty on one hand side to say like
well if it's Afghanistan you you see it
a lot if it's a building for a project
were constructed by Western forces they
would last relatively long they would
stand in relatively high quality etc but
they were generally unused verse you
know if you let local people let the
local community construct their
buildings they would not stand that long
because you know they don't have the
knowledge and know how to build largely
in these areas so there would be
effective word like maybe half a year
before the ground area so you get a kind
of very interesting when you act and
when when do you overstep and I think to
find that balance and you you first have
to be very honest towards your own
actions face them but also like try and
try maybe to answer the question if it's
anyhow possible to design a nation on
this kind of skill and designed in the
most broad sense of the word yeah but
maybe that's when I guess the image
still up on the screen that's when these
kinds of encounters become interesting
when you can actually collaborate with
local communities to maybe start to
define a kind of a meeting or middle
ground of those two extremes yeah to
bring kind of inhabitation to the
structures that are inhabited or to give
them the knowledge to make structures
that last longer yeah I think one of the
issues is that which I found interesting
as a designer is that there has been a
lot of collaboration I mean even the
millet
we have learned to make community-based
interventions they listen to the kind of
elderlies they have etcetera so there's
a tremendous effort to to incorporate
likes a kind of development aspects in
in their work where where I think it's
slightly problematic is tailoring some
of these ambitions and wishes and hopes
to towards a kind of actual outcome and
that that translation has has not
happened very successfully because I
think in part because the lack of design
and design thinking in this kind of
process it's very linear it's like you
know you you have we would like to in
increase the education in a particular
product province that means building
schools
it doesn't mean maybe gift tools to
people who actually can read and write
and do other stuff so yeah I mean just I
think to pick up on a word that you used
Janna in your presentation which was
smallness and I liked how you talked
about the difference between EU Member
States being small members versus people
who didn't know yet that how small they
were and how that aligns with something
that you brought up Grameen there on
asymmetry because I think what I've
always found fascinating about
colonialism is how a tiny island like
Britain was able to have such a global
impact given how the asymmetry I guess
in size and then the asymmetry of power
and I was at a meeting yesterday where
we were talking about how I mean India
and China like some of the biggest I
mean speaking specifically I mean where
I'm from India it's one of the biggest
populations in the world yet we're still
talking about like why we can't get our
voice across in a big enough way and I
think I'm just curious as to like what
are the future asymmetries that could
come about like I think there's
histories that are kind of forgotten
like what you just said about
citizenship in in Britain only actually
coming out as a reaction to Indian
independence I thought that was
fascinating and that's something that I
wasn't really aware of until the first
time I heard you speak a few weeks ago
so I'm just curious as to why these
these actual facts aren't kind of hidden
current discourse and like I mean how
this relates to this idea of asymmetry
as a kind of spatial but also
theoretical problem well I mean
historically if we're sort of thinking
about colonization one of there's recent
I mean that the scholar
she's a economic historian like she's
been writing on this for quite awhile
but her work has been popularized quite
recently and there was an article which
talked about the extent of money that
was taken well that was taken out of
India that Britain that wasn't used only
in terms of building up Britain but then
was also used by British people in other
settler colonies so in the u.s. in New
Zealand in Australia and so on and on a
conservative estimate she argues that
over the 200 years of British colonial
rule Britain took in today's money forty
five trillion dollars out of India over
that period so if you think about that
amount of money being extracted from a
particular country and that's only from
India not from the other colonies so you
think about the extent of resources that
were extracted the labor that was taken
they involved the British participation
in the trade in human beings the profits
that were derived from plantation labor
from coerced labor when you talk about
all of that and add it up together that
wealth in itself generates further
inequalities of the accumulation of a
small amount of wealth enables you to
accumulate more wealth which enables you
to accumulate more so the asymmetries
that we see in the world today are not
natural in any sense and I think one of
the problems that many disciplines have
is approaching the present as if the
present was naturally produced and to
think about if we understand the present
to have been produced historically
through particular sorts of historical
processes then we would have to
recognize that the wealth that we
currently have and we enjoy is a
consequence of the very same historical
processes that have produced poverty
elsewhere and if we don't want to
address those inequalities simply in
terms of issues of charity or
benevolence
which is our dominant frame for thinking
about how we might address poverty in
other places but if we thought about it
in terms of issues of justice then we
might think about it in issues of
redistribution so we might then think
about it in terms of issues of
reparations and here I'm talking about
Social Democratic reparations where it's
not the paying of money to individuals
but the paying of reparations to other
nations who have been put into the
position that they are as a consequence
of our extraction of their resources so
in that sense I don't think it's so much
for us to go in into being there we need
to make recompense for the injuries
we've caused and how we do that is
something that I think that without
doing that we're not going to address
the asymmetry that exists we speculate
about how to do that meaning and I would
like to go back to this map maybe that
you had of the F what is being done
there's projects and I know how many
projects you described but I'm curious
who are the nations right in here and
what are they doing and it's because if
you say you're saying extract extraction
leads actually to exodus no in some way
like extraction has led to mass
migration and that's you know actually
where we are where we are at this moment
and so if we would give back and if this
would be seen I mean this would be a map
maybe elsewhere but I'm curious if you
know who are the nations it's a giving
back and I'm wondering if you could it
seems when I see this map I think
everybody has intentions beyond giving
back or sort of new forms of extraction
are being you know created it's my my
sense but would there be a way where
this could just be giving back I mean
instead would that be in your thinking a
way that we could go about it yes I mean
one of the things that we have to
realize is that for every dollar of aid
that we give we get 23 dollars back yeah
so we're not actually giving aid all
that aid comes with strings that are
tied to who you know if you're giving
money to bit for construction
who gets the contracts to build a
construction and where does
I end up back and and so on so I think
that those asymmetries are built into
our very systems of doing good they're
not about doing good they're about
continuing to extract resources from
underdeveloped countries interesting but
I think I'm but I I think something has
changed post-911 the reasons to
intervene and are much stronger
politically tight so the narrative on
the war on terror is a direct result why
interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan
and Syria
Olivia etc etc so suddenly the the
amount of money or the resources or are
not as relevant than actually trying
sorry actually trying to try to provide
some kind of weird notion of of security
if you look at staring into map but if
you look at that there are over 52
countries were 52 countries acting in in
Afghanistan none have the kind of
overarching reconstruction approach most
we have quite different doctrines
Americans are very much about like we
deliver really large-scale projects in
return of intelligence the Dutch for
instance were slightly more on a kind of
comprehensive approach to involve much
more the diplomatic part and
the development branch the Germans were
actually much more institutional and the
Turkish because of the Muslim background
they were they were able to get much
closer to the local community so I think
the i'm trying to say is that that kind
of i think post 9/11 and in post
afghanistan
the motivation is quite different it's
not it's not to extract anything anymore
it's not to colonize it's not to is
basically to fight a war that one
doesn't want to fight on on their own
home ground and you see the difficulty
with that now emerging very much
pre-emptive but you see the difficulty
emerging that once once one steps into
this kind of realm it's very hard to
leave so they have now a huge obligation
to establish some sort of level of
security for for an entire country and
and and and and i think that kind of
responsibilities is very hard to take
should we maybe at this point open it up
to questions from the audience if you
have questions to continue there's a
question
just a great question I mean so that it
doesn't become to two sides to the story
I think I think yeah it's interesting
that what you're saying because I think
you're both right in very much so but
it's interesting that the colonization's
are so complex that so Afghans work I
know more about because I've seen it
being done and I was aware that this was
you know 50 something countries are
involved the amount of money if I
remember rightly is more than the
Marshall Plan to Germany and during the
time so huge box went into Afghanistan
to its reconstruction I think you're
quite right
to some reparations some of the empire
that worked that way I think here we see
an example of a change I think Hallowed
has been brave enough to do this work
actually and reassess how money is being
spent I'm not sure the UK has done that
in the same way so I think they haven't
opened up in the same way that the
Anna's being positive and I think the
financial side of things is completely
changed so I think London has being in a
sense or Britain is flooded with Chinese
money in one sense in terms of
infrastructural projects in terms of
buying sites long and is being
transformed by investment from abroad
produce are built for land banking so I
think I think it's become very very
complex indeed I think the terrorist
version or looking in that way is one of
the the imperious version is another but
it does seem and I'm not being gloomy I
am an architect and I will be cheerful
at one point but the it is interesting
because I think the complexity is is
much broader and I think Chinese
investment is really quite serious I
think the idea of non exodus is also
quite serious so I happen to have two
nationalities I am British but I'm also
Venezuela so I see a state in which you
can't move out no no these series taking
place so they say you know three million
people
but actually that's nothing compared to
the population that's left in there so I
think it's very very complex at the
moment and I think in that particular
case you know aid to Venezuela you know
the new leader seems to be coming with
the Americans so it's almost impossible
in that sense you're completely right I
mean they can't make a single move
because he's seen as America sort of in
a sense indulging in Latin America yet
again so history is definitely there but
I think there are many complex officers
of the minute and you know do you do you
what do you think of that young in terms
of let's say the relationship of how the
money's being invested into Europe as
opposed to what we're doing the
countries that are being reconstructed
it's not something that you notice or
can I just interject something while
you're thinking that I mean one other
thing to add to the issue of Venezuela
is that Britain holds 300 million
dollars worth of gold reserves of
winners whele in the Bank of England
after decolonization in the French West
African countries France holds almost
the entire gold reserves of nine West
African countries and it only gives them
access to their gold if France gets
priority for the contracts for any
construction that they might be doing
within their countries so to what extent
is that actually decolonization what
about the other way around the fact that
we are taking the money from obviously
not African nations but from China's or
to build our infrastructure and so on is
that well we're not using it to build
our infrastructure it's being used to
build private enterprises you know and
also I mean in the context of sort of
talking about China and other places
that one thing to remember is that in
terms of foreign direct investment
Britain and the US are still the top two
countries doing that so even despite all
the concern raised about other places
which we always deflect we don't
actually look at the long-standing
regularities which are reinforcing those
same old priorities so it's still the US
and Britain where's your hopeful part
the architecture part well hope for the
hopeful part is actually that I think
that'd be the essence of reconstruction
actually is a whole different ballgame
all together and I think there's that
there's an issue of which has been
discussed of citizenship the property
issues were brexit and so on we I still
believe very strongly that we we do have
to make cities we have to make
environments we have to work in that way
and I think we can do that a lot better
I think we
from the positions which are there I
think the issues of nationality
particularly the issue of brexit I think
a very political I mean obviously it's
very divided in that sense I don't think
that that actually has to have an
influence in the way we live or the way
we conduct our lives in different ways I
think obviously has an influence but I
think we should be building not only
buildings but we should be building an
education system that works and all the
things that we've stopped talking about
for such a long period of time now see
you're very positive that welcome to do
that I mean just to pick up on something
that you raised I think that it we also
don't think that each of you come from
an opposite stance I think actually
earlier today we were talking about what
architecture can learn from critical
theory and vice versa because I think
there two approaches to the same issue
and I was just wondering if through
listening to each other talk if either
if you could reflect on that while we
wait for our next question in the
audience it'll be easiest of questions
is it it's partially what we're here I
mean I guess I mean I think in terms of
I mean framing it as a kind of much
wider problem to I think in your talk
you were really some of the hard-hitting
facts or things that people just don't
necessarily know about and looking at
the kind of flow of wealth or power from
one place to another is something that
is quite hard to see when I mean you're
Casey on you're kind of there on the
ground intervening with people who you
know haven't thought about the fact that
their building doesn't have a an
overlooked point to protect it and I
think it's about that kind of that
degree of specificity versus that sense
of an overview that is I mean from my
mind hearing you both speak I could see
that there's a kind of sense of
collaboration that's needed to de frame
maybe what we do as architects within a
kind of larger global sense of facing
these asymmetries
what I think what is what I think is I
think it's a classic define between you
know groundwork and and and and and and
more overview but what I what I quite
enjoy is that the the harmlessness of
architecture is is a really nice entry
point to address some of the bigger
topics so in in this case the the
mission in Afghanistan was quite charged
in Holland politically and in the media
but when I first came there it's like ah
I'm just looking at some buildings and
schools and they're kind of little canal
and it's you know that's it so you know
it was it was relatively harmless but if
you if you look at the effect or the
impact of these kind of efforts they
quite quickly propel in a different
realm like how we conduct international
missions and what kind of configuration
we do is what kind of expertise is on
the ground that what was actually needed
etc etc so it quite quickly became
something else but I think that as an
entry point I think it's quite helpful
because no one in any position felt
themselves attacked in any way it was
kind of a rather constructive in nature
so yeah we can work so I think that
that's a really nice position for
architects to be in almost at its
unfretted me I mean the question about
architecture being mostly harmless
though I mean surely architecture is
always for some purpose and the question
is whose purpose the extent so if you
think about the building of railroads
across Canada it wasn't to those
railroads were not built for the benefit
of the indigenous peoples within Canada
they were built in order to construct
Canada the nation the settler colony and
to actually provide the ability for
settler colonists from the east coast to
move to the west coast and claim that
territory as theirs
so it's the it's the imprint upon
another peoples of who it is that you
believe yourself to be through that so I
find yeah I agree so I maybe it has been
a very long day but it's not it's not
the architecture itself this harmless is
a highly political I think we all know
that but but the to to analyze to
address certain problems through
architecture in the most banal way to to
look at bricks and mortar is is is a
very very interesting way because I
think architecture is rarely understood
outside the architectural realm so I
think that's that's quite quite a nice
entry well so last time we spoke about
borders and you know the act of
architecture is the act of drawing a
line and as soon as you draw a line and
you create a border and so we spoke
about erasure and and what you argue I
mean since architects always try to ask
themselves what's next and what should
we do if we are fully aware of
everything and sort of have the historic
perspective understanding with which you
can help sort of you know have people
see why we are where we are would then
be destruction or you know removal be
one of the acts that we should be
thinking about should we remove the
train line it depends you know so these
things become taken up by other people
and sometimes they're found to be useful
and used and sometimes they're not when
they fall into disrepair so I think that
that's one of the aspects I mean you
were saying yourself that some buildings
get built but nobody uses them so what's
the point of a building that isn't used
and even if the other building only
lasts a year but it's used and then is
rebuilt is that a more sustainable way
of actually building we don't have to
build the stuff to last forever we just
have to build for it to be usable for
the purpose for which we built it up
and it's part of the problem the sort of
you know talking about optimism before
and I was wondering about the
relationship between optimism and hubris
in that context architects tend to be
very hubristic the relationship between
lab and capitalism because it's not as
this the building's that we build in our
current age of buildings that are simply
functional some of them are just purely
egotistical statements and in the
context of climate change and the world
going through what it's going through is
this really what we need at the moment
if we as a species are going to be able
to live fulfilling lives for a longer
period I mean I'm very glad this is come
up I wanted to ask about empire 2.0 and
sort of to bridge these two examples of
say India and Afghanistan the idea that
we've somehow switched from a physical
imperial colonialism to almost a new
liberal colonialism or capitalist
colonialism and in just this how how
different that is you know you spoke
with the US and the UK and and I think
almost you know the u.s. developed this
this new sort of neoliberal form of
colonialism in contrast to the UK system
in some ways perhaps but I wanted to
task how that I mean obviously it's born
pretty nasty fruit in in some of these
examples and how that neoliberal
colonialism has
I mean I don't think neoliberal
colonialism in the context of the u.s.
is only what happens outside of its
borders because one of the things to
remember is that the whole process of
constructing the US was a process over
200 years when and in a way in it you
know and it wasn't Americans who did
this it was the British who did this
because America at that time was coming
colonized by the British so it's the
British who moved the border of what
comes to be known as the u.s. from the
east coast across to the west coast and
in the process dispossessed peoples of
their land but they don't just
dispossessed them so this is the other
thing to remember and if we you know and
just sort of contextualize it in terms
of brexit as well is that when the Brits
were in what comes to be known as
America one of the ways in which they
organized moving from the east to the
west was every so often making treaties
with the indigenous peoples who were
there because at some point the supplies
would run out the ammunition would run
out they would need to make a treaty in
order not to be overwhelmed so they'd
make a treaty and say ok right we'll
take this much land we won't take
anymore now we're at peace this is how
it will be more supplies would come but
they would go to war again and break
every treaty so the u.s. is constructed
through a process of the making and
breaking of treaties which will
celebrate with Thanksgiving every year
know exactly Britain then continues to
do in the context of its own self and
this is what it's doing with brexit
because what it's seeking to do at this
moment is break the Good Friday
Agreement in order to establish leaving
the European Union the Good Friday
Agreement is a legal treaty that's made
between two sovereign countries Britain
and Ireland and for those of you who
might be confused Ireland is actually a
sovereign country I know I'll use you
know the radio presenters on the Today
program often don't seem to realize this
fact and talk to Irish politicians as if
somehow they're subservient but they're
not they are politicians of an
independent country in these two
countries created an international
treaty this is a treaty that is they're
ratified by the European Union and the
United States and is located within the
it's an international treaty you cannot
break it on women and yet history seems
to suggest that Britain constructs
itself through a process of breaking
treatise and this is yet the latest one
so I think it's that aspect of not
necessarily seeing these things as
different in the present I think they're
differently conceptualized and
constructed but they come out of the
history that produces them optimism a
difference is that yawn is sort of
implying that by looking at the
architectural scale there is a sort of
possibly an innocence there which then
allows to open the can of worms to
understand the complexity of what takes
place he it can also be done the other
way around like in the reconstruction in
Afghanistan where you see the complexity
of what took place and then you look
back at the project a doesn't work or
wasn't used and so on so it's a movement
of scale so my question to you is how
would you move to the scale of the
either the local oldest or architecture
because it seems a really daunting
process to go from either the historical
scale or the Imperial scale down to the
moment of the building workers point I
think Yan is so saying that that's a way
of seeing the bigger picture possibly
you could explode from that point in
something larger do you have any
suggestions for us humble architects as
to how one might focus the broader
questions in
to something which is actually very
specific
I don't but one thing could be to absent
ourselves yeah why do we need to go and
construct buildings elsewhere when we've
got any number of homeless people here
who need solutions that we could be
designing right here to address problems
of inequality of low-wage of you know
lack of income all that sort of stuff
there are solutions that are needed
right where we are
why don't we address the broader plan
fax you by obsession is local government
actually and our local problems are not
being localized but just simply though
there's a politics that needs to be
resolved there but the question is that
there there is still this issue that if
we we can talk about things in a broad
sense like like brexit so we get no
positives from brexit all we're told is
we're particular things are gonna go
wrong that's the way it's sold to us
politically it's not the big picture of
you know what breaks that is trying to
do we're told this company will collapse
you will not be able to do this and so
on so I think it's interesting because
you're the broad approach that you
suggest
it also doesn't it makes it very
difficult to understand how you would
take it down to a smaller scale so
railway lines yes going from east to
west in America yes you know 200 years
and then in America becoming independent
but how do we then take that down into
something which is specific I think is
maybe a question that a lot of
architects try and ask themselves so a
lot of the ways in which modernization
processes and other places have been
talked about is often within the frame
of coloniality modernity thinking about
modernity is always rooted within some
colonial understanding and yet for many
of the thinkers and intellectuals in
other places it wasn't that they
rejected coloniality modernity they
rejected the coloniality aspect not the
modernity aspect so people around the
world have sought to develop different
ways of thinking about things and doing
things often they've not been able to
because the resources that they might
have used to construct those had been
siphoned off out to support
infrastructure projects within the
the poll of the Empire not done within
the peripheries and so on so the issue
isn't about whether the project is done
or not it's about who gets to decide
what project gets done at what time and
in what manner and who do we think we
are to go somewhere else and tell people
how they ought to be living I think that
there is a question of politics around
the notion of reparations as I was
talking about but that reparations ought
not to come with strings it ought not to
come with hair I'll give you money but
I'm going to be the construct the
architect the construction company is
going to be ours and so on and we're
going to tell you how best to do this
because we know and you don't yeah we
bad but yea I'm interrupting in this
discussion perhaps without making it
political
what are you doing young linen because
she showed us something with the police
building but I didn't get really what
you are doing what are you attributing
to this theme Basu or actually it's
quite simple there was no you what the
impact of reconstruction mission in
Afghanistan was so there was very few
very little notion of what was what has
been achieved especially after the
departure of international forces so two
years three years five years down the
line what are the results of all this
efforts so what I did is in in this case
I visited many Dutch projects in in my
particular province to look at what's
the current status and and how does a
build extent and what has been achieved
and what is the impact and you know but
actually moreover like how come that
some buildings are or some interventions
are successful and others are not so can
we learn
this kind of can we learn from these
kind of projects order a failure or
their success so I've done that I've
documented I've spent many months
traveling there
presented it to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs presented it to the chief of
Defense they both embraced it
now we're talking and we discussing so
on how to improve future potential
future international missions called
Syria called Libya etc center so
international intervention quite
critical results now in us collaborating
to say can we to draft something like a
reconstruction manual not as a kind of
blueprint but much more as a kind of
attitude and an almost checklist how to
engage that's what I'm doing in muscle
it's much more straightforward it's kind
of planning how to rebuild the city so
it's the first one of the first examples
I mean it's the first time that a city
as a total entity is being rebuilt in
one go trying to establish a kind of
comprehensive plan so that's not only
like rebuilding the destroyed houses is
thinking about how do we restart the
economy you know two things one the
project in Oregon was self initiated and
eventually it was supported by the Dutch
government so it's their actions which
were scrutinized so it's reported back
to the government in Mosul is much more
work for the UN with the UN and they
they directly support the local
government so it's it's it's it's dark
on this issue but potentially something
you should be reconsidering so there's a
lot of collaboration with local
stakeholders over the past weeks there's
been various discussions within a school
which touch on the difference between
tactics and strategy strategy being
potential overview of we want there to
be reparations for damages done to
certain countries potentially right and
the tactics is potentially what
architecture is trying to do and I think
there is maybe a gap between saying that
we we unrightfully took the money within
our colonial movements and therefore
stored in there within our own banks
within our own economy and we should be
giving it back to them the raw form but
then there's always the question of this
is happening previously in history and
because of the problems in a social
structure that we have created they
don't deal with the money in what would
be unethical ways on were always ways
which are not beneficial to their
societies and so what point are we then
in the wrong why just giving them the
money back
so in this case is the difference igner
the strategy of we need to make amends
and repairs and the tactic of how do we
do that and so I think there was a gap
and although I think their ability and
what your were criticising about our
history and kind of the empirical nature
of it I think there is a gap between
what and if the architects are trying to
do and what you are suggesting and I
wonder do you have a strategy of how to
give this money back or how to return
this wealth and then on a second
follow-on point of saying that when we
go into these places we should not be
trying to take things out the reality is
that we are still within the capitalist
nation there are still you cannot make
interested kind of play and no one at
least in the current mental structure of
our country will make a move a postive
on for the country without any kind of
return so maybe playing with this even
though this is not impossible situation
how can
play with these or any existing forces
and give something in return which does
not take anything right to some kind of
mutual benefit and some wonder if you
have a strategy for this
sorry tactic for this wrong strategy so
if we think about when compensation has
been paid if we're compensation you know
if we think about reparations as
compensation so when the slave trade was
abolished in 1833 compensation was paid
at that point and it was paid to those
people who owned other people because
the people they owned were property so
slaves were understood as property
because the slaves were being freed the
people who owned them were losing
something and according to liberal law
you cannot take somebody else's property
without recompense in them for that and
so in Britain we paid the equivalent of
40% of GDP at the time to compensate
slave owners and that if you saw the
tweet from the Treasury the very
misguided tweet that was sent a couple
of months ago we only finished paying
off the bonds that were taken to pay
that amount of money literally last year
so from 1833 taxpayers in this country
and not just in this country but within
Empire more generally have been paying
off the bond that the government took
out in 1833 to recompense slave owners
if we can understand within liberal
tradition and the rule of law that the
loss of property ought to be compensated
for and it's been we've done that to
slave owners then why can't we
recompense the loss of property when
that property was taken from other
people given that that is our tradition
that is what we say that we are and who
we are so I don't buy the argument that
it's about us being a particular sort of
nation and we can't do what's in our not
in our best interest because if you sort
of look at politics at the moment we are
doing what's
in our best interest economically for
some other purpose and the fact that
we're doing it suggests that there are
other interests that override a pure
economic ones and so in that sense I
think there is the post so my sense is
that what there is for me to do as an
academic is to make the argument there
are movements for reparations so if you
look at the West Indies the the CARICOM
nations they've come together and they
are making an argument explicitly for
reparations from Britain and making an
argument for Social Democratic
reparations that is that they don't want
money to be paid to individuals within
the West Indies they want Britain to pay
money to the West Indies generally for
investment in education in health care
you know in those institutions that
constitute good social democratic states
because they haven't had the possibility
to construct social democracy precisely
because of colonization so that would be
one way of doing it is to take seriously
the arguments being made by CARICOM and
to engage with them and have that
conversation
the thing is partly within Britain we
don't even have this conversation most
of us don't even know our history we
don't even know the history of Ireland
and the way in which Ireland was a
colony of England and what we have done
to Ireland over the last two centuries
and that's our absolute neighbour and if
we don't even know how we constructed a
famine that killed a million people that
led to a million people moving to the
Americas and that a huge number of the
work of the population from Ireland then
came to Britain as bonded labour to
build the roads and the canals and the
railways in Britain and so on and we
can't understand that relationship it's
no surprise that we don't know about the
broader relationship there was a piece
in The Guardian today about the
massacres in Australia if any of you saw
that and the extent to which the British
were involved in committing massacres
against Aboriginal peoples precisely to
take their land and to establish the
state of Australia that's just now been
documented until the 1960s Aboriginal
peoples were classed as flora and fauna
they weren't even classed as
human in Australia and so you know there
are these so it agree so I don't know
about the tactics at the moment because
we're not even having the conversation
so my wish is to put this stuff on the
table so that perhaps we can start
talking about it and when enough people
start talking about it we can then have
more concerted action to engage
politically with those questions but
until we know our history until we know
how our history is shaped the very
possibility of us being none of this is
going to make a difference sorry we do
have a question it can be the last
questions in response to your comment
right now is just thinking about do you
think it's also this idea of time like
my ancestors did it it's historically
you've not been a part of that
experience is historical eyes on it
which we'll don't believe in it
so do I live for the guilt or what
people did for me and I was thinking if
architecture is kind of like that
connection where buildings live for
yours you see it you experience it like
how do you navigate this idea that it
wasn't me it's not my generation but its
fact is the time scale with which these
things happen
it's lifespans so like how do you
navigate that okay so the first thing is
that for me none of this is about guilt
and it's certainly not about blame
because nobody alive today is
responsible for any of the things that
we're talking about historically that
have produced the world within which we
live however all of us in this room do
benefit from the legacies of those
structures and the extent to which we
benefit from them we can either choose
to unreflective Lee continue to benefit
from
or we can seek to address those in
Justices because if as I've said before
the historical processes that produce
the inequalities in the world our
historical processes that have shaped
the possibilities for all of us to be
here in this room today we benefit from
those structures we may not be
responsible for the creation of them but
if we don't contest them we're
responsible for their maintenance and
their reproduction so we have a choice
we can either choose to maintain and
reproduce the structures that we think
are unequaled or we can choose to
contest and address them this is for me
it's really not about blame or guilt
it's just about how we choose to
position ourselves in terms of those
histories and how we wish to take
responsibility for where we are in terms
of the sort of world we want to leave
for the generations that come after us
I think that's I'm sure there's lots
more questions but I guess we are
running out of time when I know okay
there's one word that didn't come up
much and just to come back to kind of
the you the framework we kind of used to
an architect client user I think the
world sovereignty has been a bit missing
tonight especially in its in to define
who is the final user
I think the attempts you undertaking can
inform us and the content and the
dynamics of taking taking on these
subjects great source of information but
there's kind of this daunting question
behind all of this is the where do where
does the architectures code end and I do
feel that intersection between both of
your interventions kind of really points
at that is that where it is yeah the
scope and yeah I was wondering if the
last word about sovereignty and how that
might find both your interventions
well I mean in a way the issue is
sovereignty to the extent of who gets to
decide what goes on within the within
the territories over which sovereignty
is claimed did you wanna yeah I started
this kind of journey with the very
interesting I think when a question like
if it's possible at all you know is it
possible to intervene at all as
designers or we equipped we have the
instruments we cetera but also in
essence is it possible to enter and
intervened in countries in a kind of
rightful sustainable way to actually
contribute something positively and I
think that that it's happening more more
post 9/11 I don't have the answer to
that but I'm trying to find ways to
actually contribute to that when when
it's still when it's possible and I
think even now it's more and more
interesting it's like what would you
would you intervene as a designer in or
contribute as a designer in Syria you
know with the kind of current
government's knowing that you could
potentially help a lot of people
destroyed cities as homes and there's
one but under government which is
questionable so these kind of questions
are on the table I mean you bring bring
up a really interesting point about
Syria because I was having a
conversation about Raqqa recently as
like the world's most destroyed city and
that destruction was perpetrated
primarily by the UK in the US and
partially by France and there's a
project that they're trying to do to
kind of bring the impact of that
destruction back to the UK so that
people can be aware of what
because it's to distance from us and I
think in a way like I definitely don't
think remember you have to apologize for
your position because I think it's
really important that we have
discussions like this and that we don't
I agree we don't have enough of them and
people aren't exposed to the fact that
there's a much bigger picture of it but
I think there's also a degree of
helplessness where we see all these
things happening and we see our
government's role in in making them
happen and as an individual you kind of
want to get involved and and step in and
I think that's what has always intrigued
me about young your project being kind
of self-motivated so I mean I think from
from the perspective of someone who
organized who organized these talks on
behalf of the AAA and from our
perspective of having conceived of this
as an idea I think we were really
thrilled to bring people together in
each of the three sessions to talk from
very different perspectives about what
does the kind of uncertain future mean
for us within the UK but also how can we
make that a kind of very relevant
project that's happening globally and
it's not just happening in here like I
think even in the border lecture we were
talking about borders that exist all
over the world and I think we have to
keep framing it as a much larger
conversation so I think this isn't the
end of the conversation I think it's
just the beginning but in terms of
tonight's conversation I hope you'll all
join us upstairs to maybe chat more
informally with our speakers and talk to
each other I'd like to really thank the
Dutch embassy because it has been a
really important series of conversations
and without your support it wouldn't
have been possible and thank you to you
two to both of you for tonight and to
florian for producing this whole series
with me and and thank you to everyone
for coming to all of the talks so now
that we thank you
[Applause]
