I'm delighted to introduce this
evening's event the discussion tonight
is the second in a series called a a
collections talks in previous years this
series has focused around the AAA
collections in the archive the library
and the photo library and it's provided
a platform for researchers working with
our collections to present their work
and an opportunity for us it was also an
opportunity to show off some of the
collections this year we wanted to
broaden the scope and reach of these
talks to focus more about the act of
collecting and archiving inviting
curators archivists academics from
various institutions and companies to
talk about the current trends challenges
and politics of the culture of
collecting and archiving the final talk
in the series is called the analog
return which is on 18th of February
which is about photography collections
so we hope you can come to that one as
well
so now I'm delighted to introduce a very
distinguished panel of speakers Helen
Thomas is the chair for this evening's
talk she's currently editor and senior
research fellow at 88 Zurich she's
worked with digital design records and
architecture collections in various
situations including at Pheidon Press
drawing matter and with her work with
the VNA our IBA architecture partnership
John Sheridan next to her
is digital director at the National
Archives responsible for digital
services and digital archiving he
provides strategic direction developing
the people and capability needed to
create a disruptive digital archive
that's really exciting I'm just doing it
in the order of speakers abigail warren
is digital preservation archivist at the
West Sussex Record Office she has worked
with digital records in several places
including at the black cultural archives
the University of Sussex Special
Collections
and with school archives David Baldwin
in the middle here is currently project
manager at the London Metropolitan
archives for the London hub of unlocking
our sound heritage has experience
working with audio visual and digital
archives
fionna Orsini next to David is curator
of the RI BA drawings and archives
collections
she's curated several exhibitions
including underground journeys Charles
Holden's designs for London Transport
and six-speaker man on Johnson's next
abigail is head of exhibitions and
archives at Zaha Hadid Architects she
has experience of managing digital and
analog architectural drawings and images
including their use in exhibitions and
publications so I'd now like to hand
over to Helen who is going to be
chairing this evenings talk to talk
about their archives and just to
introduce myself really I'm an outsider
although have been associated with
archives for many years as a Linda have
just described it's always been from the
outside as a researcher or as an
interpreter or was a teacher and so for
me I always imagined the archive of a
dark and enchanted forest
enticing full of latent knowledge and
ideas if if dense and mystifying and you
need a map and a guide to find your way
through it so running courses on
archives with students I proposed to
them that the archivists that we are
going to meet are forbidding and Stern
academic custodians with secret codes
and rules but when we actually get to
meet them we find them this to be
completely untrue everyone we met was
open enthusiastic and welcoming and
showing us path through the forest but
the question is what is the forest today
the implicit subject of today's
discussion is the digital image and the
difference that they've have made to the
discipline of the archive if he's okay
so the first digital image was made in
the 1920s but for development of the
Internet there's been a rapid
development in its technology and now
the myriad ways of making and
manipulating collecting disseminating
and showing them presents huge
challenges the intensity and speed of
change in the medes of production
meaning and storage exciting is exciting
but the question is
to future-proof for the images produced
today can still be viewed in 10 or 20
years time so weave in a way we see the
world wide web as our collective archive
something that is opposite to
traditional archive we fear the Internet
of transparent and democratic a place of
unbounded possibilities but this lack of
boundaries creates problems and
questions for example if everything if
everything is equal how does something
acquire value digital images for easy
manipulated so what constitutes our true
original in this situation evolving
markets produce new and wonderful tools
and technologies but also rapid
obsolescence the interfaces between the
public world of the open Internet and
the specialist world for the artist the
architect the library and the archive
are also changing each of our speakers
today faith of these and many other
challenges in creative ways and I was
going to mention them but I think he'll
enter did Elinor did a great job of
introducing everybody
so I'll just say that when Ellen and I
met to talk about the event today we
realised that we were coming at the idea
of the archive in the image from
completely different directions well not
completely but different ones for me of
the inside outsider
the questions are were tangential to the
archive it is the presence of the
digital image in the world that is a
fascinating question its proliferation
questions about authorship originality
sampling and copying the relationship of
a digital image to the material analog
original if there is one and the impact
on its value ownership of copyright and
image making of the livelihood but for
Elinor as an insider the concerns of the
argument archivists were paramount and
therefore much more strategic she had
questions about collaboration and
acquisition what and how to collect them
also the challenges and the means of
inventing and managing systems for
preserving and revealing the contents of
the archive
very important to her so today speakers
give us a privileged opportunity to find
out more about these questions and I'm
looking forward to hearing about how
they're enchanted forests are planted
organized and husbanded mapped and
negotiated and the first person is going
to talk about species John Sheridan so I
don't know how many of you have visited
or experienced some of what we hold at
the National Archives I love the idea of
it being an enchanted forest we're an
institution though that finds itself at
a strategic inflection point as the
archive of government for a hundred and
eighty years most of our history has
been involved with identifying selecting
appraising preserving and providing
access to physical records and like many
other archives and archivists digital
has been messing with our heads now to
give you a sense for that I have this
one image from Magritte it plays with
the idea of representation and I think
conveys something of the challenge for
the digital archivist now of course even
in the era of physical records the
minutes of the cabinet meeting were
never the meeting but digital adds
another layer in to that
representational challenge the record is
intangible and in some senses fragile
all the archive can do is make copies
over time and check that those copies
are the same thing and manage the risks
to reproducing the record using the
technology of the present and keep on
managing those risks as technology
changes under our feet there is no
permanent solution to the challenge of
digit
preservation there is only institutional
commitment to keep records alive three
generations of technological change
it also means accepting a breakdown in
the vertically integrated archive where
the archive does storage and does
conservation and DAHS access that kind
of tightly vertically integrated archive
isn't going to make much sense in an era
where we can buy a petabytes of storage
for $12,000 a year from Amazon perhaps
now it means reflecting hard on the
practices that we have established as
institutions as archives and archivists
in a context where there are no
permanent solutions we have to develop
practices that allow us to take our
truly limited quantity which is our
money and turn that in maximum benefit
in terms of managing preservation risk
over time in terms of providing context
in an era of a globally deployed
information infrastructure at the world
wide web and providing access in a
complex information rights landscape
balancing the rights of owners copyright
owners data subjects balancing the
rights of the present and the future we
believe this calls for a fundamental
shift in archival practice for example
how we think about understand and manage
preservation risk for example how we
think about providing trust and
assurance as the archivist necessarily
becomes a much more active player in the
life of the records that he or she
preserves and for example over how we
assure trust and authenticity in a world
where everything is just a maybe maybe
this is a record maybe this is a
representation of this thing we call
this the disruptive digital archive
and for the archival profession it's the
challenge of a lifetime there's never
been a more exciting time to be an
archivist and previously archives I've
also worked with school archives and at
the University of Sussex so I have
experience working in tiny places where
I'm the only artist and then bigger
places where there's lots of us together
helping each other out and I'm mainly
going to talk today about the digital
stuff that I work with now and have been
working with over the years and I think
it's important to mention that when it
comes to this digital stuff the link
between preservation and access is much
more immediate so unlike the physical we
can't just put it in a box forget about
it and wait until someone says oh I'd
like to look at those vials please and
they actually require ongoing
intervention and so put simply the
shorter lifespan of digital records
means that preservation action must be
timely and appropriate and so I want to
focus on a little case study very
quickly and which I'm going to attempt
to illustrate why this is so the items I
can't actually reveal what it is the
kids like most digital collections it's
still going through a process of terms
and conditions being agreed you'll see
why in a moment but it's very typical of
a 21st century and digital archive it
reflects a project where they were
mystic events so there's lots of
collaborators working on things like
design promotion films communication
Events Management curation etc and so in
this short presentation that I'll just
go through six key points to illustrate
what I think of every time a digital
deposit is made and I used to be a
primary school teacher and digital
preservation is quite hard to illustrate
so I used my primary school teacher
skills by drawing this picture number
one and the first thing I think about is
ownership so you all know it's really
easy to make copies of the digital stuff
you have so I will check whether we'll
be the sole owners of the digital
material Tyrael during initial
conversations with the depositor because
traditionally it's hard to justify
preserving something that is already
being preserved by someone else however
this is a big but and I really am not
sure how realistic that is in the
digital world and the kids this example
I know that all of the things that came
in are probably on various different
people's computers
somewhere else so that's the first point
and I also need to think about whether
something is purely born digital or
whether it's a digital surrogate so in
this example I discovered that one of
the films was actually a copy of a film
being held by another archive and that's
really significant because it will have
an impact on how it will be made
accessible and and I think this is
really interesting point I don't really
deal with digital artworks but I have
spoken to archivists who do and I think
ownership is really complex because when
it comes to art the concept of the
original is inextricably linked to
valuing and so when you can make copies
of things
that makes it very difficult have you
transport an artwork from one gallery to
another for instance for displaying and
I think that in itself could be a whole
evenings discussion and sinnin explain
is the nature of the material so I want
to think about the format that things
like whether it's a JPEG or if it's a
tiff we have preferences we want both
established formats because they're
viewed as more robust or open formats
because due to their non proprietary
nature they're supported by more
software applications and in this case
it was really simple just so what we
provide and the depositor agreed however
we do often get hybrid collections that
might contain a box of floppy disks and
they are the only copies of those
records they're not even really sure
what's on there so it comes to me and
then it's up to us to transfer it onto
media that's more secure and a big thing
I want to talk about here is my oxide
might sound obvious and but the size of
a collection so decision to taking a
large collection for me would involve
talking to the county archivist and the
IT team and anyone who's worked for a
local authority will know how
challenging that can be so I really want
to stress that if you're an archivist
thing you're agreeing to preserve
something digital on an ongoing basis
and you need to be sure that you have
the storage and infrastructure in place
to do so at the start of this
presentation I make sure that I've
worked in smaller archives and in these
roles I would really say it's just a
lack of resources and that's usually
buzzed budget and just staff people to
do the work that prevented progress in
digital preservation more than anything
else so we could take things in but they
might just sit on a server I mean that
was it we might not even be able to take
a large collection because it was too
big
to space thirdly we want to inform the
depositor that we will perform perform
preservation actions so as John
mentioned we might want to do a format
migration so if something is becoming
obsolete will migrated to a new format
it's actually changing the record I've
never known a depositor to place
restrictions on this but it's possible
that they could we also as cells need to
note any of those changes because it has
an impact on the records authenticity
and this is stored as metadata but
there's even standards for that metadata
because when archivists like Sanders and
this season the next point metadata so
as well as preserving the bits
preserving the infrastructure that helps
us make sense of these bits we also need
any metadata and that's the data about
the data so for example the data
photograph was created who created where
it was taking all of that information is
preserved as well
and I'd like to communicate that to the
depositors because sometimes they don't
even know what much data is or how
important it is and this bit point you
lots of the things I've spoken about are
applicable to physical archives but this
vid point I think is a really big
digital issue which we spoke about
before this event started and that's the
volume of data so in the example I'm
using here the depositor wanted to
deposit a collection of emails
originally but this was a project that
lasted several years and so that's
thousands of emails from hundreds of
people that includes attachments and
links hyperlinks and basically lose and
lose at sensitive personal information
and we couldn't guarantee that we could
take it in and go through every email
because digital preservation system
called preserve
that isn't automated it doesn't do that
for us we'd have to go through one by
one so an appraisal decision was made
that they wouldn't give us those emails
at this stage and finally an
intellectual property so who holds a
copyright will it be transferred to the
archive and if not what is the agreement
around use in my example the digital
records were created by several
different people and different
organizations and the depositor only
held a small holds a small percentage of
this copyright and is still deciding
what to whether they're going to
transfer it completely or just give
those permissions to do certain things
and this is really really important
because there's no point in keeping
stuff if people can't access it so at
this early stage we must establish
clearly that things like whether we can
put it online where they can go in a
computer in a reading room whether we
can put it in a book and without that
information our ability to share the
material is really compromised so coming
to end I just want to have a little word
warning what would happen if you don't
do all of these things and so without
permissions and you get situations like
this so this is an archive set on the
shelf and wesauce is a record of its
that we can't do anything with we are
going to do something with us but it
means backtracking to find all of that
information out and some of the media in
these boxes has become obsolete as have
some of the format's and some of the
metadata is missing and there's no
permissions I know that oral history so
some of the people may no longer be with
us so it's just a bit sad the big
archive is hopefully so some of the
problems but
I mean it's not great so to conclude and
just want to emphasize that I always
work closely with depositors to ensure
that the material at West Sussex Record
Office can be made accessible to the
public and that basically future
proofing is that the heart of why do so
my name is David I work at Metropolitan
archives but I'm also chair for the film
photography
sorry films down a proper section for
the archives and records Association and
part of that role is to work with people
who have or archivists with special
specialist collections in their archive
and as we touched on and through the
training that we get as archivists I
think inheritant Lee Wieck were quite
nervous people I'm quite nervous person
so a lot of the training we do when
managing the analog is to just make sort
of informal introductions between the
film reel and the archivist and let them
know that everything is okay you can
handle it and also engage with it the
next five minutes is talk a little bit
about the journey from the analog to
digital and how important is not just to
leave those film reels on the shelf but
actually take a leap of faith
and engage with it so like photographs
drawings or maps along a V recordings
are do you require specialist knowledge
they do require controlled storage
conditions humidity temperature control
but they also require safe handling
hopefully ensure they're at time within
the archive is a happy one for the
archivist that can be quite stressful
even as I was saying just going near
films or videos a recent training event
I did there's a lot of joking about a
video at boxes of videos they've been on
the shelf for the last 20 years I didn't
find that funny I thought actually
that's not something to talk about we
need to actually get engaged with
with the video sorry next if I say next
which I'm talking to you a Helen okay
so managing the analog in can be
difficult but it's something the
archivist needs to proactively engaged
with digitizing the unlock digitizing AV
stock can be expensive because you need
to find the the right people to do it
it's quite a complicated process so
there's a lot of preparation like
cleaning before even hits the various
sixteen or thirty five-millimeter wheel
equipment it needs to have to enable the
transfer but again it's a necessary evil
because of the risk of degradation but
also obsolete playback equipment and I
found through the work that I've done
through the archives and records
association that it's very important to
not isolate yourself but start those
conversations as soon as possible
join networks find partners within the
London area learn about rotten archives
works closely with the London screen
archives and recently over the last
three years work with the BFI in the
breaking up Britain on film program
which worked with various London Borough
archives as well as museums and
libraries to digitize film and put it on
a platform which actually raise the
profile of collections for London
boroughs therefore raising their service
to a wider audience but also showing
that archives do have these amazing sort
of films and videos in their collections
next
so once you've digitized it axing
accessing the digital polluting images
can be quite nightmare so obviously
you've got the rights of the director
but also you know schools soundtracks
everything involved within a film
production but also data protection
issues and also sensitivity issues so
recently I was working on a series of
videos for the inner London education
Authority and they did a series on
interviewing
teenagers about coming out and at that
time they may have felt comfortable with
talking about that but beyond the video
we don't know what happened whether they
moved away from that dialogue or whether
they accepted the conversation whether
family knew about it so sensitivity is a
real big part as well as data protection
rights with working with film with the
party ownership in particular online use
can be again challenging but with
certain exceptions within copyright on
site access can actually help access
these films which can be problematic
next and then finally I've got a great
picture in front of me the mind is
erasing the digital so reaching new
audiences where the new or existing will
require the archivist to be a curator so
again the archivist stepping out of
their sort of traditional comfort zone
but by sort of sharing the content
within their archives within a
reasonable and responsible way
you can often learn more about the film
of video you hold in your collections
which is we spoken about with resources
and time and staffing is not always
possible a project I'm working on at the
moment
will be working closely with volunteers
and how they it's a sound project and
how they will be clipping the sound and
reimagining the interpretation of that
sound within their own communities
within their own contexts particular
with film we worked with the Thamesmead
festival recently which projected a film
on Thames made from 1974 as part of a
living archive hub space with music
voices residence voices and narrow
interpretation of Thames meet obviously
from the outside you hear lots of things
about Thames me Clockwork Orange Stanley
Kubrick but from what what happens
inside is a very important conversation
to be had so yeah just to sort of wrap
up it's very important I think
to not stand by and watch a film and
video sort of deteriorate on the shelf
but find as many possible avenues as you
can make mainly with partners and try
and exploit it as much as possible
hello my name is Fiona Rossini
I'm creator drawings and archives at the
RBA roaring Royal Institute of British
Architects and I mean you're going to be
focusing on analog because that's really
what I deal with on earth sort of day to
day basis and more to do with the sort
of access and the different sorts of
formats that we have in our collection
so we have an off-site store just to
give you a bit of a background so the
drawers an archives collection at the
V&A is it's the collections are actually
split so we've got the main library over
at 66 Portland Place not far away from
here and that's book story so books
journals and photographs and then the
drawings collection and the manuscripts
collection is housed mostly at the V&A
we went into partnership with VNA some
years ago now however in the time I've
been at the RBA which is about twelve
years I'm afraid that the collection has
grown somewhat and obviously spaces is a
continual issue physical space that is
and so our off-site collection now is
probably over 50% of our collections so
consequently access to those collections
is is growing so we have an off-site
store not too far away in Fulham which
we have a reading room as you can see
here which you know does allow
researchers to come generally on a sort
of wants to work once a month basis if
we can manage that so this all looks
very neat and tidy and and they organize
however there is something behind the
doors that reveals a whole different
different world
so this is our store and as you can see
there are lots of different formats in
terms of what we have in the drawings
collection so the the image on the left
hand side at the top that kind of gives
you a sense of the different types of
formats that we have for drawings so
that can be flat drawings in portfolios
it can be framed items but then we also
have a lot of rolls of drawings that's
the favorite way that architects
obviously store their collections and
quite frankly that is quite problematic
when it comes to coming into the archive
so we've got lots of different types of
roles as well before we're able to get
them processed and put them into the
proper archival packaging which you see
on the right hand side so it's a much
more efficient way of storing not only
better obviously for the collections
themselves because it's archival but
also being square tubes which are also
telescopic which makes it very easier
much easier for different sorts of size
of rolls of drawings and then we also
have I can say lots of flat drawings in
portfolios but they also do also come to
us often in when they're oversized
they're in plan chests so we're having
to deal with multiple different types of
material just within the drawings side
and so this means that there's lots of
multiple types of housing
so on the archive side the RBA's
archives are kind of split into two
areas so we have the manuscripts
collection which is essentially the
papers of architects and architectural
historians and architect related
organizations and they are actually
split across two different sites but we
do have a lot of material at the off at
the off-site store and then we also have
the RBA's institutional archives which
which are big and who do get looked at a
huge amount so it's lucky company
archive I suppose you could say and they
come in again lots of different sorts of
formats so you've got bound volumes big
heavy awkward volumes as well as lots of
sorts of different sorts of boxes as
well
you've got box files you've got bankers
boxes you've got records storage boxes
so lots of multiple different sorts of
formats
so that is something that we're having
to deal with a lot more in terms of the
access it does throw up a lot of
challenges just with the with the analog
a lot of the collections are quite large
they're not processed or they're only
semi processed and it's it's something
that we're it's a constant challenge in
terms of providing that access something
that is even more tricky which we've
kind of heard about is the digital
archives so this is something that we
don't have a huge amount of in the RBA
at the moment but it is an area that's
obviously growing what we're finding is
that a lot of the material that's coming
in at the moment is is hybrid so it's
it's architects that have worked have
started off in the analog and then we've
got some kind of early early versions of
the the digital so you've got some quite
old digital formats up on the left-hand
side they're floppy disks and CDs and
cassettes as well of which obviously
we've got absolutely no idea what's on
them because the hardware is not always
easy to get hold of in terms of seeing
what's actually on there so we're having
to deal with that and then we've also
got some examples of databases so this
is an example of the we've got the
database of the Charles Korea archives
this was created by the practice it was
shared with the RBA and with MIT but
it's on a read it's a read on base read
only basis so we can't we can make it
available to people but we can't do
anything with it we can't print anything
out and we can't we can't edit it or do
anything with it it's kind of stuck in
it
at a particular time so you could do
kind of question you know what's its
purpose really it's great for
information but that's about as far as
it goes really so again this might be
something that other people will be
coming across in terms of you know
databases that are created and websites
as well how you deal with you know
digitizing or preserving a website at a
given time thank you
so my name is Manoa workforce I need
architects since 15 years now and
they're responsible of the archive and
the exhibition's of the office thank you
so today I will try to speak about the
challenges of collecting and managing
digital archives within an architectural
practice so of course the practice has
an amazing physical archive but also a
digital archive and I thought I can't
really talk about the archive without
also briefly mentioning the physical
archive because it's not that easy to to
manage physical archives especially not
in our situation so what's other
challenges of the physical archive first
of all is the diversity of our
collection of course we have an
architecture archive in front of us we
have drawings we have paintings we have
sketches we have diagrams models a lot
of prototypes but in our case as many of
you know we have a lot of paintings but
we also have a lot of design items we
have a lot of furniture pieces we also
take care of the awards the office was
lucky to win we are recording a lot of
project documentation but we are also
recording memorabilia so it's quite a
vast collection and quite tricky to take
care of all these items at the same time
it's also an ever-growing connection so
the challenges are we have about 400
architects in the office and they
obviously produce material every single
day so it's difficult sometimes for the
teams to the archive team to try to make
sure we cater for everything that is
being produced the skill and the
dimension of the items we have to
archive are also really challenging in
our case because the architectural model
would be Maul as in the middle there in
this scale but we have really big
installation
like the aura which is six meters long
we have flow vases which are as you can
see two meters by one we have very heavy
tables we have set chairs which are not
that tricky to the archive and then the
smallest item would be a ring probably
which is more less one by one centimeter
so the variety of items is quite tricky
to take care of because it's not just a
model we can carry from A to B but we
often need very specific equipment to
move items around for example for this
table which is a beautiful piece in
marble it poses a lot of challenges
because it's about thousand three
hundred kilograms so to move it around
it will appreciate that for a normal
archive it's it's quite challenging of
course we have different locations so we
have to deal with own archives with our
own offices with different loans we make
throughout the years with different
clients that might be archiving our
pieces and so this is for example a
diagram of the different storage
locations we have not everything is in
London there are lots of different
reasons why we keep items in the States
or in Italy you know in Austria so it's
quite tricky to to keep all this
together and the same for the offices we
have quite a few offices by now some are
big offices some Arcite offices but
still they all have models they all have
award certificates so it's again quite
challenging to make sure we keep all of
this under one roof now
what are the challenges of the digital
archives they are very different
obviously and for this digital archive
we had to find a solution to keep all
the information under one roof because
in previous times all the images all the
folders were a bit all over the place so
the database we have chosen for this is
the open asset platform that my
colleague Henry
here it's populating day after day so we
have an amazing amounts of images by now
which is about 90 thousands which is
recorded by project is recorded by
category so we have drawings we have
photographs we have awards so it was
really important to be able to
categorize the items not just by project
but also make sure you can search for a
model or search for a painting or so the
way we had to archive these items was
quite challenging to them we do
collaborate with other institutions our
collection is not online yet but for
example the MoMA has worked from our
practice and they have put their
collections online so we work with them
in order to make sure that what they are
publishing is correct and also it's
important to inform our own collection
with items that are stored elsewhere so
there is this collaboration
unfortunately we cannot open up our
archives yet because of copyright issues
or because of copyright with
photographers as well artistic licenses
so it's quite difficult to just invite
people in the office and say you can
check whatever you like we also
obviously take part in a lot of
competitions and therefore sure we
couldn't just share the information an
interesting case scenario is the
donation with it a few years ago - the
CCA the Canadian Center of Architecture
this is the first time that we actively
donated a copy of digital born material
you will see a bit further it's about
40,000 files that we donated but we
copied everything so it's a copy that we
donated because we wanted to keep
ownership of the project we wanted to be
able to to use the images to use the
drawings to use anything related to the
project so it was quite tricky to come
to an agreement but in the end day
to have a copy of the files but the
copyrights there are quite interesting
because of course we want to say it's
our material but they would like to say
it's their own connection so at some
point they obliged us to say this is a
drawing obviously of a project of
sighted architects but it's part of the
collection of the CCA and it's quite
tricky because it's a digital file so we
have the file as well so why would we as
an author I have to say it's the actual
file sits with them whereas we know we
have a copy so there were a lot of funny
and strange considerations to make and
also what is quite incredible we have
decided in our archive to be very
selective and to only upload the best
images of the projects to talk to the
teams to make sure that anything they
find importance is really catered for
but we would not just upload anything
and everything on the archive because
that would just create a big amount of
information once the CCA came from a
very different standpoint they wanted to
archive everything and to have the whole
folder they were not interested in our
small created archive of this specific
project so they physically went to
analyze this 86 gigabytes of of
information which for the office was a
bit of a strange decision because why
would you really wanted to check all
these different files we use a lot of
different file formats in different
softwares I checked with the IT team and
we have about 255 different softwares in
the office so I challenge any archivist
to try to study all these softwares try
to understand all these different
plugins all these different coding that
has been applied to different and
specific parts of projects but they went
ahead and used different techniques to
understand for example for this project
what was used in terms of software
so this is a bit more information about
their research they're very happy with
the research we are very happy that they
took the time the resources and put some
budgets towards this project so now if
you go to the CCA you can physically go
and check the archives of our projects
they have removed some confidential
information because we gave them really
everything so for example who was
invited to the opening you had all the
list of all the email addresses so they
have removed a lot of information but if
you go there in person you have access
to everything we didn't remove anything
at all but this is the first time and
the only time we had been asked for an
archive so we donated it but I'm not too
sure how easily we would do this again
the exhibition's are changing a lot
because the audiences are changing as
well so of course we have beautiful
paintings beautiful models but nowadays
we are seeing that the audience's that
come to our exhibitions more and more
want to see interacting interactive
items so we have often videos we produce
a lot of videos but this the VR is quite
changing the experiences for a lot of
audiences in Mexico we had people
queuing for up to 2 hours to be able to
experience one of our VR installation
which is quite amazing I don't think we
would ever have that for a painting or a
drawing but so that's quite something
new that we have to cater for and then
what's interesting also for example 3d
files are they becoming more valuable
than than the actual objects in the past
we were always ensuring our model for
quite a substantial sum obviously they
were handmade they were a lot of care
was taken into producing the models they
are really beautiful and there was no
digital file clearly to produce them
whereas now we have 3d files that we
have to
to save and preserve on to our servers
but it's actually the file that is
becoming more important than the outputs
because the 3d models as you see here is
more like almost a photocopier just
press on a button and the model comes
out so when we virtually here in Venice
when we had two models were stolen so
when we had to go to the insurance
company they didn't want to do pay for a
big amount we had insured it at a
certain for certain budget but insurance
they know this is a 3d model you just
reprinted so we just give you only the
cost of how much it costs you two to be
friends what was challenging was to find
out of those hundred different files
which exact file was used to produce
that model that went missing so now we
have all systems to to make sure we know
exactly which model which file was used
to produce produce which model but so
those are all things that are quite
changing the archive it's no longer just
your archive what you see and you take
some pictures so now it's it's
challenging us because certain files we
can't really easily manage our archive
yes that's a bit what we are dealing
with really good collection of stories
about all the different facing in the
digital world but also I think
interesting the relationship with I like
the way that databases came up and
something that somehow it has a has a
physical quality to it as well as a
digital and I mean there are so many
questions to I thought maybe to start
with the beginning of which is I guess
I'm like speakers and outside as I said
at the beginning we always imagined that
archives have some kind of objectivity
to them but of course lots of decision
making have to go on I think all of you
talked about that in different ways and
I'm just wondering if you could open up
a discussion about how you know like is
there an how do you make decisions about
what you're going to collect and what
what you're going to leave out and what
you're going to look for I think you
know office it's quite tricky to keep
the same line with every single team so
there is a lot of of course we want to
explain how the project is designed what
challenges it faced what it has what is
so unique about the project but in order
to be able to write that story you
really have to speak to the teams it's
often not enough to just try to go
through their folders to understand how
they came to the conclusion to to that
specific design which obviously results
in amazing option set and teams are
happy to be interviewed in different
practices not in our case but so certain
teams have interviews when we try to
propose that a lot of teams I know I
definitely I want to be interviewed
my projects so but it's it could be
really interesting to hear the story
because your designs so that's at the
moment not really something we we are
doing other teams are very protective
they don't want to share the information
for some obscure Asia and sometimes the
teams are very enthusiastic and very
proud about their project so they would
release hundreds of images but then we
have to say it so we cannot rush a
decision then between you it's really
not always that straightforward yeah
yeah an interesting contrast between
your very private archive in a way in
that it belongs to an architect's office
and the more public deal with that kind
of process I'm suggesting in for the
r-va and that we will you know where
possible it's not always possible we
will talk to the donors hopefully I mean
if we can talk to the architect directly
if not the people closest to the donors
who might still be around
it's important to find out about those
individual projects really and what was
important for them in order to
understand what is
because you know you have to particular
with large archives it's not it's not
really Parton from there all the issues
of space and the resources you know and
the cost in keeping all this material
but also it's just not conducive you
know for researchers could have weighed
their way through lots of material that
may not actually be really relevant so
John feds at the beginning of his talk
about how with the analog digital is a
huge amount more information or more
layers of reality that are recorded I
wanted I mean I think rabbit as well
that there's huge binder depositor
against so he thought oh maybe it would
be nice to donate the email was but then
when he really thought about it he
changed his mind the email you send and
especially if you're dealing with the
events and like using that list of
important attendees and if it's a
project that has funders there's certain
information that you wouldn't want to be
made public so I think he just from a
risk assessment point of view thought
until I'm sure that you can make it
accessible in a way in a certain way all
the capture it myself and then when you
you're ready for it I'll give it to you
but it can be it's interesting working
with depositors isn't him
and sometimes it can be compromised so
what we're depositors who want to know
they we give you this but you must also
take my libraries and that does that
kind of thing does happen so it's it is
a collaborative process and it can take
a long time content so I I think this is
one of the areas where archives and
archivists most need to shift our most
need to shift our thinking because
traditionally the archivist has been
worried about too much and volume has
been a challenge and is a challenge for
a physical archive your your costs for
storage and conservation rise linearly
with the size of your collection for
digital archives it's not like this at
all it's variation that drives your cost
rather than volume
I'm volume you can if you give me 10
kilobytes 10 gigabytes or 10 petabytes
of digital objects all of the same type
the amount of work that the archive has
to do to preserve that content doesn't
vary that much whereas if you give me a
hundred kilobytes of five or six
different types of things suddenly I'm
on the hook for managing a range of
digital preservation risks over time
rather than one risk so variation
becomes our big concern rather than
volume and secondly and from the
perspective of the researcher in the Big
Data era volume is powerful in terms of
the sets of research questions that you
can ask an answer of a collection so if
I have a lot of seemingly meaningless
email exchanges between people say in
saying government with that
and public records I can compete and
understand the changing nature of the
social graph who knew who who was
buddies with who and maybe I could start
to map that to and patterns of
decision-making so lots and lots of
individually unimportant artifacts in
aggregate have real expressive power
which again counters the traditional
archivists worry that you need to weed
out the draw so because researchers only
wants to look at the individual things
if I can compute over it I want
everything because I can squeeze out
informational value from very large
collections of seemingly meaningless
stuff and so this is where we really
need to shift our practice because at
the moment our approaches to appraisal
and selection and designed in the old
paradigm worrying about volume and
rather than variation and not perceiving
the value of in aggregate
we're kind of in search of what used to
be a record and perhaps you need to stop
being in search or what used to be a
record and concentrate on from the first
principles and what has value 13 I think
that's kind of interesting different way
of searching in the archive so I mean
there's a whole discipline that's
growing up called computational archival
science where people are thinking about
how can you and work with our kyv x'
digital archives in fundamentally
different ways and this is very much
bringing to bear the lessons of the big
data era now this is dangerous stuff for
archives because what happens when you
bring the archive into connection with
large-scale compute and how do we do
that in a way the
both realizes value from the archive but
that's ethically sound and retains
public trust which is so important for
the archive to be able to do the
extraordinary things it needs to do to
preserve the record for future
generations now frankly I don't think
archivists and we certainly don't have
much of a sense about what the public
expectation is in terms of large-scale
compute over a large scale digital
public archive and we've got no real
idea about what people imagine the kind
of compute could do again we need new
practice and we need to have some new
conversations if we're to to deal with
some of those fundamental issues and
again our traditional practice is a poor
guide to what we now need to do because
there is the Victorian idea of history
of collecting absolutely everything in
that act against that but now there's
this possibility that you can collect
everything and then you search it in
different ways
and I'm wondering if that affects any of
the more I mean David was - I mean you
were talking about the transfer of video
to digital and the collection of oral
histories I mean these ideas of but then
you work in the London Metropolitan
archive which city which is producing
infinite amount of data information if
their attention there between these
kinds of activities well I mean talking
about collecting is as well we have to
keep an open dialogue with all of the
London borough archives as a
responsibility you know to make sure
that they for instance film are in the
right place so we do get approached a
lot from today amateur filmmakers from
Hampstead or from Camden they say oh can
we give it to you and then we go back to
Camden and
say oh we've had this inquiry it's about
even that conversation makes sure that
it's in the right place but then often
we get the hamster door come - coming
back and saying alright see we're happy
for you to take it but it's been part of
a broader network like I mentioned
before London's green archives which is
working to make sure information is
available about films across London
sharing catalogs sharing digitized films
and video to showcase where the public
can go and I think access is quite
important because when I deal with
depositors the main thing is legacy but
it's visible legacy
so you'll they're giving you their film
but they want to see it online
immediately so when you take them
through the idea and the complexities of
digitization and then the cost and then
obviously rights with an amateur film
usually lies with the filmmaker but if
they have say a film from a grandparent
perhaps that's come into their
possession it was part of a production
then you get in to see sort of murkier
waters but I think sometimes as well in
terms of access again a level of risk
management is there so even if the
catalog is online and people know it's
there and through exceptions within
copyright they can come on site and have
a look at it you can learn a bit more
about the film itself and hopefully find
out where to go to make those initial
conversations to find out about
ownership rights things like that so
again I keep going on about networks but
it really keep talking everybody talked
about it that the digital opens up the
possibility for a multi authored object
and when I encountered it when I was
doing some research recently that an
artist had was working collaboration
with an architect and the architect was
they were having conversations the
architect was formalizing it in a in a
drawing in a detailed Tori
then the artifice drawing on top of it
fending it back and on and what's that
message and then we had this
conversation who owns the copyright that
what that message the artists claim that
he did ridi ridi
there was no really one objective open
up to questions from the floor
I mean again it's from the outsider
about what I enjoy about talking and I
really love visiting reading rooms I
mean what's come up in the discussion is
especially with what John was just
saying is that there's been a shift from
the idea of taking up space to an idea
of taking up time and and you all talked
about the economy of time the time is
spent on working with files and objects
but to to enjoy these privileged lovely
spaces where you can have a human
engagement with an archivist public
services team obviously their jobs and
they're on the line when people start
talking about mass digitization and then
you know physical archives gone the our
audience is always want to come in and
you know experience the physical objects
the digital is really just a sort of
springboard or platform for people to
know where to find it particularly for
film we can't bring out the file and you
know but particularly for photographs
maps and drawings you know you
experience a greater connection with the
physical object that necessarily would
with the digital object
but the flipside of that is for our map
collections the ones that we digitize
you can interrogate maps a lot in a lot
more detail than say the reference
sheets we have out on there in the
reading rooms you can go down to street
level and have a look at buildings and
find out different information but yeah
I you know person apart probably get
into real trouble for this but I'm sort
of senior guys look at this and think
let's just digitize and get rid of you
know that's that's never going to be an
option because the audiences will always
demand to see the physical and have that
contact with the archivist or simply you
spend time with the collection share
their information and the artists who
equally absorb that and add that to
their catalog and yeah Madame was being
it with her description of the of the
exhibitions and the changing relation to
changing products that related to that
responded to what the audience if we're
looking for is that is that is that
possibility of going to other spaces in
inhabiting those trying to go beyond the
exhibition and almost have an exhibition
in virtual reality so it's taking it
even further and how you can experience
without having to be in a space with
other people or how to interact in
virtual reality but more people more
than one person do you then have to be
in the same room or can one be done and
running in Hong Kong so there are lots
of different things that we are activity
exploring cancer moment what's also
interesting is receive a lot of requests
of people who wants to showcase our work
through actual models but they don't
want to pay for shipments so they just
ask us for the 3d file they think it's
fine for us to just provide them with
files and they can just print their own
exhibit
and have their own exhibition so
sometimes it's going a bit there was a
couple of things I wanted to pick up on
we can't replicate digitally the
emotional experience that you have when
you are touching working with the
physical thing and even as a kind of a
computer scientist by background when
you have an amazing object record there
is something and that is so connecting
and so personal and then you come away
literally shaking from the connection
there to reality is not going to do that
I think the meeting room is hugely
important part has to offer
we've seen how people are increasingly
using our reading room to selfish ties
and that's the thing that we want to
encourage but I think also the archive
and the digital archive needs a reading
room not least because all of these
information rights issues we're never
going to be able to provide access to
all of our records on the web and
publishing all of this stuff with all of
these complex information rights data
protection copyright miss copyright
there is no way that the archivist is
going to be able to publish all of this
material so we have to have safe places
where we can provide access to digital
material we also need to have play
where we can engage people not just most
people who come to the archive with a
well worked through research question
but people who were curious where we can
facilitate access and tell stories
around around for collection as part of
our democracy democratize and widen use
of the archive so I think physical
places for archives are hugely important
we should expect how people use them to
change we should do more to facilitate
access with people who don't arrive with
research questions we should be
absolutely confident about the emotional
power impact of our physical collections
and not lose sight of the absolute need
digital archive has the physical places
where it can safely surface its
collection in a really difficult
information landscape
hi so I was actually going to ask a
question around whether studies that are
being done around collecting and
managing physical collections can be
used to some degree within the digital
realm particularly around risk and
decision making on storage and
monitoring corruption or degradation
which are definitely conversations that
we have in collection care of physical
collections so I just fold it over here
but then I was quite struck by what John
was saying about within the digital
realm how you have to worry more about
the very variety rather than the volume
and then also about how you could
squeeze out a lot of metadata out of the
information through search ability and
and this is definitely conversations
that we have within the physical realm
so if we have a collection that's as
varied as what we saw it saw us or you
know just within the archive we have so
those nitrates sitting next to parchment
that increasingly also means that it's
it's much more costly to care for that
collection than just a bunch of boxes of
just paper and it's the same thing with
metadata the colorants that are used to
write documents to make the drawings
tell us about history of material usage
so that is a form of metadata that
provides another layer of information
that is being archived along with the
drawings themselves so I guess I was
going to just comment on and the
panelist wants to take this further I
think there is a lot that can be
transferred and translated between
conversations and studies that are
happening
with in collection carers departments of
physical collections into the digital
realm
maybe that's an opportunity we've
learned as digital activists from our
collection care department is the value
of empirical measurement for
understanding digital preservation risk
and up to now with digital preservation
we tend to follow a standards-based
approach there's a number of standards
you can look at and um this bothers me I
mean it bothers me guy who says these
are the right things to do and how do
they know where's their evidence and
particularly you're looking at stand to
serve quite old the other thing that
bothers me is the risk that the systems
we use for preserving our collection and
themselves post of it I know I look at
the software that we're on and I think
jeez how on earth is our collection
going to survive our digital repository
and it bothers me a lot these systems
they've got arms and necks all over the
place they're large and complex and they
don't always take good care of the
collection so I'm picking up on from and
the collection care world empirical
measurement of preservation risk as a
core discipline and building good
preservation risk models that we can
deploy is one of the areas of practice
that we're looking to develop the other
is this sense of trying to do no harm or
pass the baton on to the to your
successors having done no harm and
viewing the software that we use which I
fear a lot of it is potentially very
harmful viewing that software is being a
danger the software we use to preserve
our collections
in a danger and taking steps to mitigate
the risks that it poses to the
collection to areas where we need to
really ask digital preservation practice
[Music]
like you think it's exciting an exciting
time partly because some of the
standards are old now but I feel like in
the archive world people are only just
starting to do digital preservation so
for years everyone was chatting about it
and then in the last five years more and
more places were like okay we'll just
give it a go starting is more important
than worrying about en do you need to
worry about so just start and we're on
our third generation of digital
preservation system and each one of
these things have kind of look like a
like a bed kind of Art Nouveau and what
we really need is something that's
Bauhaus I mean even a sense about what
these systems are like to need something
that's much crisper cleaner that is much
less involved with our collections for
managing them successfully and that
tries to do this we've been simulating
in software what the physical archive
has done and we need to stop that and
really pick up on the collection care
point focus hard on mitigating
preservation risk using evidence
members whether they recognized
something similar in the AAR code in
noticing that the point where perhaps to
start using digital or where students
start using digital it's a kind of
hybrid situation we think we're facing a
kind of black hole where I have the
materials been got rid of because and
I'm wondering if you'll recognize in
kind of certainly we've seen a lots and
lots of important projects where we've I
would agree with that
facing it is a worry because you know
it's not really being dealt with as I
showed you know we've got all these
various old formats well we've got those
as objects but you know so you can keep
those as a record of sort of the formats
they came in but in terms of what's on
them it's it's it's a real it is a real
problem and I'm sure this is a problem
potentially in in practices themselves
before we even receive so yeah it's
potentially there's gonna be a lot of
material lost I think
and it's really a time bomb we have in
the old days we archived everything on
the CDs it's the most beautiful CDs
because they had lovely neighbors they
had all the older structures everything
we can wish for nowadays they were so
properly created we had the whole stack
of them obviously and a few years ago we
thought let's open the CDs we need for
that project so we tried and we couldn't
open most of the files so let's just ask
our IT team to just sort everything
transfer everything as quick as possible
when possible so that has now been done
we didn't throw any of the CDs away
because I still hope at some point there
will be a solution and those CDs will be
open about so we did save what we could
but a lot of files
unfortunately grim a lot of files are
lost at the moment I still hope there
will be someone that will spends money
not already go and try to reactivate
those CD but to meet a bit like the time
I got cheese if you don't feed them
constantly some projects that we have
very little of at the moment and that
was the point I was trying to make
really in my presentation is that it
needs that direct intubation
intervention and all the time monitoring
and yeah it's hard to work we've
attempted to - for preservation reasons
-
to digitize access and digitize some of
our audio-visual material and in many
ways that's been easier because maybe
it's because we just didn't have as many
formats but you know there are
specialists out there that can have
access to the right equipment in order
to be able to get that at least in a
format that can be read it read should I
say and that's not to say don't get rid
of the original but but at least it's
then it can be can be looked at before
the original format completely degrades
and you can do anything with it
we need the equivalent of that for for
paper based materials I think the one
thing is worth saying about leaving
aside the physical format of digital
material when you have information
encoded in some way and the archive and
the user has a question of how much how
close do I want to come to the
originators experience of working with
this material and so if I have something
that's encoded in a widely deployed
textual format so I can read the content
and I may not be using the application
that was used to create it but I can
still read it if it's in anything like
the American Standard Code for
information interchange from sprite 19
late 1960s or UTF 7 or ETF 8 so I can
get the informational value from
something and using a completely
different bit of software how close do I
want to come to the originators
experience do I want to use the precise
version of the software they used to
create it running on the precise version
of the operating system running on the
hardware and or something less than that
and those choices and very much depend
on
context of use that you have of the
material and the archivists making
decisions about essentially how far am I
going to go which is really a question
of how deep in your pockets because the
amount of money that you could spend is
one of those how long is a piece of
string type questions now I think it
makes some really interesting questions
of historians how much of the context do
you need to be able to ask an answer
good historical questions about this
material and I know is there kind of as
an amateur keeper of vintage computers
it does make a difference when you open
the file hard that is 35 years old in
just in terms of the whole experience of
working with that object now this is
it's it's very kind of complex territory
and I think we need much more engagement
by historians using our digital
collections and then telling us how much
of this do they need us to worry about
in the archive because for sure we can
we can mitigate the digital preservation
race but it's not obvious to what limits
we need to go in terms of recreating the
experience we know the experience of
hardware and software combined as a
really big bearing on the total context
of the Creator when they created the
object
it's like lots of question marks and
that goes back to what you were saying
about the reading room so does the
artists have a responsibility to
recreate the experience of opening
something on that hardware and we were
talking about literary archives I went
to the University of Sussex I spoke to
their person who looks after digital
preservation and made
a lot of digital literary archives and
she was saying do we keep all of the
drafts do we keep every version of a
text because if you were looking at the
king of books are kind you would care
about her first draft but with a current
or they might just give you one
manuscript but if you did a disk image
of what we've saved on their hard drive
you might be able to discover or order
you will be able to discover old
versions but you need their consent to
archive those or there's lots of
interesting questions there and there
might be different formats there's all
sorts of
he sees what one wants to see and I
believe very few architects actually
draw now but I'm particularly interested
in it and I think historically there was
often a pride or perhaps even some power
as well associated with having one's
drawings in a collection and I wonder in
your travels how you value the
sparseness or the frequency now with
which you would value either financially
or culturally analog drawings well given
that the majority of our collection is
still analog we we very much value that
and it's interesting you say about you
know architects still actually hand
drawing and so on I mean it that there
has been it's interesting that there's
been is sort of kind of moved back I
think to hand roaring we're noticing
that with the sort of more contemporary
practices that we're potentially
approaching for for donations
we're always there's always going to be
a lot of you know digital born digital
material but we're always interested in
having examples of of the analog of the
hand drawing because it just says so
much about the individual and the
process as well so for us it's it's
still
was going through some drawings
printouts from team as stars who were
doing a project in Saudi Arabia
I was visiting another office but I came
across him I thought I recognized you
and he was going through a ones and
redlining the and as it were that print
the animal it was covered coming out of
digital teams and it was a sort of a nod
to you a little bit of sort of
confidence if you like it takes a little
bit of big drawing to see a detail that
somebody might not have seen on a screen
and I'm Deanna taught about that I'll
print anything everything because I
don't kind of trust myself and and John
was checking every damn section of
detail so this thing came out right and
it did and it couldn't have been a good
charlie which is where we're not for his
eyes and experience from the 60s till
now
don't know if it's relevant but at the
council the internal departments at work
for the County Council often use
physical printed copies of older things
like plans or things to do with highways
and they annotate them in great detail
and then that becomes valuable because
of their annotations over time and we
have to chase them to archive those
because to them it's just working
scruffy thing but to UNH's its years and
years of history through physical
annotation I think you're right we have
example exhaust of that sort of thing
working drawings where you've got the
annotations and it's there recording
that thought process and as well as the
process through the practice different
people signing off and that whole how
the project's evolved basically comes
comes into being so so yeah for me the
hard copy just gives you
what you see is what we get really so
there's no no issues with it and and
it's it's we have it there it's
something physical and I mean I was
using example of you know we have over
300 rings in the collection you know
there are over 500 years old the digital
material if there was equivalent they
just wouldn't have lasted you wouldn't
be able to access them we still have
these drawings from 1550 okay they'd be
well looked after so there is that
element of preservation it seemed really
important so could you say saying about
the one our is that our use of computers
has led to a profusion of us producing
things on paper with annotations so
certainly looking at government records
the amount of paper they're paper
records goes up with these abduction of
computers and I'm sure it's I mean is
because you can suddenly produce it
several copies quickly and easily and
then scribble on them and now suddenly
you've got a whole bunch of paper
records very interesting how our use of
tools impacts through
unexpected it's quite interesting in the
film the main kind of interference of
digital so using filters and AI
technology to create software that will
automatically remove all their warts and
all of like a film I think there was an
instance I got told I'm not really sure
it was but the software had been
developed to identify scratches on the
frame and remove them but it was a
particular film which was shot at the
beach and all the seagulls have been
removed with his software perceive that
was a scratch on the frame so going back
to the original is very important you
know obviously this interference it's a
crew that in Hollywood's so screen are
closed so these are based in Custer
where I work and one of my police it
there was saying that they still even if
it's recorded in digital they'll archive
it on film he would think so expensive
productions they're still pretty good
preservation it's better than any of the
forms of physical media that we have
that perhaps we're always trying to get
the digital to just mimic what the
physical was doing when actually should
be doing something different all
together I thought one of the greatest
examples actually was a czar Hadid
exhibition and the serpentine gallery
where you had the physical paintings
there but the VR allowed you to actually
inhabit the space of the paintings which
was a totally new experience like I
think I've been to many as I Heidi do
exhibitions over the course of my career
but I really love I thought the VR thing
was just a fundamentally new way to
experience it and I think that all the
points you made were really trying to I
think for me helping me question how
could we see the digital is not just a
way to kind of digitize the physical but
it provides a supplement or something a
new way of reading that content which I
think really exciting to think about
what that might be just to kind of add
on a little bit I'm just curious
you archiving BIM because that's what we
archive in the archive team is more
JPEGs and tips and videos because that's
what the system allows us to do so
openness and does not cater for cut or
any other formats when you speak to the
IT team they tell you that yes
everything is archives because they move
everything to afford to a server called
archive
so that a project that might be dead I
was not going forward those files didn't
transfer we don't throw anything away
it's just copied onto that archive
server and they say yes but you can have
you can find anything but so the
preservation of digital files as we were
talking about unfortunately is not
really taken that seriously our office
at the moment so the files are
transferred and hopefully we can still
open them and archive them but to have a
proper system in place for CAD files or
BIM files or I don't think we are there
yet so I'm gonna speak up as a computer
scientist on the whole IT people do not
get archiving right they don't really
don't like don't understand the
difference between backup and
preservation preservation is nothing
like that and crucially they don't get
context which drives me how do you know
what this is evidential value of
archival context is hugely important and
no you don't get back just by slinging
some stuff on us so that's one of the
things that all digital archivists with
the computer science background analog
archivist we all struggle with our IT
friends and colleagues fee for all of
their knowledge and skills and missing
on some really basic archival concepts
that we all take for granted that they
don't quite register and the vocabulary
that's used around certain bits of
software that talk about archiving when
the software doing those no damn such
thin means that
up or battle but fight it we will look
anymore
I think questions is probably the place
to end with a call for fight the fight
so thank you very much really
[Applause]
