the mTEC annual keynote lecture I'm very
pleased and rather proud that is
Phillipe tonight I've known about his
work and followed it for a number of
years he has a number of impressive
titles professor oh boy
so forth but I think the most impressive
thing is the work that he's doing and
the ambition that he has to bring this
research world to construction
fabrication and to do it in a way that
sort of warms my heart to develop kind
of open source methods and discussions
that are common and addressing to all of
all of us as architects and people who
want to make structures his specialism
is on shelves but I think his expertise
come as a far wider area we were very
privileged to have him in the jury this
afternoon for him tech and I think he's
very knowledgeable about history of
architecture I can see some of the
slides that are coming up so I think
he's just the way the historical figure
on my compare him to is a young Renzo
Piano and I was fortunate enough to know
many years ago as someone who combines
the sensibilities of an engineer and
maker and the proper date so please join
me in welcoming fili
thanks a lot Mike for the very nice
introduction but more importantly for
the invitation this afternoon was
amazing so congratulations to all the M
Tech students and also their tutors
those who just came in and didn't see
any of the magic that I saw this
afternoon this probably doesn't make
sense at all but this was a very very
inspiring and exciting afternoon so
thanks a lot for the invitation it's
also special for me to be here because
it's almost on the day five years ago
that I gave a lecture here last and this
was this had changed a lot of things for
me as well today in the next three hours
now that's what the number of slides
suggest that I will entertain you for
three hours but I will try to share my
excitement on rediscovering things that
we somehow have forgotten and I'll try
on sharing a little bit are our voyage
to kind of hopefully also entice you to
look back a little bit more often and to
try to reinvent by looking at the path
by learning from the master-builders
this for me started and for those of you
who have seen already perhaps the
lecture of mine this is always the first
slide because this is when my life
really changed I went to MIT to do
high-tech things I ended up working with
John ochsendorf on assessing these
beautiful structures you're looking at
the fan walls of King's College at
University of Cambridge amazingly
beautiful but more importantly they they
are unreinforced masonry large pieces of
stones that are kept together in
equilibrium and they have been standing
for five more than 500 years for a span
of 13 metres the stone slabs have only
10 centimeters at mid span and that goes
to 15 centimeters and these numbers are
actually proportionally equivalent to an
actual and so this to me was extremely
fascinating to try to actually
understand how these structures were
still standing and
how we could also take advantage of
these this knowledge that we somehow
forgot I just have a few framing slides
because I find it important to explain
where we come from that this is not just
computational magic but this is based on
on kind of some principles and an
important one is these are maybe two
extreme ways to look at structures if
you if you have a beam for example in
bending then or on modern material then
you would like to try to understand what
can the material what is a material
capacity and then stresses are important
and another way to look at these
structures is actually to try to look at
a good form stability and that is what
these master builders had to do because
their material system was unforgiving
there was no reinforcements to keep
things together so these stones had to
be balanced in space and be able to
stand elaborate e of loading cases
luckily for them actually what we look
at at the left is what we are being
taught nowadays in engineering and most
schools that is that is actually two
dimension things modern materials that
we push to the limits but what we have
forgotten is actually how to discover
good structural form and and if problems
are not stress problems the problems on
the left is are not scalable but if
you're actually after stability then
this is a geometrical fundamentally
problem and that is why these master
builders could build all these these
marvelous structures centuries literally
centuries before the only theory of
structures that is currently still being
taught and so that is something that we
really capitalize on and that is that is
why they could use this purport on the
right these proportional rules that if
something works then it would you could
scale this up to a certain extent and
they explored indeed stability ODEs also
true scale models because if it's not a
stress problem then a small scale model
will find
mentally act very similarly than a large
structure something that I hope that's
although here know is this very elegant
idea that Robert Hooke presented in the
in the sixteen hundreds already as hangs
the flexible line so but inverted will
stand a rigid arch so that means that if
you have a certain set of loads if you
have a system in pure tension so without
any flexure then if you freeze this
geometry and flip it and from a static
standpoint you have something that
nicely stands in compression you
probably know that for example gaudi
exploit these kind of ideas or hines
Easler and so on it's very tedious to
make this these these models these
hanging models so people developed this
kind of analog ways of actually doing
this on paper and more specifically
graphic statics and what's very elegant
about graphic statics also a technique
that is only recently coming back we're
doing our best to really bring it back
because what you're looking at is you
not only have the shape of the structure
but you also see these two diagrams on
the top they're actually a diagram of
forces and they're geometrically related
to this geometry and what's now exciting
is that you see that they're all these
lines are connected which means that
that actually signifies that the
structure is an equilibrium and more
importantly because they represent force
equilibrium you can just measure these
elements and so that is also a technique
that we look back to because until until
the start of the 20th century designers
actually were not just designing a form
and then trying to see if it stands or
not they actually had these graphical
methods famous Gustave Eiffel or Brunel
or many great designers of that time
actually were looking at form and forces
at the same time through these
geometrically connected diagrams so that
is if we for example compare 86 and 88
you see that 88 is a more shallow
structure so the force has become bigger
which is very clear
in the diagram I didn't teach you
graphic settings at all but I said that
you can just measure the lengths and 4
so the shadow are a structure for the
same loading case which is the deeper
structure 86 has smaller forces so that
if something that is kind of obvious is
a relation between the depth of the
structure and the magnitude of forces
but now you can start to do this for all
members and start to really
geometrically actually optimize your
structural form from my doctorate with
John ochsendorf at MIT I extended this
to start to discuss cover also
three-dimensional forms and the same
ideas the same clarity that actually for
example on the left no 10 on the bottom
that this note is in equilibrium is
because we have a polygon of forces or
vector forces that are closed and you
see that the entire diagram is closed so
what's important about this sorry to be
a little bit theoretical but I want to
give you this base because this is what
is behind everything that I will show
afterwards is that we really believe
that in this world of let's call it zoo
of tools that people are not necessarily
understanding what they're doing so what
we are trying to push is really methods
that actually make a high-level
structural intuition as explicit and as
clear as possible and give this into the
hands of the designers let me try to
convince you with this this simple and
extremely boring a starting point for a
design so let's say that you have a
circular supporting grant grant plan and
you want to span spacing compression we
can obviously imagine the dome we can
maybe think a dome with an opening and
oculus in the middle like the Pantheon
well in fact there is literally an
infinite number of solutions that for in
this case the design load is the
self-weight of the show that can work in
compression only so you can go here and
the third row on the left you this but
form or the more alien-like form or the
Swiss cheese kind of situation all of
these actually could work in compression
only meaning without reinforcements or
as
we'll show you later with very humble
materials so here on the top here we see
the equilibrium form on the in the
middle you will see actually the layout
of forces this is a design decision also
so it's not that certain boundary
conditions only give you one answer as a
designer you can actually lay this out
and on the bottom you will always see
the distribution of forces and so we're
just playing this with these diagrams
these have all been generated with Rhino
volt a tool that is freely available and
that you can explore you see that you
actually with redistributing forces and
strategically actually telling the
forces where you want them to go that
you have this clarity as designer to
really explore all these different
solutions so for example the one here on
the left you see that you need to
attract quite a lot more force to have
these ridges and these ribs occur into a
structure and so visually you start to
be able to connect 3d geometry to
actually what happens internally in the
structure let's see what we can do with
this so again going back to the past we
I am fascinated by using traditional or
materials in in novel ways and for
example here the beautiful this is a top
view of Westminster Abbey and I will
walk you through an example where we use
modern interpretations of stairwell to
me which means how to cut up a stone
vault and make it stand in 3d one thing
before going to the example where I
again want to go back to the knowledge
of the past is that this pattern is not
only beautiful it also actually is in
line with what the structure needs so
the cuts are as perpendicular to the
force flow as possible not to have
obvious sliding the cuts are also such
that they could be very precisely built
by the masons of fabrication is
explicitly part of this and also
construction that it's manageable inside
maybe I'm over stressing this but there
is so much knowledge in the logic of
hardest
were done that now we can still I think
learn a lot from so a first project
started doing my PhD almost yeah I don't
remember how many years ago that is but
doesn't shoot I always say this is an
eight year collaboration but is yeah
this is this specific project started in
2010 but the collaboration already
started earlier and I will emphasize
later why that is important that that
this goes back ten to even almost 12
years so we had an opportunity to build
to build one of these crazy stone shells
in Austin Texas and so we started to
design and I want I was inspired by this
beautiful shells of Heian Caesar
building in concrete or these very
expressive tons of structures by FRA
otro and so we tried to to do this in a
masonry show this was a proposal for an
amphitheater all exciting space in
Austin Texas it was the first show that
we that we built and it stayed at this
scale but as I said fundamentally this
kind of problem is the same and so we do
have a a real structure of 860 pieces
that nicely comes together so we test
also how to dissenter the shell and so
on so here's on first shapes that we
showed it's it's exciting to see it
stand without any glue all the pieces
are complex and then because it was
meant to be shipped to an exhibition we
made this movie to clarify that this was
really standing without glue this is
equivalent to Godzilla jumping on one
leg on the edge of your shell so no
worries this might not happen too too
soon but what you also can appreciate is
that the capacity of these structures to
actually adapt to very extreme kind of
boundary conditions this was very early
on in our work and you see a very
beautiful collapse there is a
there is a problem with this collapse
that local problem propagates globally
so that is typically not a good idea you
want to kill only a part of the people
and so that the rest can go out and so
on so now we know how to do this but
this was at the time where we were very
happy that Patrick Schumacher invited us
to their shell exhibition in the 2012
Venice Biennale we were in a little
corner next to Frei Otto and Heinz
Easter and so on very humbling but
what's why I showed this now as an
introduction is because finally in our
four years later we had to chance in
exactly the same room at the Venice
Biennale to scale this shell up by by 20
and that was this our Bandido fault that
we did together indeed with our
long-term collaborators the Escobedo
group out of Austin Texas so what you're
looking at is a capstone shell out of
399 limestone pieces that are held in
space without any connection any
connector any glue any reinforcement so
this is really geometry at its best at
its purest for those of you who know the
the Arsenal building of the Biennale
it's a protected site so you cannot
touch anything that meant that we that's
why we had these very manly supports
that spread the stresses over and as
wide area as possible and then I will
come back to this but to get the
efficiency of a compression shell you
need to really control the boundary
conditions because you have the trust
that you need to absorb and so since we
couldn't anchor anything we had this
system of tension ties also actually
educating the visitor how this worked so
399 cuts limestone blocks no mortar or
reinforcement up to 16 meter spans and
the minimum thickness 85% of the shell
was 5 centimeters in thickness so that
means that actually if we compare this
to the eggshell that actually 85% of our
shell is only a third of the thickness
proportionally of the actual if you
think that this already sounds fairly
ridiculous
maybe the rest
the next is also quite stupid we had
only five months to do the design the
engineering the convincing of the
Italians that we were not entirely crazy
fabrication and construction of course
as academics with a lot of papers on
this topic we were very confident with
our digital chain and stream that we
could handle this with no issue
whatsoever honestly I think you need to
start with comments and sketching that
here I at least have a good starting
point and then we do digital sketchy
this is unit using Rhino fault again
that we really share and make available
and then Rhino volt pro as we call it
internally it's now also made available
through our new computational framework
we use them really to define the refine
the geometries we need to understand
when the material gets in trouble that's
why this five centimeter came from like
when we have an eccentricity in the
force when would years our stones start
to fall and then we use extremely
non-traditional methods this is discrete
elements modeling to actually fully
understand the behavior of them of the
of the the shell there was I can admit
there was a fair amount of skepticism by
our Italian colleagues and they made us
work for this project we had to do all
kinds of differential settlements of the
support we had to do a full seismic
analysis and so on and because this took
so long diskin vinson we had only one
month left of the fabric for the
fabrication if he would have done it
like this very sophisticated for
beautiful sculptures we would have ended
up two and a half years later so
hopefully we would have gotten an
invitation for the next order the one
after that of the Biennale that was
obviously not an option so we use some
more advanced methods faster methods to
cut the stone here this is a diamond
wire as also a hot wire cutter for
adults there is this multi actually
access
a CNC blades and so on and so how did we
get down from two and a half years to
justice one month a first step that we
did is we D we decided you lose a lot of
time and opportunities for challenges
with tolerances when you're moving
pieces when you're milling something so
step number one in the optimization was
we can never move or touch the blank so
the blank so that the starting piece
will never be moved a second step is
using these five axis plates is to make
all the interfaces of planar cuts so
that was also a very big step this
really cuts like butter true through the
stone that also has a replication you
will see in the aesthetic of the shell
that if you know something about
tessellations if you have a planer
outside and all your faces are convex
that means that you're actually four in
the negative double curved parts you
would have these bowtie geometries that
would not be compatible with a fast way
of cutting so that is the reason
actually that the shell looked faceted
on the outside it was directly driving
these hard geometrical constraints that
we had to put in in order to reduce the
time from two-and-a-half years to just
one month another step that we did is
that when you mill a geometry you start
with a rough a rough pass and then you
go finer and finer and finer until you
for example polish at the end so here we
decided to describe the interior
geometry of the shell just with not even
a rough pass but a rough pass where we
jumped one centimeter per cut so that
means with just a few lines that were
extremely fast to be cut we then had a
description of the inside geometry and
then these could be these fins could be
simply being hammered away this was
Hector one guy was assigned to hammer
them away all as equal as possible all
right so this would have been beautiful
but then there is also the reality that
of course you're working with big stones
big blades that vibrate and so on and we
calculated that we needed in overall
Gian
the birthstone an accuracy of 0.4
millimeters because we didn't want to
add any mortar we didn't want to to be
not as pure as we could have been and so
that's why we develop these custom
profiling tools that actually then shave
off these last millimeters to really be
on top we also included this six
millimeter in radius little registration
mark this was a necessity first and
foremost because you see that through
this optimization of the geometry we
lost a reference of our inside surface
this was unpredictable and so this
registration mark helped masons to
actually know how to align locally the
stones this of course becomes directly
critical where the section is only five
centimeters right it's very important to
be rightly aligned and then of course
from a structural standpoint this shear
key then gave us all the safety all the
the the confidence that we would have
enough friction at any interface so that
we would not have a local failure of
sliding failure still this was
absolutely the first time that such a
thing was done so with our partners in
Austin we did a full pre pre assembly
and this was also to catch potential
errors as early as possible so during
the cutting when they were doing two
nights or 20 hours a day of cutting of
stones we were actually starting to do
the test assembly and learning to make
sure that we would be ready when being
on site in Venice and in fact we changed
the logic of how we described because
the describe the geometry of the stones
after Row three because we noticed that
we could make it even more efficient
than even more precise that's maybe
another kind of interesting detail the
pressure was on because the fabricators
the builders had never even seen the
geometry this work came all from our
model and we sent directly the
appropriate G code to the machine so
this was a nice surprise that this came
together so there it is in Austin Texas
so it it it nicely all locked together
and
very urgent everything got shipped to
Venice and that allowed the same team of
expert masons to then nicely bring
everything together here I also just
really want to emphasize that these may
be theoretical or academic digital
chains are possible to a certain extent
they open the design space they open the
possibilities but at the end of the day
I really believe that it's the crafts
that's the person that is putting these
things together that really makes it
happen because every stone was slightly
kind of touched and shaped to really
make sure that they are razorblade tight
and fit so this is the Escobedo crew
bringing all of this together and then
cleaning up things maybe you will
recognize an early visitor who who
probably was thinking damn I wish I was
on this team no sir that's true and then
when we just decentered we had a vein of
doing his pass and he just lost it a
little bit and when someone said you
should look from the top he
misunderstood and started climbing the
shell rather than looking from the from
from the mezzanine level which which it
was designed for but since it literally
just came down the scaffolding that
could have been any stone loose and what
what not but as you know this Pritzker
Prize winner is still alive so how
luxury it is this went well this movie
kind of summarizes the entire process
and also the different teams there we go
so the design was done by my team and
the fabrication optimization the block
research group at ETH here we make a
point by showing that a very big part
was indeed done with these tools that we
share Rhino fault and all these other
computational methods and you see the
redistribution of forces actually allows
you to very carefully sculpt the
geometry so that it satisfies what you
need we take the dominant force flow to
then take this as an input
basically then do the optimization that
I described earlier on all the stones
and then maybe something that I haven't
said is that the cutting pattern was
globally aligned to follow the force
flow so that you had that other level of
legibility to the stones so these are
the 399 bounding boxes that then were
grouped into 56 blanks that were cut the
fabrication was done with our long-term
partners in in Texas and we used a soft
limestone that doesn't have a lot of
natural flaws that is easy to work to
really get there and very efficiently we
couldn't optimize this process you see
here in deeds that the blank will never
be never be moved this was an early one
where we started with the the rough cuts
and then this is Hector and then these
few passes with his custom profiling
tools to really hit the spot the test
assembly to make sure that everything
comes together this is this was David
Escobedo and here you see from below
that actually these pieces very
carefully come together the creating
what's actually what was kind of
interesting in this project is that it's
kind of easier and cheaper to ship from
Austin Texas to Venice then from Venice
to Venice because then you land in a
totally miraculous world of loss of
control and all your 150 crates need to
go in little barges in between the
tourists and make their way to the
Biennale site which of course makes for
this beautiful footage then it's not
over yet then you have these all these
little vehicles and expert people that
bring all your stuff inside so here we
then started to assemble you'll also see
this lightweight jib cranes that were
attached to the scaffolding this is
Frank and here this maybe is important
to point out of course this male/female
registration doesn't work for the last
stones going in so we had these key
stone rows that really locked a geometry
and that were entirely neutral otherwise
they would not slide in the only
registration that we had was all the
corners were measured with five
coordinated total stations from the
outside and then locally the hints of
the grooves plus these wooden shims were
used to basically position all the older
stones so Dehradun came back together in
just two and a half weeks the D
centering is important to be as even as
possible otherwise its equivalent to
applying a very large asymmetric load
and we actually had a very low-tech way
to know where the shell was already
standing there where the wooden shims
were falling out that is basically where
the shell was already acting and where
does the the scaffold was no longer
supporting we you saw maybe it's alive
because we called it the armadillo fault
it's an Texas native and it also looks
like the outside skin perhaps of an
armadillo but so it was it to be an ally
for five five or six months what I
really liked about the the project was
also the response that we got to the
aesthetics but what I am proud of is
that the aesthetics was entirely driven
by actually an interesting combination
of constraints of course we celebrated
this but that allowed us really to to do
something unique and to do it and to get
it done in a record time and so here you
see also the the effect of the globally
aligned cutting pattern that follows the
force flow here I want to pass just
briefly my research group was obviously
quite excited to be part of this but
they are in our team to do research so
I'm very thankful
half of my research group didn't
couldn't do any research for more than
half a year and the engineering was done
by my our excuse of a firm ODB
particularly by our partner at
University of Cambridge machida young
and then the Escobedo crew and there may
be you might be wondering why do you
build something in stone in the land of
stone by Americans how does that make
sense and that is where I want to come
back to the many years of over ten years
of experience of working together in
order to pull this off there had to be
mutual trust the Builder had to be
certain that if he went all the way all
this extraordinary effort that's that it
would not collapse so and then the other
way around we would need to be we needed
to trust them that that this would work
out and many of the things many of these
optimization steps I now present them as
maybe obvious or simple but they were
really informed on all these years of
working together you cannot only vault
an arching compression but you can also
balance and stack and do all kinds of
things and so we also do researching
going to the next level and so here you
see that if you disguise the CCTV tower
in a certain way it could be in masonry
or here the thing that looks perhaps
like something that was in one of the
parks here so what's exciting about this
is that most of the things that you see
or that you've seen from us is a little
offset or translation of an efficient
solution but by actually smartly
discretizing a structure you can take
advantage of the masonry model for
example to have very simple connections
or to build in stable sections during
assembly and so on a project that we
were lucky to work on a very important
project for John ochsendorf was the MIT
Collier memorial a memorial for an
officer that was shot after the Boston
bombings and this was the design intent
this was the proposal by MIT Union the
architect and this was a monolithic kind
of representing an abstract hand with
the cavity carvings to the hand for the
openness and then the
the carved out piece for the emptiness
or the the missing of the person but
then looking at this in early design
sketches they actually accepted to look
at this as an unreinforced cut stone
vault and so that actually added to it
we did really extensive assessment to
also explain project there we come again
with our models this is John explaining
meeting and her team is he will tilt
this to 45 degrees which is quite
aesthetically equivalent big big loads
that compares to an earthquake this is
Mathew DeYoung on the left and then
there's the reality that the local
engineer of records used linear elastic
models to basically say that all of that
would not work this project happened
before the armadillo evolved so we lost
the battle half
it stood fully unreinforced for just a
couple of days here also interesting
about this project is that we started
actually against gravity we started in
the middle and every you went outside
because if you look at this structure
it's actually a very flat shallow fault
and these shallow walls are extremely
sensitive to support displacements and
so we start there where the shell needs
to be extremely precise and we pushed
the tolerances to the outside these are
only 32 pieces of 30 plus tons pieces of
granite but it's it's nicely standing
there it is in principle and
unreinforced structure but there is a
few pins that will hold some of these
things together if you are in Boston you
absolutely have to go by it's a
beautiful little little memorial I like
that it's standing next to the Frank
Gehry building that is maybe you hurt is
a very expensive lawsuit and leakage and
things and all all of that everywhere so
I'm sure that it will not stand
thousands of years like our beautiful
little arch
and the bottom alright so learning from
the past we not only do this to do to
explore exciting form and to do
expressive form but also to try to try
to something that I said that if you
follow these compression forms then the
stresses are very low which means that
you can use very simple materials so
I'll show you some examples of tile
faulting this is a technique where you
use a lightweight tile to build in
stable sections without needing any
formwork from below
that works because the first layer then
serves as a lost stay in place foam work
for the shell for the build up of
structural depth on top beautiful
examples by the Spanish emigrants Costa
Vino's in New York like here at this
Queensborough bridge market or probably
you've seen the oyster bar in Grand
Central Terminal in New York beautiful
example I want to highlight again that
this pattern is actually not decoration
it's one of the layers that build up the
structural depth typically you have
three layers of unreinforced masonry and
again these large shells were built
without the need of any forward from
below so a first translation was
actually to apply this in a context
where we have a lot of Labor but we
cannot afford a lot of engineered
materials so we translated the
traditional ceramic tile to Seoul Press
style I was lucky to be able to be part
of this team during my my my PhD still
designed by Peter Ridge architects and
John ochsendorf and Michael Ramage at
the key role in translating all of this
and going on-site so this was in mapping
good way international national park a
very remote site that was why part of
the brief was that actually it didn't
make sense there was also no budget to
bring in all the typical made materials
we work with so here then making these
compressed aisles I expected many of you
have seen this project or similar
projects but I like to show it because I
like the anecdote that goes together
with a happy women on the right the top
right and that has to do with the fact
that these are soil press
these styles are designed to take only
to megapascals in compression for those
of you who don't know what that means
that is peanuts it's really not a lot in
compression but more interestingly if
you hold the tiles that are about 25
centimeters on one end they just break
in bending so they have no bending
capacity whatsoever and that is indeed
why the women were carrying the tiles
because the first week was a disaster
with the brutal man breaking more than
half of the tiles by the time they
arrived on site this is apparently a
true anecdote I heard it from James
Bellamy our Kiwi Mason this is very
traditional tile vaulting this works
when you have nice boundary conditions
to work off so of course for these
boundary conditions you need support and
then you see the widest is faceting
mortar all the timber that you see is
actually just guide work it's there to
make sure that we trace this this that
we get the geometry right and then you
see once you can you can directly start
building up the structural depths with
the other layers so here a summary of
that and remembering how weak these
studs are to the right I think that
picture really makes the point that if
you get the geometry right then it's
really not about stresses you can really
use locally sourced materials very
efficiently in this case in an art form
and that is stable enough for the next
person to start to lay the other bricks
and even to walk on it and so on another
thing that you see in this image is this
black line that it's the tension dye
that connects the two edge conditions
the difference between a curved beam a
curved form and an arch the beam if you
don't support it will spread out and
will immediately crack the arch why it's
so efficient is because you support the
end conditions so that is also obviously
something that you can't forget but
exciting about this project with very
humble means local resources both human
and materials we realized a very
beautiful solution I can only take the
credit of doing the assessment I think
the detailing is beautiful and beautiful
integration in the landscape main scale
that was of course Peter rich architects
and his team main spans were 18 meters
so using just compressed dirt so after
that I took the opportunity as first
project at ETH to start to address this
this is the current low-cost housing
situation in Ethiopia there's nothing
low-cost about this it just happens to
be what is left after subsidy if
low-cost and the reason that this is not
low-cost is because they built like us
they built with concrete with steel all
materials that I have to import it or
that they are very recently starting to
produce but only in sufficient amounts
so can we learn again from these cost
vinhos and their floor systems and just
quickly another kind of mini lesson in
between an arch is a very good form for
a particular loading case but it's a
very bad form for here for example I
have a point load and that is when you
have a single curvature arch or a barrel
vault you need to for example true
stiffeners locally increase the
structural depth so that you can find
these compressive lines that's safe we
go in compression to the support if you
then add this tension ties then you
basically have a lightweight version of
a beam so that is exactly what we have
done here so we trained the locals in
Ethiopia and then we had this system we
stabilized it with a lightweight
volcanic rock and then this is how it
looked the stair we were not responsible
to for that but I'm happy that they paid
attention that the arch maybe is a good
idea but why I show this project is that
this project looks ridiculously boring
it looks like a box and that was exactly
the point it was designed by an
Ethiopian colleagues so actually a box
is concrete e is modern that is what I
all want but what's special about this
box is that 90% of these boxes is local
locally sourced
soil
the 10% is in the h-beams of course
right because you want to really control
the trust of the floors and the
important part is that this unit which
is five by eight meters two stories cost
3,500 euros entirely finished which
means around 40 euros per square metre
for the entire construction constant so
that is what it means to actually get
the geometry right so to get strength
through geometry rather than too much
material capacity that and also let
stood a very surprising call by Lord
foster to collaborate or to help design
and engineer and build an infrastructure
piece that would bring kind of an image
to this drone port amazing draw
important concept that's probably all of
you have heard of and then we had a
weird situation that next to this crazy
stone vault we also had to realize this
prototype which used also saw press
tiles built here on site the challenge
here is actually not the geometry
necessarily you might appreciate that
it's more smooth than what we had before
so we applied more advanced methods to
actually have a have a more happy shell
but the big challenge was the one in the
middle because the challenge that Norman
Foster and his team gave us is can you
develop a kit of parts a system that you
can safely send to all over Africa that
you don't each time need to engineer the
shell sent an expert crew to make it
happen so can you embed can you make it
as lightweight as possible and can you
embed all the robustness of the geometry
in this kit of part and I can happily
say that we absolutely are not there yet
because it's very challenging to develop
something that you can freely deploy and
where everything is inherent and
understood in this process there is an
advantage to work with such an important
architect that is that the mayor of
Venice actually allowed this pavilion to
be
permanently or at least for the next the
next five years so that is very nice so
you will be able to see it next time
again alright so maybe now just to make
the point we are together with good
colleague dill cable we had the
opportunity to actually we were invited
based on these African projects and in
Africa you have a lot of soil a lot of
labor available how can we translate
that concept and to really resonate in
New York well in New York you have a lot
of waste so maybe like our buddy Wally
we can start to compact our waste and
start to make building materials out of
that so here you see this pavilion that
we built our it was only there for three
days so we wanted to make sure that
nothing was wasted we used we found this
material this is recycled tetrapack so
it just heated and compressed with no
additives this is one tenth of the
strength of timber but more
interestingly one hundredth of its
elasticity materials that means that
it's totally flimsy it's really not
meant as a structural material that is
typically what you need to say to get me
excited to get on board so okay so here
a summary of of the project this was
only two two and a half months of
development fabrication assembly I
wonder why I could actually always get
these ridiculous deadlines but anyway so
there it is so we had to resort I don't
like it to grasshopper but yeah there we
go
that allowed us and to assemble this why
did we do it as an arch because we the
key constraint can we assemble it on
this extremely expensive sites that we
only have budget to rent for two days
before the opening can we assemble this
with obviously dirt cheap student labor
and so there we use
we used the the the idea of the food
wars as something that could nicely
self-control each other and we as I said
it was only there for three days so we
didn't want to leave any waste and so
these wrapping straps are actually the
only connectors we didn't need any glue
or nails or something like that
we had a little bit of fun the orange is
orange juice the blue is milk in the
u.s. they drink wine out of carton so
the other side was black those were wine
cartons and anyway sorry I shouldn't say
all this inappropriately
not when I'm being taped so cut but
anyway what was important here to show
was actually with extreme tight budget
using a weak material that absolutely
doesn't make sense can we build
something safe perhaps modern Cathedral
of waste the same colleague likes to
trigger me their table is that I have an
even weaker material for you can we do
something in mycelium mycelium is very
popular can we do something structural
out of mycelium so for that I thought
I'm being I'm getting a little bit
annoyed to be called the arch guy can we
show that there is other forms that can
also really be controlled in
compression-only for that we went back
to the past again and this is a paper
from 1864 from Rankin in fact only the
top part is the actual paper so pretty
cool that in the 1800's your papers only
had to be three sentences I can promise
you that these three sentences are
really dense but what ranking was
actually saying is that there is a three
dimensional equivalent of graphic
statics that if you have on the right a
note in equilibrium there is a force
polygon in 3d where all the faces are
orthogonal to the members in the in the
in the element that now the cool thing
is is that the area of the faces are the
magnitude of forces so again we
translated a very complex form finding
or structural concept into an absolute
geometrically
the designers love to work with so now
we have basically by aggregation of
polygons in equilibrium we can this this
we can discover three structures with
uneven stress distributions we can start
to aggregate all kinds of things to
basically discover forms like
multi-layer shells that are in pure
compression and you see that they're
just a combination of these equilibrium
shades so this we did for this micro
tree installation I'm not taking this as
serious as other things that we do but
the point was here again for a material
that had only do you remember the two
mega pascals for the the the tiles I
said that those were peanuts this
material can take 0.2 mega pascals in
compression so that made it even more
stupid and this is actually a fully
spacial three-dimensional version of an
arch actually and what we did is we
actually put this table on top and we
priests post-tensioned the structures so
that we had this three dimensional force
flow that we controlled that we
discovered through 3d graphic statics
that stood in equilibrium actually maybe
I will skip this movie to move on
alright so at a certain point I was
criticized by my colleagues why do you
use this kind of all techniques only to
try to do better in Africa what is the
real relevance of your projects and I'm
happy that they did because the same
ideas actually indeed could also help us
why are we no longer designing like that
so going back to this little lightweight
beam that I showed here indeed if you
compare it to a typical beam taking the
same loading you save more than 70% by
actually going to a stiffened arch with
the tension tie rather than the beam one
of the reasons this is is you see that
for example you have this three and a
half four centimeters it depends where
you are of concrete cover that is only
there to protect your reinforcement for
corrosion for fire safety and so on you
see that there is much more material
that actually structurally you
absolutely don't need so if you reduce
it to that then you can develop a floor
system which is what we did that it is
entirely
unreinforced and that has this
externalized very identifiable tension
ties and that is happy that is only two
centimetres in unreinforced concrete and
we are now building a project we are
going on-site in April believe it or not
where we have five by five meter unit
floor plates that are indeed only two
centimetres of unreinforced concrete in
thickness of course this Suns entirely
ridiculous and because and I can say it
is because I am also an engineer the
engineers are the most skeptical animals
on the planet so we needed to do all
kinds of load tests and extreme measures
to really clarify that this shell works
this prototype took ten times the
required ULS which is good news and then
if you crack the floor then you actually
see its elegance and how thin it is
I'm building up towards this project
that I set another aspect that we are
showing in this project
I love shells this also shows double
that double curve curvature actually is
very good this pringle is happy carrying
500 times its self weight in a bad
loading case this is maybe not a shell
structure but this is a very large
curved concrete structure and you see
these these only four unique projects
because they need a unique budget the
unique budget goes typically to this the
formwork is extremely expensive
extremely wasteful this is arguably the
largest and most precise wooden
structure ever built in Switzerland and
it needed all these scaffolding
foundations to hold it up and it turned
into this after 28 days when the
concrete is hardened right so that is
where we jumped on to the fascination
the academic more fascination of fabric
foam work that promises to have a very
lightweight system to shape concrete so
here it is a hybrid system with the
cable net actually is the falsework so
it carries the loads and the fabric
basically allows you to cast or spray
the concrete on top so this was partly
developed
indeed Riggs PhD here on the left of
course a structural nerd you need to
stand on your first little prototypes
and surprisingly showing these kind of
things I convinced a client that we
could do this at a big scale so this is
the nest high-low project it's on the
nest building this is not designed by us
but it's kind of a physical
infrastructure that allows different
innovation units and new ideas to be
implemented and you see that here it's
may be missing a beautiful crown on top
and that is indeed where this project
will start construction in April
beyond the aesthetics what why I'm
excited about this project
okay beyond the aesthetics because maybe
you know that in Switzerland I prefer
the straight edges so I am so looking
forward to give a heart attack to all my
design colleagues at ETH is that a large
roof will be entirely built with a
flexible formwork and then the floor
system will indeed be this two
centimeter lightweight floor so if you
look at the section of the structure
this is actually the structural depths
that we have practicing architects might
say what about acoustics well the cool
thing is that and this I must say
actually we rolled into this so it's a
nice coincidence but in airplane
industry they cannot go heavy so they
use stiffness rather than mass to
acoustically dampen things and here
indeed we have not proven that we can
use the stiffness of the shell to have
an almost equivalent for the problematic
low frequencies damping of the acoustics
without having to add mass so this to me
really brings the the circle almost to a
close because this means that we don't
need to add additional materials as we
typically would need to do for
acoustical reasons this is a
collaboration also with my colleague
Josh Ritter he is using these large
surfaces of concrete that are only 2
centimeters as large active radiators to
have a low-energy heating and cooling
system so we are using waste heat from
appliances to basically have a thermal
quality
we also wanted to really show a
beautiful architectural concrete so a
visible concrete that goes from the
inside to the outside so we made sure
that there is no there are no bridges
where the glass facade is and so on and
so then to make it even more silly we
also add flexible photovoltaics on top
so that this is not this is a unit that
generates 50 percent more energy than it
needs so a nice symbiotic relation
between the structural or the
constructional innovations and then the
heating and cooling okay so this project
and really came to a point that this was
going to happen the client got a little
bit nervous and started to be skeptical
about can you pull off this ridiculous
big roof with this cable net formwork
and so on we a year ago moved into our
new building beautiful route by komatsu
Kohler what's special is that on the
bottom we have this ridiculous robotic
fabrication lab 70 meters by 17 meters
by 5 meters of free CNC space to
prototype whatever you want in robotic
fabrication so we were we took a chance
and we decided to do our prototype in
this hall so we blocked two-thirds of
the hall with a project that had
absolutely nothing to do with robotics
and this to actually do a one to one
dress rehearsal with all the partners
involved I showed this slide quickly to
clarify that we took a huge risk there
so rather than doing it in our
controlled environment we did every
single step with the partners that we do
it on-site so we trained industry we
developed it we went back and forth to
make sure that there was no more
skepticism and that we developed a
system that would be ready for
commercial applications afterward so
this is the idea is that we externally
pre-stress and this allows basically to
also keep the floor free we don't need
to build up all these formwork and so on
to work on them so here we go
the market acrux assembling this shell
you see these braces on the inside that
has to do that we
building on top of a building so we
cannot efficiently on the outside go
through tension we have not even a meter
on the outside to build our shell and we
wanted to really mimic the entire same
setup as we would do on top so we
developed this kit of parts more
specifically this was a contribution by
our architects super maneuvered a
diagram and this kit of parts maybe here
you might start the front like okay this
is a little bit academic and silly but I
want to maybe highlight that this entire
system was nicely put together in just
one week by three people and I want to
have the contrast this compared to the
months of carpentry or milling of an
equally complex formwork that would be
thrown out in a way so I think the
investment of just assembling this one
week this kit of parts really makes
sense I also like to say that BIM in
reality means this but I really like
this money shot beautiful shot by NIDA
where that really clarifies how
lightweight this system is so what we
are really achieving because what we
have is in order to carry this very thin
concrete cell nonetheless 20 tons of wet
concrete is carried by 500 kilograms of
cable net and 300 kilograms of fabric so
800 kilograms is carrying 20 tons of wet
concrete another advantage is that this
thing was assembled month so now it's in
three parts in the basement it's can be
carried by three big guys and and stitch
back together very quickly raised inside
and we will build a shelf so this will
be ready to cast again in just less than
a week time okay there is no miracle
here you cannot go from brute force kind
of a stiff stiff system to a flexible
system that is so efficient and so on
without any any tricks so what we need
to do what we needed to do is we
actually are we developed algorithms
such that we can pre-stress the cable
nut such that it has a non uniform three
camber so that under the weight of the
wet concrete it sets to
exactly the right shape in our case that
it is is important because we're being
macho about the thinness of the shell so
it really needs to be exactly there
where we need it to be okay that sounds
good
so but that has nothing to do with
reality because if you have any kind of
length difference or a mistake or your
boundary conditions are slightly
different on site the stress state of
your nut is entirely different than your
deflections will be different so we
developed with our colleagues in in in
control we developed algorithms actually
to not only predefined the priestess but
then also actually to compare the
theoretical state with a real steady
state and this is important because if
you know this that the shell is not
where it needs to be the formwork is not
where it needs to be which 100 percent
certain will not be the case then if you
look in this this situation all these
links on the outside have turnbuckles
but that accounts to about 90 trillion
combinatorial options which one is the
one that will redirect your shell and
that is the beauty of that through
automation control you can actually
narrow down to exactly the ones that you
need to tighten and that beautifully
worked then we apply the fabric so this
is how it looked from below oh I didn't
talk about dimensions so we are talking
about 10 meters by 20 meters by an
overall bounding box of seven and a half
meters this is how it looks from the top
the note we developed such that actually
the complexity of all the curvature was
reduced to very simple patches of 40 by
40 centimeters so we had all these
references with very simple connectors
that allowed us to attach this carbon
fiber reinforced carbon fiber
reinforcement this was a decision
because otherwise we couldn't get away
of the covers reason number one and can
you imagine starting to prevent all
these reinforcements in these kind of
tight geometries of course there's a lot
of concrete magic going on here that we
can allow to spray and vibrate the
concrete to have a good
on all these geometries musical
Intermezzo no that's alright so here
also the same team doing this I pause
here just for a second Tom in the green
Tom famila I call it my group with him
didn't have a life for half a year to
make this happen and Dave paya Graham is
the architect that brings all our
innovations together in this unit
alright so the concept again the layered
system we really wanted to test
everything the same as on-site to not
leave any unknowns as of course things
that we can optimize like the very
sizable edge beam but we didn't want to
innovate everything this could also be a
standard piece here this is showing all
the beautiful custom development with
local Swiss partners with fabrication
methods that are highly efficient so
that they can really be developed at at
a competitive price the fabric actually
maybe I'll I'll skip the fabrication
porn a bit and go to to the next stages
so here the assembly it was a painful
process of going back and forth but it
was maybe at the end worth to do it was
very expensive it took more than six
months and this had to do with a lot of
learning a steep learning curve with all
our partners but everyone now involved
have signed our report that they will do
the next one in only eight weeks so that
is very exciting here the attaching of
the reinforcement here what I said you
have this nice reference very simple
very easy to assemble technique and the
pouring happened my mouth was visiting
this is my mom
it was hoping to walk around Zurich but
was stuck in this very hot day looking
at people's fraying concrete here this
beautiful concrete that you can vibrate
on all these steep areas development by
wholesome whites and then here the
decentering not everything work we
learned a lot but actually everyone is
now 100% convinced that within the
expectations of Swiss architectural
concrete so feasible concrete this will
actually work because we want to leave
this trace of how it was built we don't
want to start to paint it so here you
see in the background your master color
being squeezed in a little part of the
hole to do their robotic things we all
like each other but it's also fun to
annoy each other sometimes as well all
right
the shell is almost on the edges it goes
to three centimeters it's on average
five centimeters in thickness and it
goes to so here with the photographer on
the base you see you appreciate the
quality or maybe skip to the last part
which I also like
[Music]
not the credits but marvel style encore
so distant this dinosaur came in to take
it down which actually I recommend any
of you to destroy your building at least
once because you really learn certainly
as engineer it makes you it gives you
some confidence and yeah it didn't it
couldn't be moved and that was also not
the point it's an on site and now I'm
happy to say that we got all the funding
arranged and all the green lights and we
going on-site in in April so this is the
shell 100% concrete ready but very close
and this was done with all these
different teams this was done with one
model I like to at this point say that
our structural partners building a
yeoman cult or approach beam on steroids
and that was done with compass which is
a computational framework I cannot talk
about this too much it's entirely open
source it's and it's basically I should
also not say this but it will rend and
render grasshopper obsolete in the next
couple of years so but what's exciting
is that from the computational the novel
computational methods to the full
nonlinear assessment to the digital
fabrication everything was done through
this computational framework basically
if you're curious if you like
programming it's Buyten based and it
basically is platform also independent
so Rhino geometry is Fe geometry is
blender geometry is browser geometry and
so on and so on okay but we we never
stopped we of course are already
self-critical like you saw all the
logistics on site this is very
lightweight elegant but it's it is quite
an effort to do all these different
layers systems in the show can we even
do better and start to also integrated
reinforcements for this way we are doing
research in 3d knitting of technical
textiles what's amazing about 3d
knitting is that this is a
non-orientable surface like for example
a mobius strip and this comes out of the
knit the the machine in one go
so without any scenes this in order to
be sufficiently approximated would need
at least 16 cutting cutting patterns
right so but then we use this to make
this very lightweight technical textiles
that we then in to impregnate with
high-strength cement paste and this
gives us an extremely lightweight
complex part through bespoke
prefabrication now have a stay in place
for work that you can start to integrate
in your structure if this is maybe too
abstract we wanted to show this in a
little bridge because here we show some
other features so it's really little
it's only two and a half meters but we
will scale this up very very soon
in fact on this one we are doing an
exciting collaboration with charges
group at sardis architects the code
group
Saji will present tomorrow but in the
knitting what's very very exciting is
that you can also include for example
these sleeves where you can implement
maybe reinforcement cables or in this
case we have these splines and these
ties so that means that we can develop
what you're looking at for the two and a
half meters it will be the only support
onto which the concrete is being cast
and this weighs only 20 grams so with 20
grams we will basically cast our two and
a half meter little bridge and you see
here how easily this can be assembled
and here you also maybe appreciate the
lightness of this thing again with this
magical concrete by our colleague Robert
Fludd we we make it stiff enough so that
basically you have a stiff shell that
without any support so entirely
self-supporting you can then take this
shell to cast on top so I'm looking
forward to scale of this bridge let's
say 20 meter span and I have two of my
assistants work on site with the only
thing you need to make a 20 meter span
berridge right so this is a layered
system and in this case we of course
also used a corrugated shell to make it
stiff enough of course
but is this I admit is just a
small-scale prototype but for me is the
next layer an entire stay in place the
next step that we will do is also fully
integrate all the reinforcements into
this alright I am wrapping up right now
I wanted to quickly go back to the
Venice Biennale show everyone looked at
this one and that was kind of the point
to get people's attention but how many
stone shells that does one eat in the
world how many rich people do want it in
their gardens not that many the
relevance of this was actually to show
that you can start from constraints that
these tools that were laughed away by
engineers to be only appropriate to
teach architects a little bit of
structures can really discover exciting
things and and so on and so on so this
serves as an inspiration but also as a
as a first kind of milestone in in
showing what you can do when you get
strength through geometry and not
through material capacity it was
important that is also why we pushed it
not to have any mortar otherwise
skeptics would say it's the mortar that
keeps everything together so it's a dry
stone you cannot go but the main story
is these floors starting from these
traditional Catalan vaults we have the
soil pressed false that really
capitalized on the labor available in
and for example in a developing world
situation with local materials but then
translating this in our context labor is
very expensive and material is cheap so
here a prefabricated unit in this case
concrete we use concrete because it it
is castable 2 centimeters more than 70%
lighter than any floor we use in
concrete nowadays and we all know that
concrete is still really the dominant
material so that is an important already
milestone these prod floors are
expensive because they need a double
sided mold to make those and that is why
in our exhibition maybe you noticed also
the black one or by the end of the
exhibition copper one in the corner and
that one is entirely 3d printed so this
is using sentry
printing and this one we actually
discretized and this not only has to do
with logistics but it also has to do
again with the structural reason let's
go back to another hero of mine Robert
Meyer he built a solid and doable bridge
with three structural hinges and this is
because then even if the mountains would
move and evenly he always knows exactly
the four states in inside the structure
so he can really use this new material
at its best and we needed for this 3d
printed material that doesn't have any
tensile or bending capacity we needed to
make sure that under all loading cases
this floor would only be in compression
and no surprise by the way that my are
use graphic statics to discover this so
this is not only pragmatic logistics
this pre discretization we pre crack the
floor to tell the floor how we want it
to work not the other way around right
otherwise the form would crack
everywhere because this 3d printed weak
material again just over 2 mega Pascal's
but as weak as called dark chocolate in
bending so basically no bending capacity
again we do our famous load tests and if
you don't believe me that this held all
the codes required loadings this is half
of my group so one and a half tons of
ETH nerd standing on something that is
only 2 centimeters and has the material
capacities of dark chocolate I like to
now transition why we actually wanted to
show this at the Biennale Aravena
asked us to show our battle one of my
battle is that we are fighting against
the straitjacket of only the stress
based methods that are being taught
right now and we no longer know how to
safely design these efficient firms what
I didn't tell you about Grand Central
Terminal is that it's not only only 15
centimetres of unreinforced masonry it's
not only built without formwork but it's
also carrying the Vanderbilt hall on top
proportionally this is thinner than the
ridiculous two centimeters that we do so
that means that two to three millions of
New Yorkers are really risking their
lives every single day
go to work right this ignorant is not
new beautiful shells have been destroyed
to be replaced by beams because they
could not be analyzed can you imagine
the impact of 70% lighter on the floor
when you start to stack this in a
high-rise certainly recent research at
MIT by Catherine the wolf has shown that
for relevant spans of nine meter more
than 90% of the contribution of the
weight of a structure of a high-rise
goes to the floor plate knowing that for
really high rises the structural
component is at least three-quarters of
the full mass of the building can you
imagine the impact by just addressing by
just replacing the floor plate as I
showed a first hint with my
collaboration with our Nash looter if
you start to rather than layering all
the systems
he works in Singapore and has just shown
a project that if you reduce this by
actually not not have structure
mechanical heating all these different
things on different layers in Singapore
you have an average floor depth of a
high-rise of one and a half to two
meters so if you reduce this to 50 to 60
centimeters you get one floor for free
every two floors so you get three floors
where two floors need needed to be so
this is exciting to me that is why we
are pushing this so hard I am believing
in this floor system because we need to
do things better we need to the next
step is of course to get away from the
necessary evil the concrete the cement
to go to more natural because our
stresses are so low we can actually
bring back more humble materials and so
on and at the end of the day I'm super
excited that it also happens to be that
structural geometry is absolutely
beautiful geometry alright some blades
and self-promotion
on the left if you want to do know
anything about computation of shells on
the left but we just brought out it just
came out before Christmas so sorry that
I wasn't here before Christmas otherwise
you could have given this to your
grandma
but in beyond bending actually starts
from our exhibition at the Biennale and
and explains all the precedents the
principles and the potentials of why we
do this research and what we showed at
the Biennale with all of that and with
being thankful for your patience because
I did spend an hour and 15 minutes I
thank you for coming and I'm happy to
take any questions if there are any
thank you very much
yeah thank you guys thank you for your
presentation it was really really
inspiring I have a question though about
the armadillo vault in Venice when you I
think I missed it but you said something
about some pieces were neutral yeah how
what does that really mean and also how
does that translate into your micro tree
in insole and then the formwork that you
created in nest yeah okay that is a I'll
have to combine a lot of things that are
not related but okay no so what I meant
with neutral is that we locally have
this registration for the Maison so it's
a male-female kind of connection but
geometrically the last piece would not
slide in if that connection is there so
it's like the Keystone we had these
Keystone rows kind of lock lock that
geometry that's that's that's the only
thing about that that neutral interface
so that you don't have that that
connection that is in the way micro tree
was a little bit of a playful game so
let's not talk about micro tree too much
although what's exciting is that with
such a weak material it is still
standing they want at the exhibition to
be extended so it will be there for an
entire year with a material that is ten
times less than peanuts and then the
last thing why we do the flexible
formwork is actually to start to try to
find a way to open up again to make
exciting curved forms realistic not only
for unique projects but but for more
project because and and there I also was
self-critical with what we are doing in
the nest it's still very a lot of work
on site so it's not quite there yet even
though if you would compare it to if you
would compare it
- doing it with a Milt homework we are
already better so we are already better
off even with the work on site and so on
we check the numbers and so on but there
I really see I release III really see
almost a Holy Grail in this next layer
where this formwork is stay in place
takes care of all the reinforcements and
so on and so on so with that research we
are trying to bring back these exciting
forms so I like these forms just
aesthetically also Hines Easler Felix
comdata these are beautiful things in
certain situations but I also like them
because structural geometry is complex
geometry so this is now then when I was
talking about the floor system is that
we were almost round we were always
there we convert efficiently efficiency
at least 70% lighter we actually covered
acoustics that we don't need to add
material we have a beautiful integration
of heating and cooling and really
capitalizing on this large surface but
how will we fabricate this if it's too
expensive to fabricate then it's again
irrelevant and now what's exciting is
that in the project in nest one set of
floors we will do with the knitted
formwork so no waste whatsoever and the
other set of floors we will do with a 3d
printed stay in place solution so again
there we used new advantages of digital
fabrication to close the circle and this
to me is what makes me so excited about
in exactly in this time it's because now
digital fabrication is is getting to a
scale a construction scale so many
people are researching 3d printing are
really improving on the material science
and so on so we computation is the
methods are getting there to really be
able to control so these geometries and
so on is that
this will make a difference this
actually structural geometry will allow
us to save our planet
so that makes me super super excited so
I totally misuse your question to say
all kinds of things to say we do a lot
of tall buildings so you know lowering
the cost of of tall buildings is very
exciting and what I'm really interested
in is the notion of system integration
because once you start talk about the
floor plate because the floor plate does
more than just holding you up and you
like the stuff underneath you cool it
you heat it all that kind of stuff what
are your thoughts in that direction well
we we are showing a few first hints and
I I've fully acknowledged that that has
not been solved so that also needs to be
checked to it real real practice real
demands and so on I'm also taking this
series because soon we will have three
PhD students focusing just on the floor
- one of them will look at all the
fabrication options to really go to a
commercially acceptable waste free
digital fabrication one will look at the
engineering because I was also still a
few engineering questions to be solved
certainly when you want to apply this
for high-rise and then the last one will
actually address exactly your questions
the questions of interface right you
cannot just have this thing by itself
but there I also have to be realistic
that the only thing that for now is
maybe my job is to try to demonstrate
that at least it is worth to bring back
these structural models and techniques
and this lost knowledge of the efficient
vault and arch and and and and to do
this in in the element that that really
is the most relevant one if you can save
anything on floors that this impact is
direct right and so so there's many
questions it's not done so I
but I really believe in it and so I hope
to inspire to to do these kind of things
yeah
but thank you for your question the
questions
[Music]
[Applause]
misson in the neighborhood and I was
wondering a regarding the use of false
work farm work and how much energy is
invested into that that friend you know
were you looking into him
maybe inflatable structures yes I was
doing recently there shortly after to
human effort by my research as a
ridiculous amount but sorry that's
cheesy no currently you're maybe for
example may be referring to this thing
right so there we were pushing things
already a third of an eggshell
proportionally quite an exciting form no
safety net of reinforcement so there we
went for a very bomb how very controlled
very rigid kind of further right so but
I think formwork is kind of the key
thing when I talk to two colleagues of
mine the structural team at Foster's
Clippers bowling a go home and they all
say the same they would like to design
and be involved in many more shells but
it's not happening because it's always
the formwork the logistics of the form
the cost of the form the waste of the
fork that is the bottleneck so that is
why we showed one solution with the
pre-stressed but in the pre-stressed one
you have negative double curvatures that
it's more for candela like things
foreseen clastic shells compression
shells they're actually yes you could do
inflatables that is a similar problem
but what we are doing there is actually
we try to really crack something that
actually some students this afternoon
did a very good first pass at is
actually how to assemble a discretized
structure in stable sections and not
just a dome but really exciting forms
and why we want to do this not only to
have these forms but also to have the
box that I showed in this little
collapsing or this CCTV tower
meaning that you use an amazingly model
to be able to build in stable sections
and so on so we're trying to address it
in different ways to make very low
impact lightweight as efficient kind of
flexible systems as a foam work but also
to try to see can we get rid at all by
fork and can we be smart about how we
discretize a structure that maybe might
not look like a fault or an arch how can
we bring this together on-site and can
we use the efficiency of the masonry
model for that and I wanted to say
something else but since I forgot it
it's probably not important but thanks
for your question I want to ask for a
question about precision because you
brought this very traditional crafts
well its craftsmanship into the digital
age then you mentioned several times
that this building technique requires a
lot of precision during the fabrication
process now you bring this fabrication
technique to the underdeveloped african
community how can you guarantee the same
level of precision without those
calibration tools available yeah okay
thanks for asking that question it's a
pity that I didn't make that clear that
is also why we had these four floors I
don't believe that one solution is
appropriate everywhere so in a developed
world context you actually want to give
people work you want to engage labor
yeah but you want to do it as much with
local resources as possible and if you
engage local labor that also means that
you need to be aware that things might
not be exactly at the same standards as
you are used to so that means that also
in the design processes you include
geometrical safety factors that take
into account most likely deviations of
the perfect form but that is also why
another point is that the project with
Norman Foster that we show the prototype
in Venice for the drone port maybe you
saw that this shell has a lot of
positive double curvature so that means
actually that the stiffening scheme of
this shell is if you have a point load
it has so many paths to go to the
support and that gives it its robustness
its stiffness and for this kind of forms
if you're slightly off because you
globally have so much positive double
curvature they are much more robust so
that is a system that we do there for
the floor systems the floor are way too
shallow and that is why we have this
stiffener so the thing is that you need
to provide solutions that are relevant
for different contexts there way you can
generate a lot of positive double
curvature that is always the best
solution because that will give you the
safest job shell but in a floor system
or in a situation where you cannot trust
on the same precision that we have we
need to provide other methods so and
that is why we didn't show one floor to
be an alley but we showed four to show
that different solutions are appropriate
in different context thank you hi I
would like to ask you about embodied
energy but it water in the project so
you've been talking about efficiency and
one can tell that the different
processors have different degrees of
embodied energy have you conducted like
lifecycle analysis of the different
projects and which one is more efficient
has less embodied energy we haven't done
it ourselves because you cannot try to
do everything but there's several papers
that I have used are our examples
so both the floor system and the
defaults in in Africa so the vaults in
every beat everything
so there are attends less than a regular
structure there are thousands less than
the the stadium here for the the
Olympics a million less than no I'm
exaggerating than the bird's nest in
Beijing and so on right
but the floor there also does already
better but unfortunately and we also saw
that the researchers that decided to
compare our force there actually looked
at our
first prototype that was very clumsy use
toxic kind of milt foam and so on and so
there actually you can do much much
better with these things so I will have
to refer to my colleagues it's a
Guillaume how they're capturing the wolf
and so on and all of these are compared
they always score well because actually
the things that have most impacts or
Catron actually developed an indicator
and it's kind of an obvious one but it's
really clear to identify there's two
things that contribute the most one is
the geometry so that you get actually
that you get efficiency through the
shapes strength through geometry so the
structural form that of course reduces
the volume and then the second one that
you can innovate is of course the impact
of the material and that is why I make
this small Commons also because we
talked about it earlier it might is that
now that we have shapes that I have lost
stresses I want to get rid of the
concrete all together and go for 100%
local recycled waste materials and so on
or even grown materials if we get with
our mushrooms a little bit better than
this 0.2 mega pascals maybe we can start
to cultivate our building materials
rather than scratching the the Earth's
crust yeah so if you see that that is
the the most really the impact factor
those aspects then you can imagine that
we're doing pretty well because we are
significantly reducing the volume of the
structural material thank you yeah thank
you for the lecture I just wanted to ask
you touched a little bit their
construction sequence yeah and it you
have the like research above it but I
want to ask about the armadillo world as
I saw in a video it was a really
interesting construction sequence
because it's only directional and the
world is not only like semi-spherical so
what are the principles in which you
actually defined what is
position for the Keystone well for it is
directional because also the before we
we did quite a forward process so the
force flow was very clean and because
all the rows are aligned to the force
flow so there's a lot of kind of
iterations and looping into that but
maybe what you're hinting at is the
sequence of construction or being able
to do this without formwork so this one
actually doesn't consider that you
cannot start going in space and then it
will magically stand up so that is that
is the exciting outlook is that this
form could never be built without
formwork that's that is obvious but what
is the minimal amount of support arches
locally that suddenly allows you to
bridge the gaps and then to work indeed
on the local level of the other
components can you play with that to get
to get to the next stage and so on so
here in this case this was indeed very
pragmatic because the shape was designed
such that the force flow nicely flew
around the openings and so on so we
could progress with with um with with
the different roles we progressed
equally to keep the scaffolding as
balanced as possible and then we
basically something that I didn't say
about the Keystone is that another trick
that we did is we tried to keep
tolerances where they need it and we
would have managed perfectly if we would
have had a couple of months to build
this but we had to go faster so we
started to kind of the Escovedo team
started to not make sure that every
stone was there where it needed to be
we went until the Keystone rose and we
actually measured the gap and we cut the
Keystone's stones at the end so we
actually cut them to directly slide in
and to lock the entire geometry but that
is a shortcut that we did only to speed
up the process that would not have been
needed if we would have had the proper
amount of construction time to really
make sure that every stone is where it
is and so on so you have those many
inside stories anecdotes dirty secrets
that I can share
this but thanks for your question okay
I'd like to thank the league for all
these stuff to start them in and put a
really amazing thank you thank you
