good evening and welcome I suppose only
fair that I should introduce Rodrigo
since I was the one that saw him depart
you know he taught for the last two
years of of Rodrigo in this in this
school and well he he's exhausted my
dictionary because I look first and say
well as a teacher I think the word is
adonus so I look up the concise Oxford
Dictionary and he wasn't there so I had
to go downstairs for the small Oxford
Dictionary and the two volumes and sure
sure nothing was there so I was quite
happy but um so he was the perfect you
know the the the unit must of acidity I
don't know I suppose the the litmus test
or the or the or the pudding was last
night you know when or yesterday when we
had a dip for reunion and well one of
them is in heaven but then the rest well
one is looking after very very sick
father but the rest were here and it was
amazing absolutely amazing but you know
this is what I think that that unit
without word ago wouldn't be having this
reunion you see so he wasn't from that
point of view as a teacher as a unit
master he was very safe but then another
aspect and another word that I found I
was I wasn't too sure was Aquinas and I
look it up and the same thing the
concise one didn't I get it Oh have I
invented that or is it Spanish housing
I'm translating or something and then I
looked it over and sure enough it is but
the the meaning is not quite complete
because it was meant to be calmed
recollected and so on yes but I'm gonna
give you an instance I think it's the
only occasion I've seen in whatever it
is thirty
seven years for the eight years that
I've been teaching here we're in the
final tables you know there were about
six or seven of us there and Rodrigo it
must have been we're all very tired it
must have been already 7:30 in the
evening you know having started at 10:00
and and then he said wait a minute
this morning we saw a portfolio and we
pass a portfolio and this one he said
I'm sorry better than that one to me was
you know that economist the the quality
that every single student was going to
be judged in exactly the same manner
yeah well he was late in the evening and
we were all tired or not this morning
was so one that was just as good as this
and we passed it so yeah so the teacher
then that the architect I mean this was
quite a few 30 years ago first time I
saw a union master put his work on war
with the students I don't think I've
seen that every certainly I wouldn't see
it today I can name a few there's a room
here for you special so I think that I
wouldn't see it today but we were
actually doing the Waterloo competition
which in fact one of our students won
but I like more islands and and and
rodrigo's I think it was very subtle
obviously was what we liked but um so if
they was you know was preaching with the
example and then there was nothing else
up behind so I I do remember very
clearly was that some because he can
draw and because he can actually it's
like you know a certain age you know if
if you're still stronger than than the
youngest
you know when you have some kind of pool
over that and he was able to say things
like but you can draw it why not
I can't so why can't you but that
reminds me something that Alan said once
me and that was that some of his
drawings have this very carefully
beautifully hand-drawn you know that his
hand drawn but you know that is very
very neatly done particularly parallel
lines is it and he said no he there is a
special lock and his wrist and then that
says you know it just goes on but anyway
I never saw that the two of them worked
in the in the flatter but it's and so on
you know so the architects the teacher
the that we had the benefit here of
those of those exhibitions and the price
for drawing and price are drawings all
all the wrong corn and so on so he was
always leading from the front and then
obviously many other things you know
they the the friends a lot and friend
and so on so anyway so the AAA let him
go you know they kept me but I let him
go so it was just ridiculous you know
but anyway the A's will know for making
mistakes
so but anyway sometimes there is you
know a grassroots reaction and then they
all want to to amend you know so I hope
that the lecture tonight
is there a making amends for letting him
go right now manager has asked me to
announce that after the lecture there is
going to be some drinks so I think
they're in that room yeah so um Rodrigo
[Applause]
thanks a lot heavier this has been an
intense week for me because we met
yesterday with Xavier and the students
from unit 4 from 30 years ago so it's 30
years since I was teaching here lecture
hall look difference but not that
difference
there was no panel they're different
colors across you slides at the time not
this kind of imagery so the subject
today is also do with the issue of play
the relationship of play and
architecture and certain discussion or
argument as to what happen to this
program or the subject of play during
the modern periods of architecture right
up to about 1980s so it's a way of
reviewing from the point of view of
architecture more so than the point of
the offer of a historian we go how did
architects manage what did they see
within these subjects not being a
natural player I came to take an
interest in a subject through an
interest in terms of urban living for
play represents a particular mode of
Reverend conviviality I like to start
with this image which everyone knows
better Bruegel the elders children games
which was painted in 1560 it's quite a
fascinating painting were place
everywhere there is no particular
setting for it that's quite interesting
it is happening everywhere on the
streets and on this kind of square like
place in the foreground and the garden
and so on but there's no particular
setting built purposefully for the
activities and there are no particular
apparatus or item
built for it rather than the things that
children themselves bring to organize
particular modes of play
the issue about play in the modern
period is that works almost the reverse
that play takes place in playgrounds for
adults or children that is kind of full
of implements at hers and things to be
used for the purpose of play the title
is city of play and it alludes to the
prime setting of play the argument is
also to do with the other cities really
the place for play which is played
everywhere but that's the prime setting
of play that's the it's also a place
where this looting activity becomes
really public and convivial the question
is then how was play accommodated in the
modern city and how we're modern
playgrounds shaped if we look at
Brueghel's image we can decompose it in
to access it is so structured that we
can we can read it horizontally this
kind of panoramic of view as an image
that brings together the city and the
country so there is an urban rural
horizon inscribed within the picture and
this is interested because the
relationship of play or the the way play
interchanged
settings between the rural and the urban
between the wild and the urban is one of
the big subjects about the spacial kind
of imprint or the spacial consequence of
this activity we often find urban logic
forms that derive from rural logic forms
like for example football or in general
English sport games were mostly brought
in from
rural places and they even bring a
little bit of a rural landscape into a
city in the form of the fields but it's
also true that other forms of play for
example contemporary forms of play have
moved from the city to look for wild
conditions for X Games for example the
wildest possible conditions so there is
a shift to and forward from the wild and
the rural and the urban the other axis
in Bruegel Spain's is to do with the
city and particularly with the streets
the notional Street that sort of moves
right back into the far horizon and it's
full of this activity all along and it
talks about the city as a theater of
play and the streets as a place that
occasionally as in the carnival is
completely overtaken by a festive
activity but what is striking again
about the pictures that there is no
particular contraption built for play
there are no particular settings are no
fields that no demarcate areas there are
no differentiated spaces activity simply
has taking over has taken possession of
the urban space and in doing so it has
turned the public setting into a ludic
arena in the modern period there is one
interesting and important event which is
to do with the provision of paid
holidays for workers in Europe and the
United States and in the rest of the
world as well around the late 30s this
becomes more and more of a universal
right and this picture of a rickety
Arizona captures a particular instance
about this newly gained leisure time it
portrays French families enjoying for
the first time in their lives probably
their paid holidays
going out of the city finding a place by
the banks of the river and organizing a
picnic one can see that somehow
everything is inadequate in their in
their the way they see it and the way
they dress for the occasion it the
picture talks about an unexpected kind
of condition an unexpected encounter an
expected experience about being out
enjoying so-called free time time which
is not enslaved by labor and having to
invent a way of taking care of it later
on us we know the notion of the sportive
somehow brings in the right attire the
right furniture the Wrights implements
and a right way of being in a situation
like this we're going to look down at
three kind of statements that architects
make about the subject which in my view
are very important significance because
the subject of pay was embraced in a
straightforward way in a very vocal way
by modern architects like we see it for
example was quite insistent about it but
it was embraced from in many ways and
from many different perspectives by 1940
that is during the war he was brewing up
this idea so in the war like a receive
was conceiving how to fuse the contours
of certain memorable canonic parisian
places such as plus one dome the courts
of the louvre and pastor Conchords he's
trying to bring them together such as
turkish trades a set of spaces which
would be built with residential
buildings folding above them and this of
course is the prelude to the will radius
notion of the red ants the residential
broken kind of plan residential blogs he
talks about it and he says this is a
legacy of objects web mer whose
dimensions and presence are an unfailing
source of joy he says that is printed in
1946 he was of course validated in
topology of the world ends the residual
blocks of the radius or the squares were
the hosted monuments of fountains
describe a football pitch what is
significant about the picture is the
presence of a football pitch in amongst
the fields where were finds fountains
obelisks and you know traditional urban
monuments and there is something about
the description of football and the
ludecke activity in the form of sports
in the city in equal terms to the civic
activities that will have taken place
within the major urban spaces of the
city of Paris years later we all know
this famous image 1953 the spittin
substituted the CM charges for functions
which was a kind of conceptual fabric of
the radius the division of human
activities in circulation recreation
living and work this meat sauce together
with the teams in Tim tan reacts against
that and substitute the grill of CM
Charter with the notion of forms of
Association which is much more based on
human relationships and is less based on
decomposing things in a kind of analytic
manner as as it was with the same chart
it's more based on perhaps much less
graspable fields of relationships which
can take the individual through a
gradient onto the collective experience
but the beans they used to put this
message across is through the famous
photographs by Nigel Henderson who
captures London children playing in
cheese and he'll broads in the extent
this rather deprived area in the East
End so what is significant about in the
way liquor bcs sets the football pitch
in the middle of the new city and as an
equal to very well-established kind of
canonic urban squares the speed zone
bring children in play in order to
construct an argument how the city
should be conceived and behind this
there is a certain notion about not so
much the rational order of structured
play but the irrational and spontaneous
order of children play so they are
somehow embracing the idea of
spontaneity and chance that sort
permeates and comes across Smeaton's
manifesto later still and this man is
you know constant learning who's and the
situation is but in particularly is very
very much integrated with your homo
Luden's he has read the text by with
Inga this Dutch historian who wrote the
seminal text about play and he
visualizes him Homo Luden's man at play
as a true 20th century subjects and he
should be the citizen of the new city
here II suggest that man our work is
going to be somehow made redundant
through robotic production or something
like that free time would be now like a
24 hour time and the city would be seen
as a mechanism for ludecke action where
the city's conceived as a toy in a way
the manipulation of urban
form is part of the game is made into a
game and the the whole kind of armature
conceptual armature of new Babylon is to
do the notion of improvisation chance
and play the labyrinth is brought
forward as an urban can offer
ingredients in a very powerful manner
when 1872 Reverend Torre wasn't inciting
architects and his peers to learn from
Las Vegas
the maker of gambling were as he put it
the non-judgmental observer that's to
say the person who looks as Vega without
the kind of prejudice is built upon like
disks on the history of architecture for
example this non judgmental observer
could learn from las vegas as much as
any architect could learn from rome it
was just a different type of an urban
phenomena but it was just as rich as a
baroque city so in this very brief
survey
we've seen how the curb is EA the
smitson constants and the Situationists
and venturi they use play each one for a
slightly different agenda but we can
also see different players coming into a
form will later be smart to do with
sportsmen usually male the athlete is a
figure which liquor busy somehow
celebrates with the Smithson is clearly
the children the figure they celebrate
and with constant and venturi is more to
do with the citizen perhaps an adult
person but they it does not discriminate
age not particularly a physical kind of
condition for play it's not to do with
the notion that everyone is a player
so we might ask ourselves what is then
the kind of universe that the Mladic
impulse of the ludic instinct as some
people mentioned it creates was what
kind of universe is the one that it
proposes there is this kind of mirror
condition of play in relation to
so-called ordinary life which is well
portrayed in this image which is taking
from the Architectural Review 1935 I
think it is when discussing the
functional tradition and their
collection review Jane Richards the The
Critic was writing the essay makes
reference to implements and you know
ludecke implements but also tools it
sets them together and he celebrates
them as instruments of precision which
somehow embody equality of functional
position and beauty so in putting them
side-by-side the architectural review
somehow is suggesting that there is a
there is a pairing of these objects
which in a way it is true so how are the
tools and we have the planes implements
on the right hand sides but whereas any
tool might be made into eluded
instruments if we decide to do so it
doesn't work the other way around so
there's not as reciprocal or symmetrical
condition because the play implements
only serves a purpose within the domain
of play and the domain of plays domain
which is to do the imagination it's not
to do with functional purpose is not to
do with production it's not to do with
adding things onto a world is to do with
transporting ourselves into a different
world for a certain period of time where
we behave we think and we do things that
we otherwise wouldn't do utility and
play are then at opposite ends of a
spectrum of artifacts but also the same
can be applied to certain spaces it just
takes an a conviction to turn a place
and an occasion into ludic events we
could do it right now for example we
decided to do so but it was a modern
periods that equipped a ludic universe
with infinite purpose made specific
highly focused contraptions created the
scale from landscape to objects so that
the modern period in terms of the logic
program was a period when the world was
equipped with spaces objects and all
sorts of equipments which was particular
to the purpose of free time leisure and
enjoyment it has been said that the
loading activities Baron it does not add
goods to the world we have it but the
production of fields and implements
during the modern Prix was simply
prodigious there were thousands of
implements and thousands of spaces
created everywhere and in a way this had
a very evident impact in the fabric of
towns so we were asked what are the
spatial resonances of the ludecke
impulse I mean what how does it
transform itself into an architectural
proposition let's say well one can
discriminate something about form
material speciality color and so on
scale the scope of variety of possible
ludecke settings is simply beyond grasp
but it is useful to ascribe a certain
specific trades here we have two
pictures of mountains they're very very
different although they could they do
not actually portray exactly a same
setting but they could do so
and this illustrates very well the point
because it is in the eyes of the
beholder what we read here as asking for
example investigating issues about form
maybe natural formation color and so on
but the player would look at the
mountain more so like the image on the
right where the players would see in the
mount a particular ludic challenge so
that the conception of the setting for
the player would be completely kind of
instrumental to certain visual in a way
is a functional vision or tactic vision
of the mountain what can I do with the
mountain as a player so clay is embedded
in all places as in in the brigade's
painting we could play anywhere
virtually anywhere except under
conditions of the res or obligation or
maybe very extreme conditions fields can
just be sized by an act of will and this
in the city is commonly achieved through
negotiation as with the carnival for
example that takes over the city
interrupts the flow of events and it
establishes kind of a different set of
conditions for a certain period of time
but play can also be can also results in
the construction of very specific
elements which only serve the purpose of
play and which set in a formal way this
condition of the space are parts as in
the Greek terminus for the player the
choice is always tactical the Venetian
Venetian images is very beautiful this
is a Venetian traditional play which was
called Guerra de Pune and which
consisted of of a fights a fistfight
that was confronting two neighborhoods
of Venice and the fighters
solve in the crowning point of a bridge
so they take over the bridge which is of
course a standard donation item but they
visualize in the bridge the goal which
is the highest point of the bridge so
the the form somehow informs the ludecke
kind of intention also of course that
point becomes from a theoretical point
of your spectacle point of view of
accounts the point which is best seen
from everywhere and they set up the
battle simply somehow re-engineering the
use of an everyday element in the city a
kind of mundane element in City to
become the theater of a ludic events
that we call we could call that the the
embedded the embedded condition is to
say sizing a place and transforming it
for play then the place would return to
its kind of ordinary life and there's no
spatial transformation involved spatial
transformation comes into the scene
particularly strongly as from 19th
century seen in this picture of Santiago
1875 a yes 1875 which depicts two ludic
settings on the right on the right hand
side diagram and the right part of the
diagram we see two elements we see the
racing course which is a ludic form
which has been imported from Britain and
it's the first kind of sports item that
arrives you know modern within the
modern sport idea it's the first sport
practice and landscape that is brought
into places like Santiago Chile quite
early on 1875 that somehow will replace
the other form which will CL B
pattern which is described by those that
linear pattern we see on the upper part
of the picture which was simply an
avenue that was taking over for horse
races pre 19th century or early 19th
century so the upper one was embedded
into the fabric of the city is this
place that doubles up as ludic space but
also it's a northern space whereas the
lower one establishes the discrete
domain which is different within which
the rules of everything change in
relation to the rules of behavior in the
city even the people the way people
dress or their behavior
the pace of action and everything is
ruled by a ludic activity so my
inquiries very much about this
transition what happens then
why from certain point onwards the
construction of the field becomes such a
priority because we look back in time we
find situations very dutiful situation
like this one the ESP another in in
calculator and Corfu which was turned by
the English into cricket grounds so we
have something like a Mediterranean
scenario very dense town dense fabric
and formal construction of Prague
setting which is turned into sportive
fields but somehow the two situations
live together without establishing the
kind of separation we saw in Santiago's
racecourse the other movements we can
see in this remote place this isn't of
Augusta this is northern Chile 19th
century second half 19th century and
it's a harbour this is an important
piece of information because the
introduction of sports into Latin
America for example and when we think of
places lebra's ill with football or
Argentina who mastered
the game in a fantastic way it came
through the harbor's and through the
foreign colonies particularly British
and at some point they have to create a
setting or they feel rather that they
need to create a setting apart and we
can see a cricket ground right outside
the grille the urban grid of Antofagasta
this is tyrannous in the middle of a
desert in the middle of nowhere the
landscape the climates the conditions
absolutely nothing to do with England
you couldn't grow grass there there's no
water so everything is very very alien
but what is interesting is that you find
the figure of the cricket ground and
planted there as it happened cricket
didn't never become Chilean sport but
football did so that you go into another
remote village this is high up in the
end there's again the middle of the
desert near Bolivia quite far away from
any metropolitan center but this place
this place square is kind of also dogs
formal pattern of the square in the
middle of the town which stands for the
representation of the kind of government
and collective ideas and all that and
outside the town well finds the fields
and that polarity about the square and
the field is something which is very
interesting because originally all
throughout Latin America doing
throughout the colonial period games
were played within the square not
outside the city the removal of the
fields from the square we would say in
Spanish a word which is very beautiful
this plus R this plus R means to take
something away from the square so
literally the removal
feel from the square it was retrieving
you know this object from the square
into some other place is like an act of
occlusion in a way if one talks about
play it is important to distinguish
these two strands the organized
structure game like a VCS favorite and
the ants structure or spontaneous game
and this figure we see on the screen is
a swimming pool difficult vizier design
and repeated in many of his games he
never ever built it but it's interesting
because within his kind of binary kind
of rationale the swimming pool is
exemplified and embodies very clearly
these two conditions so this one which
is good for training and you know proper
swimming you can divide into strips you
can measure time you can you know it
follows all the conditions that enables
you to compete and set yourself to do
something in relation to a universe of
players in the world and the other one
is literally conserved there's no
pattern to it and it talks about free
play there is a French sociologist who
studied the subject of play in a very
interesting way also he was a very
interesting person was related to this
realists who knew quite a bit about
architectures well his career kawar he
wrote a book on the subject a heap
nominates normative play as ludus she
uses a Roman world and spontaneous play
as Padilla which is a Greek word in some
ways these terms are better than play
and game because game somehow game is a
form of play whereas losses and Padilla
illustrate better this kind of polarity
there are many elements in construction
of the space foreplay or the
construction of the playground if I
understand the pager and it really
brought sense there's an element of
metrics which is this right back to the
Greeks who used to define the stadium as
a unit of measure as much as an arena
for play so the stadium was a unit of
measure was supposed to be replicated in
every setting exactly the same the
reality was not so precise probably
because they didn't have the instruments
to do so but the notion of the stadium
was to do with the notion of metrics a
matrix in the stadium were related to
certain conditions of human effort
there's something about the body in
action the size of this strip of lands
and the kind of action that was proposed
for it in this case of course was to do
with racing there is the question of
metric which becomes somehow very
obsessive in the modern periods I'm just
showing three different ways of racing
this notion of apportioning materials
for example or elements or sizes
according to the types of players we
have so for example the image on the
left it is drawn from a manual written
by a very bright Swedish landscape
architect was involved in the renovation
of our landscapes in Stockholm and the
image describes the proportions of
ground materials that you should
considering in the construction of an
urban park so this for example there is
so much percent of sand so much percent
of lung so much percent of water so much
percentage of hard paving and so on and
so forth so the world of the player is
seen through the eyes of the planner
as a world that can be somehow
subdivided in a very rational way
through a certain proportion of
materials to be used throughout the
construction of an important public
landscape the image on the right is
different it talks about the distances
that can be established between
particular ludecke settings and the
places where people live and the
position of the public school and the
image is a bottom comes from manual by
German who is describing again the
proportion of space that an athlete
a male athlete needs a woman needs which
I would need and then there is a
decomposition of the ground again into
different kind of surface conditions the
other kind of innovative thing about the
modern period is the notion of
constructing designing and constructing
the children playground that I think is
completely unprecedented
so the ludecke format is is something
particular we have seen how metrics are
kind of involved in its geometry of
course forms part of the loaded
proposition the the field is charged
with values kind of geometric values
portions of the field account for
different values ludecke values let's
say the rules would establish what the
player can do or cannot do in terms of
moving through the fields the
relationship between the scale of the
field and the type of action that is
proposed but each type of sports is
somehow a parametric kind of resolution
of something to do with the tempo
something to do a difficulty of the game
something to do with physical efforts
something to do with the particular
implements that are occupied so we can
say that each one of these kind of
inventions Bacon's particular Britons
and cadences
and that talks about a particular
movement is as if a choreographies
inscribed somehow conceptually within
each one of these formants but beyond a
certain scale the notion of the field
which is so prevalent in modern sports
this notion of flat terrain of an optic
visual control you know perfectly
homogeneous and so on is not tenable any
longer and beyond a certain scale we
only get tracks or linear patterns which
can fold creating circuits as in race
tracks or horse tracks or wherever or
they might be seen as linear elements
which do not necessarily fold themselves
within this kind of state of things is
that we find things like again archaic
modes of appropriating ordinary space
for play as in the Tour de France for
example or in places like Monaco where
the racetrack is is conducted within the
street system of a city and that Street
system becomes interesting because it is
difficult and play somehow it's built
upon the notion of an arbitrary chosen
chosen difficulty I was looking at
pre-modern forms which are very
interesting because they they help us
understanding the particular kind of
condition of the ludecke setting and one
comes across
of course the forest as the setting for
a game like the hands and soon after
that one comes across of course the
French forest pattern which is very
interesting where the notion of the
field is hazardous the visual
intelligibility we see in the football
pitch or cricket or wherever it's not
there any longer there is no possibility
of visual commands of the
a little field where the action is
hazardous and what the whole condition
is is completely different to most of
modern sports its notion of density and
hazardous progression one should imagine
also the issue of sounds and even smell
as forming part of this particular ludic
experience but what is extraordinary
about is that this French creates a
field out of the forest through cutting
avenues and Aleya through the forest and
establishing this very very complex
pattern this matrix of you know straight
lines and cont plants this is an
extraordinary abstract territorial and
landscape conception which had
tremendous incidence in the conception
about the city because as many people
say it is from here that
Cosman and people like him
extract the notion of the structure of
Paris so it's the hunting forest that
you know provides the tools for the
conceptual tools for the veneration city
of Paris and that is one characteristic
of play which is very beautiful that
plays a kind of laboratory sometimes
every now and then play offers formulas
for certain types of action or certain
configurations that might be useful
completely outside the domain of play
the other thing which is also very
interesting a very beautiful stat this
is a very active kind of world it's
always reinventing itself and we could
say that some of the forms the Lunik
forms undergo certain declination forms
are derived from other forms as in this
painting of hand
activity that's happening in erequest
near Madrid which involves the Spanish
courts and given the absence of the
forest they construct something which
could have been conceived by artists
like jean claude and crystal with canvas
and with props and the kind of temporal
race in order to establish a certain
ludic events of course the conditions
are different this is not hazardously
longer maybe the element of visual
control has become has increased a lot
the element of chance has this decrease
and maybe this is less playful than the
French case but still nevertheless it
belongs to the same kind of universe if
we look at the transformation of the
Babylonia from a hunting forest into a
modern park we can see the extent to
which leisure and play imprints evolve
and they actually modify space in in
quite straightforward and impressive way
how these imprints embody specific
performances frantic performances and
plan and agitated as in the hands on the
left slow paced said eh it's you know
quiet as in the stroll which is the form
embodied in 19th century Park on the
right but if we observe the park so well
Bologna is made from a hunting forest
into a park and the pattern of the park
is made out of this curvilinear kind of
glaze and pathways but the park
accommodates race fields up on the top
left-hand corner so that the notion of
the park brings with it the notion of
two simultaneous forms of behavior one
to do the race and sports
in a particular way and this kind of
particular abstraction about the world
of play in relation to the world of the
everyday and the other one to do more
with the promenade and enjoyment of
nature so on this conflict sometimes was
very much discussed amongst landscape
architects right into up into a 20th
century active and passive leisure as
they call it and it creates all sorts of
visual and conceptual conflicts between
two patterns that have brought together
within the conception of the modern park
we're looking at the fields we look into
the track we look into the racecourse
the libraries of course embodies another
kind of ludecke figure which is
extremely interesting it is built upon
the notion of occluding the field so
here the the very kind of ludecke
proposition is to do with never knowing
where you go and never knowing how to
reach your targets whereas when you play
football for example visual command is
part of what the player will have as an
offer from the beginning the other point
about the labyrinth is that the figure
can never be replicated
you can never build elaborate it's
exactly like another one because you
spoil the game so each proposition has
to be a formal invention and the rule of
the game is that you never know where
you go and their rule is that the system
is extremely compact it kind of folds
upon itself endlessly and through that
motion of moving somehow on your same
path over and over and over you also
lose consciousness about orientation but
there is a different type of linear game
which is also played as a progression as
in the labyrinth or as in the racecourse
but which may be decomposed in elements
that can link together but
never in the same manner the case of
golf is very interesting it never
becomes like the favorite game of people
like liquor busy or Gropius they never
talk about it
I think they never designed like
residential areas around golf courses
but in North America becomes extremely
important engine of urban and suburban
design and improvement but golf is
interesting because it allows for
site-specific decisions and it pecans in
a way a consideration about the site
inflictions topography and the sorts of
conditions that landscape people would
be very happy to deal with it is pliable
the course is pliable can be folded in
infinite different ways it is extremely
adaptable and yet it is a game that must
conform to certain rules one can
desegregate the fields the way we have
it here the figure down there and one
can fold it together like step by step
as in the images on top which explain
the way which move from one to the
second to third and so on till you cover
the whole game although golf is usually
crazy to have been born as a former game
in Scotland in a very barren coastal can
conditions and andreas no trees there
host expensive lands very open it's also
quite windy it soon became associated to
the notion of the park which in a way
becomes like a standard 20 century
formula for the golf course and it is
one of few games that are calls for the
action of the landscape architects it
becomes engaged in the conception and
the formulation of the fields
we're looking earlier on at this
relationship is kind of interplay
between the square and the fields I
think the case of bullfights is
extremely interesting in this respect
because it becomes almost explicit about
the notion of playing in the square the
diagram shows the kind of historic
evolution of the game as from an a
structure piece of land somewhere out in
the country moving into the heart of the
square and this is quite impressive
because it was kind of rural but it
moved into the Plaza Mayor which was the
most representative most urbane and most
artificial place built in Spanish cities
to then accommodate the filth trying to
find an appropriate shape for the arena
till eventually through this trial never
process and with no particular
authorship no singular of a shape is
more of a collective cultural process
the circular formats and the plaza de
toros which actually reads like square
in a bullfight square is conceived as a
autonomous Coliseum like establishments
which is set away from the square so the
process is very very interesting and
what is interesting about it too is that
the arena itself is subject to an
increased kind of system of
systematization one could say it's a
point where you can guarantee that the
same game the same action the same
problem can be posed in Pamplona or in
southern Spain or in Mexico and Peru
arenas must be the same so that the game
is exactly the same particularly of
thinking about competing between
countries
but the space around the arena's never
regulated in the same way because that's
not a ludic space so ludecke action
attracts people it creates something
like a theater it brings people together
but the construction of the in between I
used to say the space between the arena
and the city is the area where
architects begin to get involved
I wanna find primitive kind of formats
like the one we see here in in who could
sit on Mexico or this type of
arrangement as in race in Spain where
they build up a temporary kind of arena
and temporary seats and so on for
bullfights in this small town perhaps
were complex arrangements like this one
inch inch on in Castilla in Spain as
well where again there is a temporary
kind of bullring built is acquiring
almost the circular format but is still
oval and this is interesting in
ching-chong because the balconies of the
private houses there is a kind of
understanding that during play time the
balconies of private houses are used as
public settings so you and I could walk
through a private house you know to see
it onto that balcony perhaps ice the
need to pay to be there to witness these
events so as when moves looking for the
patterns of the arena there is a
movement of agreeing on the circular
formats and consolidating a sort of a
cannon and at the same time one can see
different sorts of settings and very
many different forms of negotiating
between the arena and the city here we
have the process again this is plus a
majority Madrid which was a very
important setting for bullfights and on
the
at the bottom we have the canonic kind
of plaza de toros which is a late
invention is obviously kind of rational
minds it is to do a certain functional
sense of position and so on getting
optimal views for everyone and all that
is very rationalized and it is
established as an establishment of its
own which is completely enclosed and
completely self-absorbed if one looks at
the process there are moments when the
arena is thought out as being a sort of
a square because the things that
surround the arena become apartment
houses as in the scheme on the right so
that the the element of separation
between the space of play and the space
of Uri day is made out of ordinary
apartments plus the provision of seats
for the public and the notion of a house
looking into an arena is very much like
the notion of houses long key in Terina
like places in bath in England and the
description of the city of Bath through
the writings of John Wood the elder is
very interesting because he talks about
gymnastics and this is kind of strong
roman memory about the colosseum but he
never proposes that the spaces that this
houses are folding around would be
proper ludecke arenas it's just that
there is the strong strong in kind of
inference of it being so within this
long kind of process of development or a
bull ring at the end this canonic notion
of something like a Colosseum or a
stadium which is a building an
institution in its own right for play
only for that purpose which would be set
free somewhere in the city is the notion
that predominates as in this case in
Nader but every ludecke proposition
admits also very elementary resolutions
with the cockfight cockpits ring we
finds two different expressions this is
in Latin America people holding up the
canvas on a circular kind of array such
as to create the arena and to control
the space and to make a game possible or
the trial if you like we may not call
this a game maybe for our contemporary
sensibility but this kind of a ludic
trial that's a way they saw it or when
my friends purpose-made settings which
are set away from the street somewhat
concealed behind ordinary facades as in
my new theatre which is a little bit
like those medical theaters that were
built in Italy in the Renaissance but
this is a nineteenth-century Cordoba in
Argentina which actually supply exactly
the same ludecke space for the same
events so we could say that there is a
primitive form or a primary form rather
than a primitive form and there is a
kind of an evolved form which involves
the action of the architect and the
conception of a new typology everything
within the logic universe is charged
with values everything is absolutely
arbitrary is to say that the only serves
a purpose for ludecke action and only
for the time when you're holding the
losing action afterwards it makes no
sense at all but also everything counts
within this universe these two images
represents an experiment that was
conducted by by an architect Chilean
activist
friend of mine he died few years ago who
was looking looking into into into this
strange kind of conception of the
ludecke and he was always changing one
element in the game for example on the
left the size of the ball becomes so big
the ball is so heavy and somehow so
difficult to move it that the game
somehow changed rather than throwing the
ball into the opponent's camp or
something like that here the game was
more like throwing the player onto the
ball and transporting it into the other
camp and again if you take the net as in
tennis for example it's suffices to
increase the height of it to completely
obliterate the the notion of tennis
you cannot play any longer that game
within that kind of arrangement but at
the same time you are inventing a
different type of game a different type
of challenge that very soon could be
adopted as a kind of popular logic
proposition so the predominant ludecke
form in the contemporary city also in
the modern city also in the work of Mon
architects was the fields not so much
the track but the fields as in football
or tennis which were actually the
movements favorite sports like people
like of UCI Gropius finesse Turin and so
on cert and people like that the field
is a very strange conception in spatial
and landscape terms because it is
abstract and the noodles and it's a form
which offers no visual interest
whatsoever is usually barren and boring
it's just the supports
rasmussen the Danish architect who who
wrote this beautiful piece in London was
very keen he saw London somehow sort of
construction very much related to
certain notion of the ludecke and in
observing the patterns of ludecke spaces
in London and the kind of way in which
English society conceived or sports in
particular he made comments about the
fields which is very interesting Jim and
quote he says a Victorian approaching a
tennis courts must have felt he was
entering a new world he had indeed left
behind that world where nothing was
allowed to appear in naked form
rasmussen was making reference to this
very very cluttered Edwardian and
Victorian interiors were pianos for
example had you know fabric covering
them and there were heavy curtains and
the lakes of pianos were covered with
fabric and everything was kind of over
over over elaborated there's nothing
like a field within that world and he's
also refrained to the world of the
gentry let's say or the upper classes to
enter the unadorned rectangle of the
tennis court must have been like driving
into bracing salt water in spring he
says there everything was mathematically
determined with not the slightest the
corrective touch so the invention of the
field is in a way very much like the
mention of abstract painting of the kind
we see on the screen it looks like this
this is a place in northern Chile again
in the Atacama Desert in the middle of
nowhere it's a small very remote fishing
hamlet and we can all recognize the
football pitch we can see how it has
been established I mean can imagine also
the efforts involved in bringing earth
of this
and color into this area in order to
create a place which is there only for
occasional enjoyments and is only there
for the purpose of having good time I
mean serves no practical purpose
whatsoever so there's a fantastic
investment in effort in creating
something that serves a very particular
function and we have seen how the field
is actually a complex kind of geometric
conception also complex material
conception so in a way yes it is very
abstract yes it is very barren but it's
also full of inscriptions and it is full
of instructions as how to be used what
we see on the left is a picture of some
of our students in Chile were walking
through the tracings of the San Chapelle
in Paris which are made over the slab of
abandoned airports and the picture talks
about the figure of the plan and the
notion of the planets a two-dimensional
figure as as in tracing one-to-one scale
the field is a little bit like the 1 2
and scale tracing but it is equipped
with instructions that every soft and
are inscribed within it as figures which
talk about certain obligations so the
field is a precision instrument that is
to say that the correct standard
official field is a precision instrument
but the popularity of sports brings into
cities situations of these kinds are
where by force of needs people need to
fit this position figure into areas
where precision is not possible in the
same way so they they break the rules to
some extent but they know that they're
breaking the rules we
in a certain a certain degree of
tolerance let's say that enables them to
believe that they're playing exactly the
same kind of football that he could play
in the American a stadium so there is an
official story but there's also an
unofficial story which I think it's also
very interesting kind of byline of the
impact of play in the modern city which
finds this kind of expression there are
series of Brazilian photographers taking
an interest in the subject and recently
in The Guardian they will see this
incredible reports about fields that
were being implemented in Bangkok which
can take this extraordinary kind of
configuration so we beautiful to see
what kind of a game you play there and
what does it mean to negotiate a corner
for example it is an amazing image but
it is interesting that this unofficial
fields actually recreates the notion of
the square and the field as an arena
they are inscribed in the middle of the
town as you can see in these figures
here they're surrounded by houses and if
you make some kind of abstraction but
not that much abstraction what you've
read here is exactly the colonial
squares was conceived by the Portuguese
and the Spaniards in Latin America a
barren empty space which is used for
ludecke usages but was also used for
ceremonial and market and other
activities so the beauty of this
proposition is that on the one hand you
have this formal adjustment and this
kind of negotiating between the form the
prescribed form and the kind of
irregular and somewhat not perfect
conditions of the sides but on the other
hand you have the notion of the
standards that can apply the same two
absolutely different settings
Mountains for example or even of water
so there's certain tension going on
between the notion of precision
instruments as a field and the reality
of wanting to play a game in places
which by the very nature are not built
or cannot accommodate that kind of
position so this is student's work we've
done in different different schools we
were looking for example how the kinds
of degrees of tolerance and the degrees
of freedom that people in a fairly
deprived areas in in one service for
example would take in relation to the
orientation of the field that would be a
mandatory kind of condition let's say in
order to be able to fit the the ludecke
arena in within the residential
neighborhood where people live so this
notion of field as the heart of a
densely populated area in a way brings
us all the way back into the original
pre-modern conception of play something
that was supposed to happen in the
middle of the city even in the most
representative setting in the city the
public square and find this kind of
moving in and out of the public square
and also the the usage the recourse to
adaptive elements as in sitting
arrangements in the Roman Forum for
example throughout the history of play
there is the notion of establishing that
the ludecke space in the middle of in
the most representative on this most
charged space in town but it's also the
opposite which is of course very much
implemented during the functional period
which is to do with the creation of a
setting which
set apart in a place which would from
then on be understood as a place which
is only for recreation and play so
looking down to the way architects look
into a subject I'm going to make a very
brief kind of review overview which
starts with the athlete the figure
sidebar a Russians attempt revolution
they're inventing for example the kind
of way the way which athletes should
dress and the athlete is the player that
comes into a scene during the heroic
period in a very strong way and it is
obviously related to the notion of the
new man it's related to the notion of
modernity in terms of something which is
healthy which is well-structured
you know that somehow even in terms of
there are comments about the the ways
the fantastic ways in which athletes
move as something which became extremely
interesting to people who are engaged
for example with dance or stuff like
that the athlete is the first one to
come into the scene of course there was
provision for children games in and the
work of Brian Urlacher B's here many
other architects but the but the focus
was much more into a figure of the
athletes and this is a painting by
Kistler who somehow it's a bit like the
image we saw from the architectural
review where they were preparing tools
and play instruments here there is a
relationship between the player and the
worker of course it's the same person
simply seen in two moments within the
the calendar of the week
or the hourly kind of calendar the
athletes inference notion of virility
was usually thought of being
mail and rigor it embodies an idea of
rationality because it has to play in a
systematic way
athletic play admits training but
there's also an ethics associated to it
because originally this the game of the
player spot player is related to a
notion of a collaborative spirit but
there is also notion of fair play and
that's why also the educational
establishments take a keen interest in
the issue of sport there's a very
interesting relationship between sport
and Taylorism sports and efficiency
sports and the Industrial Revolution so
the early times of the movement this is
in 1930s again with this obsession about
allocating time and space to every
single activity the notion of zoning and
the notion of the function city as
something that could be somehow
rationally conceived brings about a
certain characterization of play through
the ages of man what is particular to
that period is that 60-plus period is
the lowest column and 60-plus period are
completely out of the game
you know elderly at the time of course
life story was much shorter so there is
a kind of crescendo in spatial terms but
also in special requirements and then
the munition towards the end of life
I'm looking at a few projects polycarb
is here because they're very exemplary
of this kind of farm both of the impacts
of the ludecke notion into a conception
of the city also the way that he
accommodates that and the way in which
she celebrates that and gives the ludic
action a certain protagonism this for
example is the university city we can
see it how it is structure around
quadrants and the living space is
extremely compact surrounding the living
spaces what to fans mostly support
fields tennis and football particularly
then there is this a scheme which was
conceived for farmers who are moving
into a city so he had the notion that
these people would live in apartments of
course not in houses any longer and the
partners would fold in that particular
way you see in the plan the dark gray
patches show vegetable gardens so these
people could carry on cultivating at the
foot of the houses but the white stripes
represent ludic spaces this is a bit
like lava let's a lot before that the
white strap is full of playgrounds
tennis courts and stuff like that and of
course everything is very rational look
obviously it talks about you know life
structure according to time you have a
24-hour cycle there are eight hours of
recreation or free time four of those
hours might be spent on the on the
original patches cultivating carrots and
stuff like that but the rest should be
spent somehow cultivating your body and
spirits in the sports field he visited
or was aware I don't know where he
visited hamsters Garden Suburb
and such schemes but he made a sketch
which has been reproduced there
that shows a means conception of a
residential court folding around tennis
courts and then the scheme we've just
seen of liquor busy air is on the right
where he somehow reproduces the figure
of the tennis courts ask the core of the
residential and sample if one looks at
the amable villa which is a later
conception there are two versions of it
but this is basically about apartment
blocks on two sides facing onto the
street on one side but facing also into
an interior which is furnished with
tennis courts so this very very clear
there of course they are also support
facilities on the rooftops the notion of
the residential fabric of the city as
something that's built around apartment
units that fold around
rudik arenas is something very very
strong it is spelled out very clearly by
Gideon who looked into bath as a
precedence and somehow it recreates this
notion we have seen about the bull
fights square plus autos as a setting
made with residential fabric rounds we
all know will wear or VIN radius this is
a place which is all to do with the idea
of residences built around Park and the
park is a very very heavily equipped
place with football pitches
tennis courts swimming pools there are
also gymnasium in the top floors and on
the roof decks there are sand beaches so
that liquor is he talks about 100% of
the space be used for logic purposes
so this is more like a you know it
reaches the highest points in a way the
notion of of the athletes as the citizen
and of the fabric of the city as a place
which is laid in such a way as to allow
people to practice sports every day
where becomes more powerful so there is
a proposed synthesis of casual stroll
and formal patches which is not an easy
one what took the houses away and we
look at the patterns of that kind of a
English garden like pattern the
superposition of this very rigid format
of the pitch within it is obviously
complex and one sees how landscape
architects were struggling with the
formal inscription of these kind of
barren figures so the diagram on the
right talks about that difficulty what
you see here is the rooftop of the
Ministry of Education in Rio by bully
marks were in a very kind of surrealist
vision he kind of collapses this
freeform Park onto a rectangular form
crashing the all the pathways through
the heart edge of the terrace and on the
right is the opposite is what you do
when you have to put a tennis court in
the middle of a park which is made
through the notion of curvilinear
patterns speed fields were conceived
everywhere there was a love affair with
steamboats of course that represented
the ideal of a collective community of
collective equipment of shared space the
idea of rationality that your
functionality
and which used to have tennis courts and
swimming pools on the top floors but the
gerousia would get to a point for
example proposing for reasons which I
don't quite understand that in the
center so use this cooperative building
in Moscow essentially a very important
kind of bureaucratic institution to do
with office work but crowning the
lecture hall there is a tennis courts
and then there is this game which is
very interesting is the scheme for the
reconstruction of France it was supposed
to be helped made helped build was
called the Moran Dan and it was supposed
to be built on the edge of the destroyed
cities of France and it would serve two
purposes on the one hand it would house
the population who had nowhere where to
live but the other hand would train them
to use the new city inside each one of
the courts there was grass and that area
Liberty she describes as a narrow grass
for children play an immunity in front
of the ensemble of residential courts
you find claps you find Scout claps you
have sport facilities gymnasia
and all that and the figure of the
player is also inscribed into the scheme
in the in the in the way of the Scout
because of the shortage of labor at the
time and liquor VCS thought that the
youngsters guided by the Scout leaders
would be able to contribute to the
actual construction of this ephemeral
kind of farm village there are
interesting kind of issues related to a
configuration of the residential or in
this case educational establishment the
kind of formal configuration and the
ways of reacting to the presence of the
fields within the court this is the
Bauhaus
so that somehow the the sports field is
fitted within the conception of the plan
and on the right-hand side we have
liquor BC again with houses folding
around the sports field the caduceus own
apartment in Paris he chose decides he
builds his apartment top floor and his
site is exactly in front of football
stadium at the edge of world one so he
was testing through this building
exactly his conception of what the new
city was all to be about as he said it
sport is at the foot of the residence
bodies everywhere it's kind of public
facility one can review many other
projects I'm not going to go into any
details but there is certain episodes in
in functionalism where the notion of
orientation in the fields and
orientation of residence abroad runs in
tandem so that there is a kind of
orchestration as if there was a magnet
that somehow relates the position of the
block in the same way as a position of
field there is also discussion brewing
at the time with people like the
gerousia but also search for example who
said that there were two precedents for
this there was the Greek precedence
which was to do with integrate and the
playing field and the landscape and the
Roman presence which was to do with
monumental icing the playing field the
Roman precedent was enshrined in the
stadium the Greek president was in
frying in constructs such as fur meeting
where you find a church a theater a
gymnasium a shrimp or a stadium and the
clap
somehow constructing an ensemble which
is open to the landscape is not
completely self-absorbed whereas a Roman
case issues framing constructs such as
the
now for example where you have a stadium
which is obviously self immersed and
inward-looking and as I said as an
instrument the stadium one who say a
fabric of separating play from non play
the issue of separation is of course
very interesting because as the field
becomes a standard form and therefore
sets completely beyond the scope of a
designer you cannot do anything with the
field you can reinvent it you cannot
modify the only thing can do is to
ensure that you're reproducing exactly
what is required there what you can do
is that is to model the interface
between the fields and the rest of the
world still within this kind of image of
the athlete though this is much later
obviously I will look very briefly at
the image of Rui can in Philadelphia
he's inspiring a Roman model and he's
intending to bring the Colosseum back
into the heart of the city as one can
see in this picture of the plan
Philadelphia he establishes it the
relationship between the architecture of
traffic as he used to call it and this
monumental fabric of the stadium that
was set in the middle of the city and
that would lodged lots and lots of urban
facilities underneath the ranks of seeds
so it was in a sense an urban piece but
was still a stadium he stakes the
proposition further conceptually to
point which was really interesting in
some of the early conceptions of dacha
of the new capital in Bangladesh where
he tooks he talks about conceives the
places made out of two Citadel's which
is a word he uses
there is a citadel of the assembly which
is down here which is a part which got
eventually built and which is built
around Parliament's the institution of
debate and democracy also kind of an
arena is agonistic like the football
pitch in a way but there were also there
is this citadel of the institutions
which was all built around a stadium and
which Lords
several things like markets art schools
swing pools shopping and so on he said
that he was inspired in Rome in the
Roman Baths in conceiving of that
particular cluster of elements the
stadium is very interesting because
although it follows the format of a
convention stadium the corners are
broken and they suggest that anyone
could walk into the arena and therefore
one could either read this as a square
or one could read it as a space apart as
a purpose-made kind of field he does not
talk about that much in the course of
the kind of evolution of of dacha the
whole business of the stadium was was
removed from there and was substituted
by bureaucratic establishments but it is
very interesting that as a notion of a
city play takes such an important role
in the vision of Kanna that states at
least that he sets
Parliament's and the stadium talking to
each other across grass and water there
is a later scheme he did preliminary
skill for is perform for Terron which
obviously not never got built whether to
ludecke elements that come into it it is
to do with lots of government programs
distributed around the kind of spinal
axial elements but
for Court which is rectangular
corresponds exactly to the scale of the
Maidan in isfahan and the Maidan in a
sense is a ludic space traditional to
the Persians thanks to the monumental
setting of public buildings to the left
we can see a stadium
so this stainless steel from sparked of
certain idea of the Civic the second
character we'll see is the child that
comes into the scene mostly in the
post-war in a real big way during the
post-war and of course the child
represents completely different kind of
player firstly because the child is a
child he doesn't choose to to play as an
athlete might choose to do to to to
spend time on that particular activity
play and life somehow are completely
confused for the child I mean his life
about is about playing and that's a way
of coming to terms with with the world
in a sense it's part of this experience
the picture they just chair by Reed
wells and desk by John prevail and I
think they are demonstrative of two
strategies about coping with with
children one is to do with integrating
children into the life of adults
bringing them into a high table you know
face to face with the grown-ups and the
other one is to do with miniaturizing
and constructing the world which is
specific to children which they will
abandon very soon as soon as they grow
up and they nothing longer can use that
space and these are thing is
characteristic of the way in which
kindergartens landscapes and implements
and things were conceived for children
during that period the idea of play also
became a hotly debated argument that
serves to demonstrate different models
of urbanely
the figure on the left is borrowed from
Rudovsky
who he actually made the comparison
between that system of blocks which
belongs to a free bail system which is
this kind of early conception of
children education very revolutionary
conceptual children's education through
play which goes through the use of
abstract models and abstract elements so
that kind which had tremendous incidence
in the formative years of most people
who went through the Bauhaus and liquor
busy as well went through the favored
model and on the Left we have something
that seemed to Rudovsky to be much more
civilized which was much more to do with
using your imagination and allowing
children to do as they would do if they
were on their own it were not imprisoned
within the kind of conceptual walls
imposed by the establishment the street
becomes a very very big subject of
discussion what to do with Street the
street epitomizes like the old city and
the whole problem of the city which is
unregulated and somehow I shall see and
even dangerous and as structure and so
on as opposed to the notion of the space
of the park which was a natural space
for children but there are many people
who debate these points and they used
the the street as the Smithson's did for
example to demonstrate that there was in
there in the humble ordinary street an
instrument for the renovation of a city
and I had to look closely to that
particular configuration they make these
diagrams we see here and they talk about
the relationship in the house and the
street and in the lower diagram they
refer to street as an arena so there is
this notion
that this or dinner space every now and
then is captured by play as in the
Bruegel painting and that this is an
important activity occurs to its and the
street is also not only about transit
but it's also about using time in a
low-tech way there are two kind of funny
diversions from the issue of the street
the play Street is conceived in Denmark
as a way of resolving this problem and
they do so by blocking traffic in
certain streets and equipping those
places like playgrounds so in a way they
obliterate the streets in order to
rescue the notion of children using that
space in the city and the other one
which is kind of interesting but this
product of the same operation of
removing children from the street is the
invention of the traffic playground
which is actually a place where children
could learn to somehow manage with
traffic they never seen streets they
were not allowed to go in the streets
were removed from the streets so traffic
playground was like a kind of initiative
first year studio for knowing how to
cope with traffic as different to sports
what happens with children game is that
there is no set of instructions there is
no standard there's no Canon there's no
prescription so certain people thought
about the playground as something to do
with typography and this kind of
polycentric configuration as with we can
and Noguchi who was obviously
accelerated with the idea of his type of
sculpture that was landscape like and
that was there to be used and to be used
in a very beautiful way where sculpture
was a theater there was a topographic
proposition becomes very clear in the
Smithson's Robin Hood Gardens on the
Left we have the Golden Lane scheme
which is very calm
vention and the respect but in rolling
hood gardeners there is a topographical
proposition which is explained by Peter
Smithson in a very dry and
characteristic way he says we made a
mound because we want children to play
football in there
we don't want noise so we obliterated
the football fields in making the mounds
we create a condition that removed
sports a noise activity to our place and
in doing so they were orchestrating play
in a particular kind of territorial
configuration there was the invention of
the so called play sculptures which
became quite fashionable and then there
were certain design companies that began
to produce these things massively the
problem with it is that Barbara Hepworth
or Henry Moore sculpture could equally
be called a place culture as long as you
would allow children to climb into it so
there is no kind of substantial
difference between the so called place
capture and any other sculpture
nevertheless one finds very inventive
propositions I find a submerged
sculpture they are particularly
beautiful as an idea that accommodates
not only a different kind of visual
condition but also different kind of
behavioral conditions and I flew it's
kind of movements of people around us
across the sculpture we get the notion
of the sand pit as embodied for example
in these examples by out of an egg which
is at the same time an essay of
prefabrication and an essay on systemic
and of for making but it is also a
proposition about what should be there
at the heart of playgrounds in the city
the emplacement of sands in the middle
of playground talks about in a way the
notion of representing the arena of the
beach in the city is like bringing the
beach from the outside into the city and
then maybe most extravagant kind of
exception is the junk playgrounds or the
adventure playground which is invented
by Sorenson this Danish Landscape
Architect the fantastic landscape
architect who declared once that to him
this invention was the most important
invention he ever made and the notion of
the junk or so-called junk playground is
conceptual the period of the war this
was built in Copenhagen when Copenhagen
was occupied by the Germans the the
essence of it was that the playground
was like a a place which would provide
children with tools to build things and
the ludecke action was to do with
building and he said it was a very good
place where children could think about
becoming engineers or architects the
expression of it is this kind of
expression this is in Switzerland and it
brings about a completely different type
of iconography into the modern city this
is not any longer rational or hygienic
it has nothing to do the cubism is not
inspired in any of the sources of
inspiration for the major architectural
pieces like the meeting hall we have in
the background but it's much more to do
a certain world of nostalgia and
imagination and going back into some
kind of primitive order which we also
find with bikinis in his playgrounds in
Athens so the figure here contrasts
these two conditions so there is a kind
of a paradox about the fragile shacks
built around this precise form of the
pitch on the right and the shack brought
into the middle of a very well structure
and beautiful made urban neighborhood in
Athens we can see a similar kind of
paradox here with a unity and its
provision for play space
on the top floor and then Danish housing
estate within the retro foreground
playground in the foreground somehow
alleviates the notion of repetition
rationalism and a certain tediousness
about that kind of conception of the
residents in the city one could go on
and on with different kind of examples
this is a it's a little Center designed
by Louie can if Ladell fear for housing
neighborhood this was a community center
attached to it there is something like a
formal garden which is actually
playgrounds is interesting is made out
of four courts each one of the courts
has a different kind of ludecke and
material agenda but what do I find us as
a kind of running theme is that whether
in its kind of athletic or sports modes
whether in the type of children
playground modes there is a kind of
consensus that the playgrounds is the
fulcrum and the central place that
defines and represents somehow the
collective in in housing assemble so
here we have two same scale will radius
and Robin Hood gardeners in verybody SSO
to do with athletes in Robin Hood
Gardasil to do with children here we
have Marcel Breuer in Asaka also do with
children liquor busy in Paris all to do
with athletes and the final review of
how did architects take the issue of
play of course has to go into the
subject of new Babylon and this notion
of the city as a setting for play and
the city as a fabrication as a ludic
fabrication this is like a out of scale
adventure playgrounds in a sense I mean
the the citizen is the fabric
of the city and the city takes the form
of the libraries and the labyrinth is a
is a is a is a ludic form Jonah Freedman
was very keen to he talks about play he
knew the theory of play he knew about
roger caillois he tried to get in touch
with him and he's very explicit about
creating a city where the the playful
activity in the city is very much likely
do-it-yourself notion of the citizen
framing his or her residence and somehow
aping the conditions of the vernacular
village he provides the armature the
citizens provides the residential forms
one could discuss why new Babylon and
the Ville special Jena Friedman are set
on legs and what happens to the ground
which was the ludecke setting for liquor
busy air and many architects planners
the ground is left barren and the whole
fabric of life is you know brought up in
the air the certain contradiction here
between what the Situationists
did in the cities they love streets they
love roaming about streets they invented
north of the reef they was all to do
with getting lost within the dense
matrix of the european city but they
construct something that removes itself
from the ground which is strange I'm not
going to go into details here but I just
to mention that people like John
headache' conceives of a memorial to the
victims of the Gestapo as built out of
items from the fairgrounds and the
playgrounds so that part of the memorial
is made with you know things that you
will find the playgrounds there is
obviously this polarity between idea and
ludos with structure and a structure
play we
improvisation and rationality which in a
way is represented by the notional model
law which is like a play rule as to how
to compose things and the speech zones
diagram play Brubeck which is much more
like jazz modern jazz and is to do with
improvising and yet retaining a sense of
control over form in reality where finds
things which are not exactly a
manifestos of course this is out of an
axe very well-known playgrounds in
Amsterdam this is a student hardware who
did a survey of the informal football
pitches in Rio de neighbor and it's just
astonishing
hundreds of them they do not form part
of any kind of established notion as to
how to understand the city but they're
all there and many of those unlike the
ones we've seen in the pictures before
they make up this kind of urban squares
so I like to suggest as a question what
will make out of the parity between the
field and square are seen here squares a
borough from Camilla city a very
conventional exemplary examples of
european squares and the fields are also
conventional games that people play all
of the worlds this is part of the story
this is more like a question as what -
what do we do this and how do we see
this for the future and I'd like to
close the presentation of this image
which i think is very evocative of the
notion of play as something that simply
is to do simply with wanting to play and
using what you have at hand and using
the theatre of the city as the theatre
of leisure and enjoyment thank you very
much
thank you very much Rica that was a very
thorough praised and also exciting
survey of all these different examples
of play inscribed within cities or in
stark contrast to the fabric of them um
I just wanted to see if anyone had any
questions before we close the lecture
yes okay maybe you can take one thank
you so much quick quick question a lot
of the play you talk about is ritual
play okay how do you feel about the
growth of virtual play it's been about
25 years since gaming took off do you
feel this is play about what sort of
gaming electronic play oh yes and the
way in which that connects I'm just
I know it's another field but a lot of
what you've shown me reminds me of the
notion of ritual are we now creating
internal rituals which don't connect
with the city very good question I
should have made the points I haven't
looked into it I think it is a
fascinating chapter I wouldn't know
exactly how to look into it because the
spatial consequences of it are different
of a different kind all together so I
was reviewing conditions that have
obvious spatial repercussions and that
somehow every now and then they overlap
with the area of expertise of Architects
or landscape architects or planners what
that's what make out of these other
fields of play which is so important now
I really don't know I haven't looked
into it but that doesn't mean that of
course it is a very important subject
and hopefully someone should look into
it intensely i I don't know exactly I
haven't in my research I haven't you
know given that much thought to it but I
thought about it in the book which will
publish there is a very short kind of
brief claim on my part I saw why I'm not
looking into that but I think as you say
it's a different chapter is something
very much situation today what I was
showing it's nothing more like a
historical is a kind of historical
retrospective view and it stops
somewhere around 1980s so we're somewhat
removed from that as well but that's the
that's the answer okay well I I just
like to thank everyone for coming and
thank you and we go again and I hope
you'll all states have some drinks in
the south jury room also on some of the
chairs in the front there's a little
leaflet at the publisher of Rodriguez
upcoming book also titled city of play
asked us to distribute because they
offer you 20% discount I think and you
can pre-order the book so if you didn't
get one just let me know thank you
[Applause]
