thank you very much tillu and thank you
very much into a public programs for
inviting me congratulations to this
beautiful fashion statement we are
talking here actually about a flag that
was designed by a Bauhaus designer who
is almost forgotten it's I think very
good times to remember his work the
anti-shah flag so but please take a seat
thank you Matt for for showing this
intervention that's my program for the
next 45 minutes I will talk about
obviously the relationship of
architecture and ideology about what I
call right-wing spaces I will introduce
you to typology and I will end up with a
different interpretation of the a a that
is here manifested in these beautiful
hoodies called anti-fur architecture I
will talk about as I mentioned already
about another version of a but before I
go into that I would like to share with
you a couple of thoughts about the
relationship of architecture and
ideology probably this place here in
Moscow is the best place in the world to
talk about the relationship of
architecture ideology we see here
building an Orthodox Church constructed
in the 1830s and it was demolished
exactly 100 years later by Stalin who
wanted to replace this alt building by a
project that you probably all have heard
about I'm talking about the Palace of
Soviets there was a famous competition
what was your on one of the one of
Stalin's favorite architects who won
this competition and this building
should replace the
the Russian Orthodox Church the Christ
of the Saviour Cathedral in Moscow
construction started for this building
but then the Second World War started
and the construction was interrupted but
there was already something constructed
that I will show you in a minute but
before I show you this I would like to
make a quick comparison to what actually
happened in an other in an alternative
ideological context in the u.s. at the
same time though King Lenin on the
left-hand side who versus King Kong on
the right-hand side he I see here kind
of interesting comparison between
competing regimes let's call them
liberalism on the one hand and communism
on the other hand but let's go back to
Moscow what happened to the to the
started construction in Moscow the
foundations were constructed and after
the Second World War people in Moscow
asked themselves what shall we do with
this foundation of the palace of itself
yet let's build their public pool and in
this Moscow pool you could swim until
the early 1990s in yeah in a kind of
beautiful version of socialism existing
in reality in the middle of the 1990s
this highly successful public building
was deeply questioned and the kids the
old cathedral was reconstructed again
most of you might know this building
from [ __ ] Riot actions against the
Orthodox Church and other political and
religious movements in Russia so by
showing you this sequence I definitely
wanted to make clear that there is and
obviously that
and relationship between architecture
nor ideology but it's actually pretty
difficult to draw exact relationships
between a built form and a certain
ideology the most famous example is the
so called classicist tradition we see
here deeply democratic building and sub
Parliament in Helsinki built in the
1930s by an architect called Ceylon and
finnish architect and if you close your
eye for two seconds and open it again
now you see only ten differences we see
a pseudo parliament in North Korea
called the man today Assembly Hall again
a colossal order a kind of building that
is part of a long tradition of
classicists traditions but obviously
with completely different ideological
context surrounded and similar things
could be said about modern architecture
the most famous example is this one I'm
sure you have all seen images of this
building still today a building worth to
visit the Casa de father the house for
the fascists in Como designed by
giuseppe tyranny if italian fascist
architect completed in 1936 it's still
standing today today the finance police
of italy as as having offices in there
at least for the region in Como and the
interesting thing about this building is
not only the built artefact
but also the history of its reception
Peter Eisenman is one of the biggest
fans of this building he's also a great
fan of his deputy Ronny and of course
when I'm talking about Peter as man I'm
definitely talking not about a fascist
he's probably an anti-fascist but still
is highly interested in the kind of yeah
they built artifact the complexities of
the Casa de fer Shur designed budget
honey he defends the architecture
obviously for autonomous reasons for
reasons that have something to do with
the idea of an autonomy of architecture
there's also building Germany between
Stuttgart and Castro in a little town
called fall time and obviously this
again is a building not inhabited by
flashes and not designed by fascists but
there is obviously a strong relationship
to the casa del fascio in Como what I'm
trying to say with this little sequence
is that there is obviously not
right-wing or left-wing architecture but
that they are right-wing spaces that
have something to do with territorial
izing processes etc I will come back to
this in a second but before I do that I
do this I would like to share with you a
couple of thoughts about this left
versus right dichotomy there are many
intellectuals prominent intellectuals
who think that talking about left versus
right is itself deeply reactionary it's
a it's these are terms from from the old
world and yeah one of the intellectuals
who is associated with this kind of
ideas is definitely Francis Fukuyama an
American liberal philosopher he
published a book in the early 1990s
right after the fall of the Iron Curtain
called the end of history and the last
man the idea of this book was basically
to say that with the fall of the Iron
Curtain the history came to an end the
Western idea of liberal as a of
liberalism has succeeded there's nothing
else to say about history of ideology
but when this book was printed
it was actually already a document of
the past because at least in Europe
terrible washed out at the civil war in
former Yugoslavia and there's also a
philosopher a Slovenian philosopher a
philosopher from former used la v√≠a
called Slava chechik who thought
carefully about this dichotomy left
versus right and he published an article
in a book that that was published a
couple of years ago in 2017 called the
great regression it's a kind of panorama
of the complexities or the political
complexities that we are surrounded by
at the moment and in that book there's
an essay by a Slavic Dziedzic who
thought carefully about left versus
right and came to the aunt that he he
said that left was this right is not the
polarity of our contemporary condition
anymore he actually suggests that left
the idea left versus right should be
replaced by a cruciform form of
combination of two axes the universality
the idea of universality versus
patriotic belonging on the one hand and
then capitalism versus leftist anti
capitalism on the other hand I found
these arguments pretty convincing and
started to establish a diagram based on
some of the ideas of Slavic shake which
looks like that in the end again we see
here the combination of two cruciform
polarities the idea of universalism
versus patriotic belonging or pratik
nationalism on the one hand roses global
capitalism on the other hand versus
anti-globalist left
and I added a few words to this diagram
that is inspired by a Slavic
by saying that there's obviously a
duplicated left and there's a duplicated
right there there are two versions of
right-wing politics and there are also
two versions of left-wing politics and
there are many many combinations and in
between stages between these extremes
that are mapped by this diagram one
combination is for example the what we
call in German language the crea font a
kind of third position a combination of
socialist ideas with nationalism the
result we know is National Socialism
basically and there's also another
combination possible progressive
liberalism that's the term by the
American philosopher Nancy Frazer who
said that there's an obviously very good
synergy available between the idea of a
kind of leftist universalism combined
with a global capitalism and maybe
politicians like Angela Merkel or
Hillary Clinton are actually depressive
personifications of the idea of
progressive liberalism I'm trying to
argue that every version or every
possibility of architecture theory has
to be situated in this map somewhere so
there's always some kind of implicit or
also explicit political argument that
can be placed somewhere there and if we
look at biographies of certain
architects and architectural theory
Titans we can also sense as a moving
field former Marxists became
nationalists I will speak about that in
a second and I will would like to start
with one example and Hungarian architect
who was very prominent when I studied
architecture in the early 1990s
his name is Emery McRoberts he is not
living anymore but he became very
well-known in Hungary but also
in Europe form buildings like this here
kind of strong yeah anthropomorphic
architecture where if is the economic
architecture which is definitely
interesting there's also influence
detectable maybe by Woodruff Steiner and
expressionist architecture but if we
look at the soundtrack of in my
MacRoberts yeah it might be surprising
that in my Markowitz was a yeah was a
right-wing architect and right-wing
architecture theorist who was also
deeply anti-semitic and was very close
to Viktor Orban who long before Viktor
Orban became prime minister of Hungary
he was part of his polished political
movement confident and yeah Markowitz
said basically some very disturbing
things about Jewish intellectuals
tuition Hungarian intellectuals like
atmos hello a yogi
Conrad quote I can't believe it out even
if I stand on my head they always have
something to criticize the Hungarian and
nation for they have a superiority
complex they live with the idea of being
the chosen people they're obviously a
kind of strongly anti-semitic statement
by an architect who we associate with
and with expressionist architecture in
the widest sense of the word I would
like to give you a second example an
example often architect and architecture
theorist who also taught here at this
place his name is Leon crea Leon Korea
Architects that I respect many of his
drawings and some of his thoughts but
and if you look at this diagram you see
a question mark behind Leon crea the
question mark is there because the DM
Cree always tries to stress I'm not a
political person I'm an artist
I would love to build for leftists but
they don't give me a commission that's
why I prefer right-wing politicians
right at the moment but this ideological
orientation became deeply problematic
already in the 1980s when he produced a
kind of coffee table book on the work of
Hitler's architect Albert p.m. which of
course you can write historiographic
books and you should write actually
historic graphics on average beer but
not this kind of books in my opinion if
you open this book it's still available
and there's the second edition available
from the it was published in 2013 he
even tried to improved and tuned the
some of the drawings of Ibn try to
basically neutralize the political
implications of many of the projects and
buildings and try to say this is the
greatest architect Germany has seen in
the 20th century and for many many
people including me it was not at all
surprising that Lyon Korea began to
population two or three years ago in
ultra right-wing magazines called Kato
in Germany so it's it's a kind of F T
magazine you could call it and in every
second or third edition Leon crea writes
an article about beautiful architecture
and it was obviously also very happy to
reproduce drawings by Leon crea like
this
we're obviously alien crea trust to
criticize the idea of modernist
pluralism and tries to defend the idea
offer traditional pluralism by
representing the idea of traditional
pluralism with obviously an idea of
ethnic purity so deeply I called the
strong a racist drawing
a couple of months ago Ranma by the
Guardian and observer wrote about this
little battle between Leone Korea and
and myself and yeah the argument of Liam
you can still read in this article I
would like to come back to the idea of
right-wing space about to what I call or
what I try to call right-wing spaces one
year ago but less than one year ago I
published together with my Institute of
the University of Stuttgart this edition
of the German architectural magazine I
class called right-wing spaces it's a
report of a journey throughout Europe
and this journey we did together with
our students at the University it
started in Rome and it ended in Berlin
so we tried to reenact so to see a
highly problematic axis Rome Rome Berlin
it's a it's an axis with political
implications that go back to fascism
respectively National Socialism and on
this journey we tried to find out ways
how historical architectures of fascism
get rediscovered in contemporary
politics and we looked at Greece we
looked at countries like Spain we and
the journey started at this building
which is very close to the main station
in Rome it's a building called Casa
pound Casa pound is a neo-fascists
political movement in Italy it for a
long time it was also it became a
political party and the scouser pound is
named after the American poet Ezra Pound
who became a fan of Benito Mussolini and
also wrote poems about Italian fashions
we'll come back to this in a minute and
this building we analyzed not only this
building but also the infrastructure
around it because we found out it and it
was well known it didn't need us to
discover this that around this
headquarter this political movement a
whole infrastructure consisting of bars
of book shops of fashion stores all run
by fascists and offering kind of fascist
products you can discover in the middle
of Rome and the journey continued we
traveled to the north we went to Rosalie
knees birth house we looked at the
headquarter of the Italian right-wing
party legally are not formally we
analyzed the spaces around this
headquarter we also looked at Hitler's
birthplace which there's a right now a
architectural competition going on what
should be done with this birth house of
without of Hitler who became a kind of a
magnet for many many neo-nazis in Europe
and Beyond and we also analyzed kind of
public memorials like the so called que
pasa denkmal in Germany I can't go into
the details of this but we also try to
analyze for example whole settlements in
Germany not only in the eastern part of
Germany where neo-fascists neo-nazis
kind of take over parts of abandoned
villages and the countryside and
establish their kind of living based on
ideas of white supremacy and ethnic
purity and the journey ended in Berlin
it started with Ezra Pound with this
building called Casa pound and it ended
on public scramble in called vitae
Benjamin plants designed by the German
architect Rance call off completed in
2001 and we
we kind of criticized the fact that in
the middle of the square
dedicated to water benjamine German
Jewish philosopher who committed suicide
while he tried to escaped Nazism in the
north of Spain in the middle of the
square dedicated to Bennett Benito and
dedicated to about Japan you mean you
could find a poem by Ezra Pound and put
it there the whole architecture was
inspired by Mussolini's favorite
architect much hello pH Antonia it's
basically a quotation of a firm building
in Torino by Pierre Chan teeny and
that's a little quote you could find in
the middle of the square it's not very
prominent most people have never seen it
most people only realize the fact that
there is a quote in the middle of the
square which is basically more or less
the program of the whole square by the
public debate that started when we
published this architecture magazine
called our class what was to be written
in German it's it's a basically a quote
that is saying under the conditions of
Zorah there's good architecture is not
possible and if you know only a little
bit about the work of Ezra Pound you
know that szura is basically a code form
for for for jews so badly in the middle
of the square called about abandoning
plants there was a quote saying that to
with Jews there's no good architecture
possible we worked together with a
friend of ours called he's his name is
Marcus mise in the berlin-based
architect who also I think studied and
taught here at the school
and he produced this
poster series and we basically filled up
the city of Berlin with these kind of
posters saying where we try to establish
a kind of similarity Benito Benito
Mussolini marchello machado continue the
favorite architect of Mussolini Ezra
Ezra Pound and ants hands come off we we
didn't try to say that hands call was a
fascist but we simply wanted to
criticize the fact that this quote was
brought to this public square and a big
debate in Germany started also in
Austria and Switzerland basically every
newspaper every kind of TV station radio
station reported about this debate
started termed by us and to our surprise
not too many people wanted to follow us
they tried to defend the autonomy of
poetry represented by Ezra Pound and
didn't want to make a specific link to
Ezra Pound anti-semitism so as a kind of
similar process what's going on there
out the idea of autonomy in architecture
plus the idea of autonomy in poetry was
combined in order to to neutralize this
statement by Hans khalaf / Ezra Pound on
a square dedicated to Abacha benjamine
but suddenly a year later and the debate
was still going on in Germany almost on
a daily basis something changed suddenly
Allan Poe's honor the son by the way of
Julia's pose another famous architecture
historian wrote a big article in the
German daily newspaper called Ebert with
a title yes there is anti-semitic
architecture and this changed something
profoundly suddenly the
parliamentary representation of the
borough in Charlottenburg Berlin decided
that this quote needs to be kind of yeah
it demolished basically and and there
was a decision in Berlin Charlottenburg
to do this but then the question arose
who's the owner actually on the square
it turned out that it's not the public
it's not a public square
it has owned by a private owner and the
big question was who's the owner
actually of this building and some
people found out actually another
journalist found out that the owner is
Blackstone one of the biggest companies
in the world who bought this building I
think in 2016 for several hundred
million euros and on this in this
article again in the verge the
journalist Marco Savino was the first
person who brought who linked the name
of the company directly to anti-semitism
if you know only a little bit about
Blackstone you know that seems watzmann
it's the CEO and chairman and was a
founder of Blackstone and the Jewish
American entrepreneur and only two days
later the the quote was scum it was
interesting to see the reactions most
newspapers newspapers didn't write about
that but in the commentaries of some
newspapers people said okay szura made
the quote gone in a way so it's a again
a kind of debate with anti-semitic
implications it now looks like that I
hope this works if you come to the watch
of Nu plus now it looks like that
the artists the quotas gone replaced by
a provisional temporary architecture
consisting of timber I actually like the
status quo because one of the pseudonyms
of vitae benjamine during National
Socialism was Hoyts
Detlef Hoyts in English timber accident
a strange accident what if any meaning
is more present on this place than
before I would like to come back to the
kind of search a chapter of my
presentation where I would like to
introduce you to my typology of
right-wing spaces in Germany and beyond
and I would like to start with the idea
of a kind of single the lonesome house I
start you with a private house owned by
one of the most prominent theatre play
writers in Germany called water stars
he's actually a pretty conservative and
I would even say right-wing a guy who
publishes in magazines like their
Spiegel essays where he says sentences
like this here I would rather live in a
dying but vital nation he uses the
German word [ __ ] I mean one that is
being rejuvenated by being mixed
together with foreign people's primarily
on the basis of economic and demographic
speculations what house became one of
the key intellectuals for the so-called
German new age what the the new
right-wing kind of intellectuals and
when he became this figure he moved into
this little building where that's his
estate in the north of Berlin where he
also wrote a little novel
where he basically describes kind of
taking his son out for a walk around his
house and and learning about the
countryside and learning to ignore the
idea of learning to neglect the idea of
of the idea of a mix of different
people's and there are many buildings
you can find in Germany and also beyond
Germany of course by owned by ultra
right-wing politicians which have to be
interpreted as buildings that are the
beginning of something the beginning the
beginning of a new settlement based on
the idea of ethnic purity for example
here the idea of a neo-nazi politician
called hoodoos pastors that's a new
building constructed by Nazis and
there's also a company or Nazi YouTube
channel in Germany where the the
backdrop of this private houses it's
basically made public so it's it's not
again it's not actually a private house
anymore it's a mix of private and public
house we could say similar things about
the farmhouse of York haider the former
Austrian politician where again the idea
of the lonesome house in the middle of
the countryside is became a very
important prominent figure for for a
kind of political project and the next
step after the lonesome house is the
settlement around brutal houses
especially in the eastern part of
Germany where real estate is soaked you
can buy basically whole villages for
very little money you can see a certain
pattern of neo-nazis moving to villages
and basically living their life there I
am based on the idea of white supremacy
there's one of the most infamous
villages is called Yama you could find
there even kind of grills with with the
saying happy holocaust and also kind of
buildings we're kind of communal living
takes part cannot only be detected in
Germany but also for example in in
France where there's a highly disturbing
girls group called Libra short it's a
kind of ultra right wing right wing
extremists pop band called Lea blue
George who produce songs and records
with titles for Sinatra chair France our
soil sing songs about Roma Lila Penn and
Donald Trump of course and they also
live in a kind of hippie commune in the
middle of the Black Mountains in France
and basically use a kind of leftist ap
ask way of living and turn it to the far
right in order to to establish an
example for a kind of communal living
based on ethnic purity we can see
similar things in Hungary where until
very recently there was a there is still
a village called a attack which used to
have a mayor he's not mayor anymore
called or fascists who forced the
children in the kindergarten in a attack
to sing children's songs where they were
supposed to sing about dancing on their
own future coffins when they have died
for the Hungarian folk and in front of
the little town hall of the attack there
were even
yeah kind of anti-semitic X symbolic
executions of Benjamin Netanyahu and
others everything combined of course
with traditional clothing etc etc we can
find similar patterns also in the u.s.
of course I mean there's a whole history
written already about these compounds of
the neo-nazi groups like the National
Alliance etc again and again the pattern
in this apology is that people of the
same kind of of the same race so to say
it's supposed to live together and form
a kind of highly disturbing way of
collective living and this building
brings me to the next example especially
in the u.s. we can detect a highly
interesting of course also highly
disturbing symbioses or combination of
two topologies in the camp you could
almost see a concentration camp plus the
church tower this has a certain reason
because churches in the u.s. a good way
to avoid taxes that's why many white
supremacy groups in the u.s. started to
call them political movement at church
and they added church towers to compound
living of neo-nazis and white
supremacist this headquarter for my
headquarter of the Aryan Nation is not
existing anymore it was demolished in
2001
here we see
images of the deconstruction but this
last example brings me to the next and
third topology and the so topology is
goes beyond the idea of the settlement
insofar as we have to talk also about
some kind of symbolic buildings that
represent the community for example in
the form of stately homes castles and
old manners there's a whole new Nazi
history in post-war Germany yet to be
written which can be told in old castles
inhabited by neo-nazis using public
money for for conservation in order to
to live there together that's one of the
most well known examples in Germany it's
called being sport copper Hoffman they
did also a bomb attack on the Olympia on
the Oktoberfest in Munich where several
people died and they used in the 1980s
400 militias with weapons and also tanks
left on compounds around old castles
around the Nuremberg in Franconia mainly
but also the image of the old castle of
the old manor is present in contemporary
right-wing politics there's a very
well-known ultra right-wing publisher
called guts kubacheck New York Times
what about him and many other newspapers
who always stress that they live on an
old if it's a good olds Manor
so you might ask yourself now why why is
why have which why and do we have to
talk about this pattern one reason is
definitely did that right-wing
extremists globally hate at least one
datum one year which is 1789 the French
Revolution and many right-wing political
movements try to reestablish in the idea
of a kind of natural social autumn that
goes back to the time the feudal times
before the French Revolution
there's also French philosopher I'm sure
you have heard his name already over an
all coming who lives in this castle in
France
that's his library he's the author of
the book the great replacement which
became also the title of this manifesto
by Brandon Taryn the christchurch mass
murderer and if we look at the diagram
and all the kind of the diagram in the
middle of this manifesto we see the
symbol of the Black Sun the Black Sun is
a became a in Germany and also beyond
Germany kind of code for the swastika
which is forbidden in Germany and also
in some other countries it's basically
the swastika 2.0 where the service black
Sun come from it's coming from this
castle in Germany called the Vives book
which was renovated by SS troops during
National Socialism and in one of the
towers you find this black Sun designed
by
German Nazi architect called hamon but
and so this is so basically the floor
pattern that is at the beginning of this
symbol that became now unfortunately for
terrible reasons kind of global success
if you allow me this word I don't know
I've only spoken about the countryside
about more or less rural areas I started
with a casa pound in the middle of Rome
but the question now and maybe also the
question here in this room is what
doesn't this have to do with the city
with our kind of more or less liberal
maybe idea of living together living
based on the idea of difference and
tolerance and I mentioned already the
casa pound I didn't mention yet that the
casa pound has a symbol which is this
turtle so they used the image of an
animal which has its own house which is
which is always carrying its own house
with it and that's also the idea of of
Casa pant to go into spaces two derelict
spaces to claim them and to basically
copy a kind of leftist way of claiming
spaces by ultra right-wing neo-fascists
I mentioned already this has a pound
alternative infrastructure with
neo-fascist bookstores and I should
mention that the model has a pound gets
copied right now also in Germany until
very recently in Leipzig there was the
so-called German has a pound
and so there are many efforts also from
ultra right-wing groups in Germany
beyond to go back to the inner city and
to learn from the Italians in order to
establish fortress in the inner city
based on the idea of white supremacy etc
when you talk about the relationship of
inner cities and right-wing politics at
least in Germany we have to talk about
reconstruction projects it's not a
surprise that the project of the
reconstructed foundation released the
women's church in Dresden became a
tattoo of a German and neo-nazi it is
also not a surprise that this building
in Potsdam it's probably reconstructed
right now the the tower is getting
reconstructed right now but the church
itself is not clear yet what is this
church about that's a garrison Church
and paestum which is famous for
architectural reasons it's actually a
very important piece of architecture and
you know kind of baroque a piece of
architecture but this is also the place
where kind of deeply problematic
handshake took place the handshake
between art of Hitler and Hindenburg the
handshake between German conservative
conservatism and right-wing extremism
took place in front of this church in
1913 three so this building is the
symbol for the alliance of German
conservatism and right-wing extremism
and for and there was a right-wing
extremist in Germany and neo-nazi who
actually
financed the reconstruction of the bells
of this tower and gave it to the city of
Postum under the condition that they if
they receive if they get the bells that
they should reconstruct the whole
building
he almost managed to do this but things
are changing right now but I want to
stress that it is not surprise obviously
that ultra right-wing political parties
in Germany like the IFT is of course
extremely happy about this
reconstruction project also the new
Franco old town is for me also not a
surprise actually the first political
initiative for this reconstruction
projects stems from an ultra right-wing
political group and I wrote an article
at the front for the remaining subjects
such a bit more than a year ago which
created a big debate in Germany and of
course many fans of all cities and no I
also don't have anything against all
cities obviously deeply offended that I
brought a right-wing extremism together
or in a certain relationship to these
kind of reconstruction projects the big
question in Germany right now is
obviously do reconstructions all these
City cars and in Berlin is are we simply
talking about my stature here um are we
provoking a certain change in social
behavior are we going back to Prussia
and it's politics again the FT is very
happy about this reconstruction project
and also is supporting the idea of
reconstructed reconstructing not only
the City Council in Berlin but also the
old town around it when ultra right-wing
politicians in Germany speak about
architecture they also speak about
memorials they speak especially about
the Holocaust Memorial by Peter Eisenman
and there's one deeply disturbing
terrible quote by an ft politician
called alt epoch book
said who criticized this memorial once
for its quote ugly aesthetics and he
recommended again quote you could put
something else in there that would take
up less space and have far more
atmosphere similar tendencies we can
also detect in Hungary by the way in the
issue I mentioned we also my colleague
at my Institute in in Stuttgart she's
Hungarian Shoshana stannis wrote about
the cultural politics in Hungary wrote
about reconstruction projects but also
about the Exile of kind of liberal or
even socialists statues of liberal and
socialist politicians to the edge of the
city while the inner city gets
completely redone with new memorials for
example this new memorial from 2014
dedicated to the nation of Hungary where
hunger is basically portrait yeah as a
pure victim of the eagle which is
representing Germany and these memorials
obviously try to ignore long histories
of also collaboration which sometimes
even lead to this these situations like
this year that McClure's 41 of them
supporters of Hitler in Hungary a statue
of McClure's haughty gets constructed in
the middle of Budapest you all probably
know that there's also a kind of heavy
debate going on about memorials in the
US with completely different political
context obviously we are here talking
about statues dedicated to confederate
generals like robert e lee i'm showing
here this picture of a kind of
far right sometimes even neo-nazi rally
protest against these Confederate
monuments the organizer of this rally
and many other rallies is Richard spans
are one of them kind of most important
activists of the far-right
in the US he he's running him up pseudo
think tank called the National Policy
Institute it's actually it's it sounds
very representational but it's actually
just an address somewhere but the
website is looks very statuary with
columns etc I try to find out where
these columns come from and I think I
found out that these are the accounts of
the Supreme Court built in 1935 by the
architect Cass Gilbert and the marble of
the stone was given to the architect by
Benito Mussolini which means many
obviously to maybe there's just an
accident but I'm more and more convinced
that these people really know what they
are doing they know the references they
did their homework and we try to
criticize this we we should also do our
homework obviously and take them serious
which brings me to a very contemporary
situation you have all heard about this
you exactly executive order by the Trump
administration called make buildings
beautiful again I think the record
reported about that mmm and yeah with
interesting results the American
Renaissance that's um
that's a newspaper block by ultra
right-wing political group called the
American renascence white supremacy
pressure group in the US they they
published recently this article called
left his rage against classical
architecture where they also quoted to
people who criticize people like curly
and clear and others including myself
this article ends with this quote in a
healthy society building connect people
to their heritage and history they offer
comfort beauty and connectedness all
institutions should do this instead our
institutions spread cultural and
physical poison and we see the results
everywhere president Trump's proposed
executive order is one small step
towards reuniting white Americans with
our civilization or tradition obviously
honey disturbing sentences we need to be
aware of these sentences because they
bring it to the point what this project
is probably all about they bring it to
an extreme point but maybe extremism is
already part in the middle of certain
societies the American ultra right-wing
extremism is in a highly interesting
schizophrenic state I would say they
either the other one and they always try
to build their identity on the kind of
European heritage on the other hand they
want to they try to turn it into the
what they call the American greatness
and all comes together in this image and
I think by American right-wing
extremists standing in front of the
pattern on copy in Nashville Tennessee
speaking about European roots and
American greatness my fourth point is
the following when we talk about these
current developments we need to talk
about old buildings obviously but also
new media we need to talk about the role
of memes in social media on Twitter etc
there's one artist group called this
innovation dot orc who didn't highly
interesting political map of certain
memes and yeah obviously architecture is
not present there but we could do the
same with architecture images and we
also started to do this in this
architecture magazine called H+ where we
try to analyze in my colleague philippe
cooper try to analyze the role of
imagery in german ultra right-wing
extremist groups called identity LBV
going the identitarian movement which on
the one hand use very well-known old
buildings for the political propaganda
they even hire an architect who can read
plants in order to organize letters high
enough that people can climb up the
brandenburg gate and if we look at for
example facebook page is like
architectural revival i think it's a
british facebook page as far as i know
that's a highly interesting highly
problematic obviously facebook site they
post memes like this year rubia the
local reject the global modernism is
faceless and soulless and global and for
example this post got retweeted by this
German ultra right-wing extremist called
Robert Tim who calls himself Schinkel
[Music]
and also work with the contradiction
good versus bad and that's that's a
rhetorical model established in German
architecture theory by
architect and theorists called POW
shoots Nam Berg who was deeply
reactionary who was responsible for the
blood and saw the Putin Putin Adi
geology you established in his
publications this good versus bad
propaganda and we see similar patterns
also on Facebook groups like
architectural revival in this post on
the left-hand side they even say
modernism is demoralizing a concrete box
proposed for Cologne the removal of
German identity assists the replacement
of German people there it is again the
idea of the great replacement I
mentioned before I would like to
conclude with a new interpretation of a
a not anti anti fair architecture but a
national capitalists architecture we
shouldn't when we when we were here the
a a a place I deeply admire we we
shouldn't claim that we are talking
about things that are far away on the
one hand I mentioned already Italy and
crea who
[Music]
it's always referring to this idea of
being the artist constructing potpourri
we should not ignore that the imagery of
Palm Pre played a crucial role in
certain UK propaganda films like
building for the future from 2013 we
should not ignore and I know many people
who didn't ignore the role of Rochester
in all these developments came out as
the former Ministry of building was very
close to these tendencies were presented
by Roger Scruton and Leone Korea but I
would like to also to mention that we
should be maybe more aware of how we're
right wing publishing houses are
actually situated in the city here in
London there's one very prominent
publishing house called arctos not many
people have heard of this publishing
house but it's the most important
English speaking speaking publishing
house for ultra right-wing publications
if you look at the addresses I mean they
are very close by they are actually here
on a salt street right north of Houston
station the CEO a Swedish right-wing
extremist called Daniel Freiburg who's
financing many initiatives in this
direction so we are it's it's it's not
far away these stances we were talking
about also Cambridge analogical was only
H the former headquarter of Cambridge
general analytic it was only 800 metres
away from here until it was closed down
I think in 2018 one of the crucial
companies who made the
yeah the leaf campaign possible also the
success of this company called EMA data
limited based here in London financed by
the Mercer family who is also financing
ultra right-wing groups in the u.s.
their headquarter is in Canary Wharf
which brings me to my last point until
now I have more or less speaking about
only one corner and this diagram the
bottom right corner where the CAA comes
come in to into the plane obviously
Patrick Shuman I think he's probably a
lot i met him only once he's a very
friendly person very open also for
discussions which I really like but do
what you shouldn't mean that and I'm
sure also this takes place also at the
school but I wouldn't place him
obviously in the bottom right corner but
now on the bottom top in the top right
corner now and I'm talking about an
intellectual and practicing architect
who started we all know this as a
Marxist so probably on the top left
corner moved via Systems Theory and
Niklas Luhmann somewhere to the Austrian
school the American right-wing
libertarian publisher Tommy woods even
posted this on Twitter and Facebook a
couple of in 2017 where he said Patrick
Shuman a major voice in architecture and
a former Marxist says I converted him to
Austrian economics to people like Ludwig
von Mises and Friedrich von Hayek
he's now enraging the bad guys by
calling for privatisation of all public
spaces including
roads and announcing state involvement
in pretty much anything you probably all
know more or less the consequences of
this debate
The Guardian kind of titled so how did
successes crap art schools private our
cities and been social housing which
costs a lot of problems also foreign
sound it architects even the Evening
Standard put his ideas about cities on
the cover and the anti-fur organized
protests with as long as like sack
Schumer how all this siege goes on we've
also seen these scenes so anti-fur
protests in front of the off sound it
architects we're even poses like this
here were shown and also this poster
here which is deeply wrong I think in my
opinion because it misunderstands the
nature of the doubled right pochamma is
definitely not a fascist nor a racist or
something like that but he's an ultra
right-wing activists and also practicing
architect who says things that that
should be criticized at least in my
opinion
and in order to understand you but
better I would like to re-import some
quotes of them of an interview patrick
schumer gave to the big german newspaper
called each side I translated some of
the keys some of the quotes in the
future Patrick Schumacher says what
better quote would better rely on the
self-regulating forces of the market the
2008 crisis is the result of government
intervention which has blocked the of
regulating market forces or in the
United States we completed two very nice
projects but
the high-end business the air has slowed
down due to government intervention they
are not new they are no new anti money
laundering laws in the u.s. in the
United States especially in Miami where
a few years ago the Latin Americans
arrived with suitcases full of money the
business is over or if interns want to
join us without a salary the state
shouldn't prohibit it all if people
don't feel compelled they won't get out
of bed at all when I worked at the
University in Berlin I totally lazed
around oh there would be a lot less
vacancy if you could move our tenants
within a week form and that's the last
quote no tomorrow not all income groups
have to be in the city center my
employees should live here in the city
in the city center because they go to
the exhibitions to the pub have to go to
cultural institutions to continue their
education the security guards and the
cleaning staff have different priorities
different career developments they don't
need to live in the city they work less
hard if they sit on the train an hour
longer it's not tragic last quote
architects are in charge of the form of
the built environment we need to is
grasp this and run with it
despite all the moralizing political
correctness that is trying to paralyze
us with bad consciousness not a surprise
that Patrick Schumacher and sounded
architects look for certain alliance
with the Trump family with Jeff Kushner
where they designed this six success 5th
Avenue Tower which won't be built
I'm terribly sorry for the bad news but
I'm Dom thank you very much for your
patience
[Applause]
