I'd like to welcome everyone to this
year's Friday lectures though I'm going
to just have to append a footnote to
that one goes on saying it 20:56
whatever this will be after a great
amount of thought in discussion the last
of the series of Friday lectures kind of
on the grounds that before I die I'd
quite like to get some of them turned
into books and I need some time to do
that so I'm going to take it I would of
course continue in a general sense to
lecture and give papers but insofar as
after things because these are 30 years
now they've been going have become
something of a kind of institution it
sort of has that feeling of an
institution closing or dying or just
walking off but I want you to also to
add to that that at the end of next term
I end as you know in their end of the
second term now there will be some kind
of events to mark the 30 years including
that I will give us on a free-standing
lecture like the last word between us
which I think we're going to be diverted
or dedicated to this thing the lectern I
will spend an hour interrogating Malec
term for what the lectern never says
before that we're going to look at the
question of the face it's being a witch
for a long time to do something on the
face but it's one of those topics that
you think yes that would enable me to do
various things and then you get this
kind of odd feeling coming back yeah
like what what exactly is a problem of
the face I was a bit downhearted to see
that lakal said the face that's very
complicated and lift it wisely at that I
think it's an interesting question I
don't know the answer but I still think
it's an interesting question as to sort
of when was the face invented I mean
that sounds like an absurd question you
know we assume that human beings haven't
faced whatever but it's not clear to me
that that it's as obvious as that I mean
first art obviously evolution plays a
large part of this since at a certain
point in evolution humans lost the need
for an incredibly large jaw which
everyone else is faced like dogs
horses whatever they have a huge muzzle
but the kind of act for atrophy of the
function I mean especially with the
introduction of cooking meant really
that sort of humans became in terms of
eating somewhat more delicate didn't
really require the muzzle so the muzzle
goes and it feels me sometimes like you
can almost see it's gone it's not
difficult to especially with some people
to imagine that they'd have a muzzle and
could you never quite know like which
part of the face to so struck when I was
young dog you stroke a muscle or its
ears so we still teach bear like to be
the absence of muscles in which case we
you know we acquired a face which is a
sort of plain oh my I mean not quite but
it's basically a kind of flat thing on
which other things are organized other
things which seem to have incredible
importance the eyes the ears I never
know whether the ears are part of the
face or like a boundary of the face if
you consider from writers a lot of
definitions of the vase they say well it
goes up to the hairline but when you
think of a variability of the hairline I
mean what about bald people
I've tried to be the point that the face
is actually a rather indeterminate
object it's very important when we refer
to it his or her face was but some of
the question what and where was the face
we now if anything you know if you look
up kind of physiologists they'll tend to
say well you know the face is a so
concentration of a lot of important
organs for sense experience it's almost
as though it's a kind of concentration
of experiential and communicative
functions but even in cultures which
perfectly well have a notion of the face
they don't necessarily have a notion of
the significance of the organs in them
or least the same significance as we
attribute to them so one thing that's
always been true is that we think
there's a special relationship between
the face and the soul we think that the
face or possibly the eyes a kind of
window onto the soul or the same thing
the other way around the face is where
the movements of the soul and the
prussians
expressed think for example of a
beautifully written book the expression
of emotions in animals and humans by
Charles Darwin the books extremely
interesting and as I say beautifully
written but it doesn't really kind of
tell you perhaps what you wanted to know
what it really tells you is that certain
emotions something like a horse or
whatever are communicated through the
body largely through movements in its
musculature and he reduces the argument
in the book to really three principles
one is that in a sense a feeling on the
part of the animal seems to the animal
to correspond or to use the language of
the 19th and 18th century to set up an
association with a certain movement of
the muscles and therefore of the
organelles and that the animal gets used
to this or you could say it becomes a
habit and the habit finally cashes out
as a kind of reflex action
the book of everything else is startling
evidence that those who reduce Darwin
solely to the principle of evolution
through natural selection do him a
profound injustice the book on the
expression of animals is all about in a
sense the inheritance of acquired
characteristics exactly what you know an
essay young in Psalm 101 on Darwin you
know Darwin's enemy was Lamarck because
Mark said but animals could acquire
characteristics not through inheritance
so especially for domesticated animals
you can soon get with the minimum of
training a domesticated animal to do
things that don't come naturally say to
a horse a horse doesn't naturally tenter
but a domesticated horse obviously does
and they're all these other phenomena
and bidded loss not knowing a lot about
animals I couldn't quite work out what
pointing and sitting were in dogs but I
pass it on to those of you who know more
about dogs than I do what the reason is
this relationship between the soul and
like the face or any other part of the
body in which the passions the movements
of the soul anger terror grief are
supposed to find
their expression in a form which is
repeatable and most remarkable is when
we come to principle - which shows the
absolute non kind of environmentalist
it's when he says animals also express
negative versions of say anger like joy
by doing the opposite thing with their
muscles there it's not a kind of
functionalist argument stool it's almost
like a logical thing to do in humans
this led to the existence over two
thousand years really of a sort of
permanent I don't like using the word
but let's call it pseudo science known
as physiognomy which is the study
particularly of the human head to work
out in detail the expressions whatever
thinking that they would be well in the
17th century very useful for painters
and obviously in the 19th century very
useful for policemen criminologists but
I want to go back to the point about
classical antiquity which is when we say
that the eye is an organ of sense what's
his relation to the soul
it's actually an inverted one which you
would be quite surprised to hear if you
don't know it it's this if you look in
Homer there are many many references to
eyes
people do an incredible number of things
with their eyes they weep they implore
they shall grief they show anger they
beg they demand the great repertoire of
actions that the eye fulfills the only
thing that seems to be mad missing is
reference to the eye seeing
and when I say see here I mean you know
the general function he looked up and
saw we have to wait till really the
period of Plato for God the idea of
sights as being a general function
expressed in the verb say rain from
which we get theory that important thing
is really that even in Plato this
argument about eyes having general sight
is not applied to the eye it's what an
analyst would call interjected into the
body as the soul so it regards the soul
as really an internal eye inspecting us
an internal space which perhaps from
then on we can call sookay or psyche the
soul whatever you want to call it and
that sight first rule is like an
internal
attribute and only later is externalized
as an adequate description of what the
eyes do so we have in antiquity a sort
of organs but I mean not without a body
but but without a very strong definition
of the face although one of the problems
which will make the face an important
problem is the issue in human culture of
recognition the question is how can I
recognize someone as the person I think
it is now of course that's a slightly
different problem in Homer because
simple what we might call empirical
recognition doesn't guarantee that it's
the person because there may be some
magical process which is kind of
hijacking the form of someone and using
it as a kind of simulacrum this problem
where you were you well I mean it's not
a modern formulation to say mostly the
recognition is linked to the problem of
how do you how you sure there's no craft
to work but it does go on through
Christianity in the most so what to me
is one of the most interesting
Harris's called dusit ISM dosage ISM
it's about recognition this I mean the
question arose for the followers of
Jesus of who wasn't at first this kind
of character I mean in ordinary Roman
upper-class terms a rather dreary kind
of rural personally went around telling
sort of proverbial stories that people
do in the rural areas at that time
indeed he wasn't really preacher called
Jesus he had to replace s2 enthusiam for
him become Jesus Christ a new
recognition by like the disciples which
made him the son of God but then over
the next two three hundred years young
people had to argue and debate well you
know this talk now of the Trinity that
is the three persons who make up God God
the Father God the Son God the Holy
Ghost what does that mean in terms of
like who was to be recognized what what
was the real relationship between them
and essentially Christians still recite
something called the Nicene Creed we've
got kind of 3 in 1 by 2 and you get one
free
but really they were only ever it was
only ever papering over obviously
philosophical problems which
professionals professional pagan
philosophers thought were just damn
silly totally philosophically
incompetent do such ism really was a way
of saying Jesus Christ never came to
earth as a man has an ordinary man he
kind of sent a simulacrum who is the
person who looked like Jesus of Nazareth
and who indeed was crucified on the
cross and four centuries afterwards
there was always this rumor he's like
don't tell anyone but apparently at the
crucifixion someone was heard at the
bottom of the cross laughing and the
idea of a theological idea was that
actually firstly was laughing at the
bottom of the cross was Jesus Christ
I mean who everyone had been put to
they'd been had in our terms this is put
together in a very beautiful scholarly
book by Professor screech the great
scholar of Montaigne called laughter at
the foot of the cross and I try to say
the recognition it's not a kind of
technical empirical thing it's a
profound problem even think of the
return of Odysseus
to his own house in ithaca finally when
he gets there it's very important that
he doesn't just appear as himself so
Pallas Athena totes him and we'll return
to this problem later with some stuff
which makes him look like an old beggar
so he's taken into the house by the
suitors but is thought to be a beggar
later on when Penelope his wife has
indeed seen him now in his what we might
call real persona as Odysseus
even then she won't agree that she's
recognized him I mean she recognizes
that he looks like Odysseus there as far
as she can tell he is Odysseus but she
can't she can't swear to it until he
reveals the secret of their
their marital bed which is it's carved
from an olive tree and is linked to the
olive tree only then would she admit
that she now has a token so resin issue
comes you know in various levels and as
always another one you could invent a
house has been invented for you so the
question of recognition is crucial to
the face but it's kind of posed in a way
which is very different from ours it
seems to me absolutely typical of Greek
culture that it says when someone dies
like dies in atoms the pneuma the the
breath the force of life leaves them and
also their face goes I mean the
diversity of describing it doesn't feel
the obligation to say you know where it
went or how it went or what happened to
it and the face is covered and there is
this I suppose really very shocking in
description of the face being bandaged
in darkness and nothingness but somehow
bandaged into it which always leaves
open somehow that the process can be
reversed
now I've tried to make the point that
when we look at the face festival we
it's unclear especially if we look at
the Greeks but it's not quite clear what
we're dealing with actually to be honest
it's not quite clear to me what we're
dealing with when we say when we talk
about the face we use it as we'll come
to in later lectures many different ways
I want now to kind of like skip into
just a few moments of slightly more
formal philosophy because I wanted to
try and indicate something that the face
did do in Greece but which never goes
really recognized as such and to explain
this I'll just give you very briefly a
description of that central piece of
Aristotelian metaphysics which is called
the categories now the categories are
normally defined as anything which can
be predicated of a subject you know if
you're Norfolk kind of philosophy
student but maybe that's left you quite
it's really anything that we can say
about a subject but it doesn't have to
be a subject in the sense of a human
being there might be in sentence you
know subject of a sentence or something
so really any object as well and
Aristotle in an incredibly famous
because this really kind of dominated
philosophy till the 17th century
he laid out what kinds of things
what sort of classes of things can be
predicated of a subject I'm gonna run
through them very quickly I think
they're kind of interesting the first
one is substance itself like what is it
to which the bt7 Aristotle uses word
musiah the next is quantity how much of
something is it these Greeks use word
Poisson quality what sort of thing is it
he is pasa relation that is it's related
to what which reeks expresses Chivas tea
where to when pot a
being in a position kites I having they
came doing plane being affected has
gained now in a sense Aristotle is
saying those are all the conditions
which are enumerated you know there it
includes like everything one way or
another that can be predicated of a
subject which can be attributed to the
subject actually I have a feeling that
architects will even if not students
philosophy actually understand this very
readily I've often been baffled or I was
a long time ago at the curious way in
which architects didn't just use Nan's
they wouldn't say the lighting they
would say the lighting condition well
that's kind of what I'm condition means
roughly I think more categories I mean
there's always this kind of curious
addition of conditions in architecture
it obviously isn't how can I put it it's
not usually necessary in a narrative
sense undoubtedly the person who says it
gets a bit of pleasure for and being a
bit rigorous matter he doesn't make much
sense philosophically but it's this
thing of you that you can experiment by
in design taking away things and adding
things including things that aren't
represented so think about whether you
need conditions and maybe they're like
Aristotle's categories and maybe yet the
17th century has yet to hit objects F
seven of these categories I want to look
at one of them it's really when there
could be related to what you can
immediately see the relation with taste
it is the emergence at this point of the
idea of frontal what is frontal me well
it's kind of you know it's the front of
something but what's the front of
something okay
I do remember standing just aside from
the section when Ben van Bertha who was
lecturing on what he slightly
grandiosely called the möbius house
arguing that this design was based on
topology rather really kind of sense of
typography I said Ben do house have a
front he said yes coffee - I said well
he's not a logical I mean I have I'm
making the point now let's imagine
because it would be very difficult show
it empirically that with a human now
erect the front of the human becomes
important
so much so that this front of a person
begins to relate to an incredibly number
of heterogeneous phenomena it's like you
sort of talk to the front of someone you
kind of pray to the front of somewhere
which means God has to appear to you
kind of friendly anyone who dad sad
should get themselves to Christie's to
look at the possible Leonardo painting
of Salvator Mundi
so in all Christians are like
recognition frontality becomes a crucial
kind of thing so much said that we don't
really we take it like for granted now
with this remains in a sense although
perhaps about the face quite
architectural I mean to the point where
we get onto the facade there's a
question of like a frontal aligning
itself with the idea of a plane that
means that the front is the plane if you
have one plane and if you have a culture
which is interested in recognition
you'll soon produce a second plane which
is the one that confronts you because
that's how you're tricking out people
you're beginning almost as an animal to
relate to people
front Lee and head on and of the years
roll long you know how many tea tables
have you sat at where children are told
no speech my face or the equivalent or
don't hide your face when you're
speaking whatever
so I'm arguing the frontality relates
also to alignment this has a profound it
says there's something about the face
it's frontality begins to migrate not so
much primary to other objects but to the
relation between those objects once
you've seen that alignment somehow goes
you'll soon start seeing the the
meaningless but nonetheless imperative
character something like a street it's
not that these things calls each other
but they seem to fit I mean it's all in
behalf of the kind of anthropological
kind of insistence that for the Greeks
the categories were a way of helping to
establish a recognizable society but
what's done in Athens is roughly what's
done in Sparta etc
so this question of alignment of
frontality is gone you can study it
although it's very unfashionable to do
so very obviously in the history of
military warfare the emergence of lines
and we once won soldiers are organized
in a more disappearing way you have what
of course is cooled in military terms of
front and it communicates in a way with
an enemy which is in alignment so I
would link this in the plane with really
the developing economy of lines of kind
of straight lines of claims and this
sense it goes on and on and on it's
presumably why Alberti
chooses to present linear perspective in
terms of sort of can get the cuts of
claims or another sense it's why were
flip in distinguishing between the
Renaissance and the Baroque refers the
Renaissance as being thoroughly Trani
metrical as opposed to the Baroque which
is what he calls painterly
and I think it's you know it touches on
the question which is always rather hard
to explain which is good noodle essays
churches some of them in foreign people
come away saying yeah they were
fantastically they were fantastically
perspectival well what else would that
mean
I mean if perspective was simply the
laws governing objects in space and
their representation how could something
look perspectival it sort of a one-level
doesn't make sense and yet the intuition
and observation is undoubtedly correct I
mean it's one of the very good examples
of what I would call the idea of the
look of something that it's not how we
see it and you know it's not how we
think we say it it's how we think it is
and it's got a very perspectival look
doesn't mean it was done by reference
perspective rules it means you've
conjured out of it a look
that I think is extremely kind of
important and I'll just go to the end of
that bit when I've tried to make a
relationship between like the look and
frontality and the rest really we should
be doing this in respect to n number of
other examples when we took a back talk
about the look of a face I think we're
talking about the look in the sense that
we say of the ruler skin church you're
not saying in a kind of scientific way
what you think the face looks like you
are saying what look
does it have or what look is it giving
now there's another term which I'm going
to introduce here which has very little
modern usage but I think is frequently
to be found in the Bible and sometimes
in translations from antique literature
it's the countenance the countenance
I mean says if you know had to be in a
Quattrocento vogue which actually the
pretty much had been in Florence I mean
they were about as much as fashion
victims as anyone's ever been they would
probably saying this season's
countenance is like this now how the
face is like related to that sorry
thanks how the face is related to that
and the Detailers we have to get to
before we can actually address this
question properly
we'll leave till later I apologize to
you all for coughing my way through this
and I hope none of you wake up sick tore
morning thank you very much
[Applause]
