Thank You Angela very happy to be back
what what I'll do I spoke a little bit
earlier on with with some of the people
that had shown up early you know both
Russia and I have been really interested
in examining how the past has always
played the role in informing the present
you know we live in such a
transformative place and divide that
we're always questioning the origin of
things why are things the way they are
and although we've published some of
this and we've exhibited some of this
sometimes it's important to take a step
back and and to go to the fundamentals
most recently we've been very interested
in the urban core of Dubai which is Dara
and how some of the things had started
in that in that nucleus but one of the
questions that emerged from thinking
about this is why is to buy so obsessed
with man-made islands where did this
obsession begin how did it start and so
what I'll do is rather than narrate a
story present and pose a series of
questions and through these series of
questions that tempted to find the
answers so the first question is is why
is Dubai so obsessed with man-made
islands and through this examination we
went to the core which is when was the
first man-made island proposed in Dubai
the second is what was being proposed
and the third question is who were the
people and the architects that had
proposed this idea and to set this
context I think it's quite important to
show a small clip that demonstrate what
Dubai was like in the 1970s
[Music]
vegetation inequitable a country
depending on desert could barely process
[Music]
[Music]
rusha
appreciate that business drives where
their stabl governments to prove
magistration and freedom but that
offered to buy nothing so she turned to
the be first fish then pearls then trade
shake russian then sold the week when
land do we pay the loan so the another
pose the series of questions and then we
put this we presented this video I think
it's important to contextualise
what made to by the way it is for as a
trading settlement and it's this Creek
that's natural phenomenon that made that
allowed ships to dock during seasons
that were we know inhospitable there for
ships that were moving from from west to
east and this natural Creek phenomenon
attracted the ships brought settlement
and people from rural areas came to the
city this is where the creek is in
contrast the city has grown a hundred
and eighty times since it's since the
middle of last the last century the
population grew from sixty thousand to
over two and a half million today
so immense and rapid growth in such a
short period of time but Before we jump
into the narrative of what man-made
islands I think it's important to just
go back and understand when the origins
of man-made islands started and although
there might be other examples but the
institutionalization of the creation of
man-made islands by the state began in
the 14th century in Holland and the
reason that exists is is because it was
mainly for survival
Holland is 30% underwater they needed
government based institutions that were
funded by the kingdom to to create
folders to create water breakers even
from an engineering perspective bringing
windmills to extract water to make land
available of course historically Venice
as well had created water breakers to
protect the city from flooding and this
continued all the way through to modern
proposals with with Corbusier proposing
the the hospital in Venice not only as
an intervention within the city but an
extension of an island that that goes
beyond the city and the third example is
the housing crisis which took place in
Tokyo migration from rural to urban
areas began to grow housing was in
extreme shortage in Tokyo and and what
had made Kenzo tange gay was his
proposal for Tokyo Bay of which others
had come in and I think now that we've
we've set the idea of what man-made
islands were I think it's also important
to understand what was proposed in Dubai
specifically and what were the reasons
for the proposal the first is that the
creeks from an ecological perspective
was losing its value erosion started to
kick in to take place the ships could
not berth and the creeks and there are
all these folklore stories of people
pushing the ships out in order for for
them to leave so the city started losing
its functionality and so an engineer
called William Hal crew was asked to
come in and he had proposed in 1956 to
begin dredging the creek and based on
his proposal the introduction of Creek
dredging took place as you can see on
the top right-hand the the the creek
began to erode as a consequence of tides
and water rising
ocean level rising on the left-hand side
is with the intervention allowing ships
to come in and this continue to take
place over the next decade or so I think
we had a little bit too much fun
afterwards so I think this continues to
modern day but I mean like I said in the
beginning of the presentation I think
it's important to focus specifically on
who and what was proposed for the for
the first man-made island in Dubai to
contextualise in 1970s was quite an
important time we had just you know
landed in the moon in 1969 the Osaka
Expo had just taken place engineering
was at was at the cusp people were
really thinking in in interesting ways
but at the same time critical
regionalism was a narrative that kicked
in
Kenneth Frampton architecture for the
poor hasn't fed he just redesigned the
Gorna Paulo Portuguese he also had
redesigned designed the Moscow from so
the idea of critical regionalism Islam
but at the same time this narrative of
building and constructing the
unimaginable
was was at people's grasp and part of
team 10 were riding in Reema patella who
finished architects that were less known
than Saarinen but were quite active
globally that built a palace in Kuwait
that built the finish embassy in India
and they had received the brief to
redesign the Creek which is which was
part of the the era sequin ish proposal
and and the the actual proposal itself
was quite interesting because it was in
some aspects conservative and wanted to
retain the urban identity of the city it
wanted to design compact buildings make
sure that the Seekers that were
originally based in the old part of the
city were retained so based on this
brief and their thinking that proposed
this
interesting multi-layered design
approach based on their thinking earlier
on they were part of two or three
meetings in cm where they were thinking
about Venice and how Venice retained its
light identity without losing the
modernizing without losing its character
and they reintroduced in a multi-leveled
way the wind towers which are evident on
the top of the buildings but going up
three or four stories they had
intervened between the buildings with
landscape architecture but not but their
designs were not only based on your
static they were really thinking about
the population growth that would take
place as a consequence of the
development of the city and so rather
than looking at urban sprawl
horizontally against the coast which is
which was naturally what was going to
take place they were I mean I'm not I'm
not saying that this was a good approach
but it was a different approach where
they were thinking about Township and
probably looking at Judaica or the Lido
in Venice and trying to emulate some of
those cities or some of those areas
similarly here you can see that a kind
of Grand Canal replica was taking place
and there at the edge of the city so
it's a different proposal with these
bridges in the back then what what is
available in the city and I think it was
also revolved around the idea of growth
this map on the left mimics for uber
guesses concentric circle plans
it looks at retaining the urban core of
the city but also advocating for as much
ferb in open spaces as possible and with
a Township on the bottom left this was
their final master plan on on the on the
top on the top right hand side there
proposed to do a sports facility they
proposed to do a university called
Dubai University there's a tower there
where they
to call it which was kind of a
San Marco ask structure but on the
bottom left you can see that there is a
a new Township that connects by the
water through a through kind of a ferry
connection so they really wanted to
retain the identity in a different way
and this is the model that's available
at the finish architectural museum some
of the points connecting to the old
redefining the urban core and the
proposal for a Township so how is this
proposal related to what exists in the
city today and this is their master plan
overlaid with the current master plan of
the city at the moment or the current
map of the city and whether it was the
town planners at the time who had
retained their original master plan or
not the new extensions within the city
are overlaid with the original master
plans that Riley anima potala had
proposed in 1974 so there is a
continuity of that original plan in
place a small point is BiBi pr1 the bid
for the competition and the master plan
was never built
but their proposal nevertheless is is
constantly repeated and you know when
discussing the original proposals in
Dubai this is part of an article which
we've recently written for C 20 and it's
out and talks about the buyers first
man-made island thank you
so mind you what do you think should I
dinosaurs or the reason why I and the
Gulf states have a lot of oil is because
it is the fact which we've recently
discovered or recently published is that
there was a lot of dinosaurs in the Gulf
and so as a result that created a lot of
fossil fuel and montina like that fact I
think it'll be great to have a bit of a
discussion about some of the questions
you provoked um in the in the
presentation but I was also interested
something you said in the sneak preview
some of us got before the lecture
started where you talked about growing
up in Dubai and he would call the
construction generation like as the
place has changed so dramatically over
time and I was just curious as to how
that that has shaped this research
project i when did this project start of
gathering all these different sources
finding out about this competition the
influence of the petals on on on the
shaping of like what Dubai would
eventually become yeah I mean growing up
in Dubai in the 80s and the 90s was
quite interesting simply because I think
the you know the population was so
diverse you know the Hindu temple was
built in 1918 you know we have a large
Palestinian Jordanian Lebanese community
we have a great influence from India a
lot of the words like there was a which
is door as part of our of our identity
and I think that mix created an
interesting subculture in the city
particularly with the with with with the
younger generation who had grown up
together and we identify in public
spaces Patrick Quinn for example is an
architect who built the the the cafe
that sits on the serpentine in Hyde Park
had built a similar structure in Suffern
Park which is the largest public park in
the city a lot of the kids grew up
spending time around there and these in
these public spaces are what defined our
youth and unfortunately because of the
growth of the city I think sometimes we
tend to neglect a lot of you know these
these faces that formulated our
collective memory and that give us a
sense of meaning in the city and so
we're now really we're looking back at
the beginning of where Dubai started
which is Dara and and where the Gold
Souk began where the traders began and
where they were where the urban core of
the city flourished and we're looking at
documenting some of that and narrating a
story particularly as the expo comes in
to form this year what our visitor is
going to come and experience and
understand and I just when they're at
the city and so our role is to construct
and re represent an important narrative
that defined this identity of the city I
mean because another time you said
earlier was about this idea of urban
dementia urban amnesia
like this forgetting of a past and I
don't know how much you can share
already about what you're how you're
going to narrate this story but how do
you think that will operate like for
people coming to Dubai maybe for the
first time to uncover this this kind of
hidden history I mean we haven't really
thought about it in detail one of the
ways we were thinking of doing it is
documenting it in this type of form and
talking about it which is important a
second way which is which we've
experienced in a number of ways the
number of places is tours I think when
you when you when you come to Dubai and
you go on a specific tour I think what
you see is misrepresentative of the
history of the city particularly from an
architectural and urban perspective
you know the words taking place post
post mid-century I was really rooted in
architects and narratives that were
taking place globally for example Middle
Eastern our modernist movement realized
a lot of their projects in Dubai whether
they're you know in the form of the
petroleum building and Jumeirah or a
water tower a lot of these ideas were
realized in Dubai and unfortunately
they're not these stories are not told
by the right people sometimes or Dokken
are not documented in the right way and
I think only by speaking to somebody and
meeting somebody would you be able to
understand these stories so one of the
ways is as taught is giving these you
know tours and speaking to different
people my last question before I open up
to the audience
I was curious I mean a lot of the
imagery that you showed in the talk will
really affect fantastic maps and
sketches and drawings from a whole
variety of different archives I mean
there's pictures by girls skin is a kind
of like fictional kind of construct
slash real I mean I think it's really
interesting about how you've gathered
the information from a variety of
different sources and how that also
shapes the telling of the story like
some of it is from an archive in Finland
some of it is by a kind of artist
photographer like that some of it is
like I'm just curious as to how you use
this kind of found material to also tell
the story I think the most important one
is the emoji I think first of all to
tell the story is important because it's
important to document it for future
generations the second way is these
archives exist in so many different
places and they tell different aspects
of the story that if you don't put them
together you'll never be able to they
might be lost
well another one is RIBA competitions
for example RIBA competitions in the UAE
were were so important that they've
documented Cedric price
to do an island and a lot of architects
had proposed these islands but these
archives never made it to two to the two
researchers in a way that is told in
this narrative and I and what fascinates
me about what is most interesting about
this proposal is not what they had
proposed but it was a different approach
for what could have been and I think
that in a ways is what is fascinating
about it it's it's the it's the beauty
in the unrealized it kind of suggests a
different trajectory that we might have
been on hand this proposal been built
but I asked the question about the
archives because of the the topic of the
series of like how do we shift the Canon
by maybe stitching together pieces of
research that aren't otherwise connected
or revealing them to an audience that
isn't aware of them so I think that's
really interesting anyway does anyone in
the audience want to ask some questions
thank you for the talk it was very
enjoyable so my question is basically
when tourists come into the by the
standard view that they have is the
toilet shiny buildings in downtown or
Sheikh Zayed Road and the vernacular
history of the city tends to be missed
out upon so how far do you think the
Bastaki are restoration actually goes to
words like propagating the architectural
history of the bay I think the you know
the old part of the city the best idea
it's it's it's unique in the Gulf and
the reason why it's so well preserved is
it's the only example of a neighborhood
that's intact
compared with Bahrain or other places
where you have two or three houses
and I think from a documentation and
vernacular perspective it's quite
important because what it does is it
allows you to translate some of those
ideas in some form of contemporary
manner the reason why we intentionally
did not present Palm Island when we're
having a discussion about the islands is
because it's easy to reference that to
reference the tallest tower or the
largest man-made island but I think what
what is more important is to go back to
when these ideas began and and to
articulate them and document them and to
understand how they were part of the
very new the very initial stages of when
Dubai was thinking about its identity in
terms of its can participation in the
world and so the Faithie was an older
version of what you have today in the
creek and so it is important to
communicate that vernacular to visiting
audience particularly architects who are
from the region thank you
Frosch do you want to contribute somehow
I'm just going to repeat my question
from before I and I'd like you to say a
bit more about it I always think when I
look at the islands what will happen
with sea level rise and you said about
the creep being eroded and when they
were planned were we as aware of sea
level rise I mean just comment on the
fact of sea level rise please you know
thank you okay so the IPCC report of
2015 commits us to to a two degree or
1.5 degree temperature increase which
means inevitably sea level rises will
take place and will affect coastal
cities Dubai is vulnerable to this
coastal impact but at the same time all
coastal cities are taking this seriously
deep adaptation in terms in contrast
with mitigation is something that Dubai
takes seriously and you can see it
Italian I don't know in detail how they
are doing but I do know that there are
examples of dredging Xand see barriers
being put in place for example in the
islands so for the example of the palm
island the outer shell is actually a sea
breaker but in technical detail I do not
know
I actually another question but I guess
when you talked about the kind of
alternative trajectory that had they
want the petals won the competition we
would have been set on could you
elaborate a bit more on maybe if you put
speculated on what that might have been
like what would Dubai of now look like
had we had they won the competition I
think there were so many participants so
the person who master plant for example
the person who master planned the Osaka
xpac 1970 from 1968 to 1970 built the
Dubai Municipality for example name is
dr. Kazuki Matsushita and he had built
two or three projects who was at the
time kind of was a Richard Rogers as
architect who proposed mechanical
buildings on the creek and they took
that proposal very seriously and Dubai
was really interested because it was
discovered and modernized in such a
latent phase that it wanted to modernize
as quickly as possible so up to 1960 we
were living in kind of ancient times and
then the minute
development took place there was a rapid
thawing and in an introduction and an
integration to the global economy and as
a result of that that's why the buyer
wants to modernize as quickly as
possible to catch up for the rest of the
world and so by doing that it has
adopted all these interesting ideas but
but what makes this proposal in contrast
to what other proposals there were is
that there was an interest in retaining
the identity but yet modernizing so they
weren't stopping the
of the port they weren't stopping the
introduction of an airport they still
retain the modern elements but they
wanted to retain the original identity
of the city and grow it somehow so for
example in the terms of faad the wind
towers that existed there they didn't
want to get rid of them and develop
something completely modern they wanted
to repeat that motif in a kind of new
modern way and that's taken that
direction we could possibly be looking
at a totally different city from what it
says today yes having a conversation
with somebody about the climate crisis
who's saying that actually the it's a
creative opportunity to look back at
history not to recreate things that
happen in the past but there was a way
of approaching how we build and how we
design that we maybe need to learn from
in order to build kind of contemporary
architecture that's very much off now
but that takes lessons from then and i
think this i mean--you a strategy that
you talked about today to look back in
order to create something maybe more
suited for for now in the future is it's
kind of along the same lines so it's
kind of an interesting question we're
just doing a bit of research for the
Biennale for Venice for the pavilion of
the UE and we're doing research on salt
and there's this idea that Dubai is a
city that emerged from the desert when
in reality it's not true Dubai emerged
from a salty plane Dubai his fears is
based on a mangrove natural salt plane
and it and it basically chose that place
because it was a flat land and if you
look at historical cities like c1 which
is a city built out of salt on a on a
salt lake 2,000 years after those houses
were built they still continue to exist
and people still live in them but
they've lived more they've modernized
them and evolve them but the original
salt block that was created and see
what's called the harsh Eve which is
salt and a bit of lime in a bit of sand
it's still developed and still in place
today so it's really interesting to to
look at the past not only as a way of of
learning but to see how it's sustained
itself
till today I mean it's really
interesting but I'm also trying to I
mean I would say maybe a foolish
question I have but I'm trying to
understand as well that's in some way
the image which Dubai is built in
today's also I mean it is kind of a
global city in many means but also what
you seem to be advocating for is the
detention of an identity which also
seems to have a lot of global kind of
influence and and and there is something
which I'm trying to understand which is
you know why is it this global identity
over the other I'm and for one part but
also a second is I mean in a city which
has marketed itself as a global capital
and maybe I think in opposition to
trafficker which is trying to take the
the cultural aspect you know why is it
that you're advocating actually for a
retention of identity in Dubai in
particular I think it's very important
and the question and I think it's a very
important question and I don't think
that I'm not playing a role of an
advocate here there is no form of
advocacy what I'm saying is that this
had existed in the past and this was an
iteration
of a direction that Dubai could have
possibly taken whether it is whether it
had taken a business route or whether
Sharjah Abu Dhabi have to have their own
different approaches to things I think
those are all very interesting but I
think Dubai had at a specific critical
point in time made the choices these
choices were based on economic political
or social or whatever reasons that they
may be but it's important just to take a
step back and immerse ourselves in that
moment and to say isn't this interesting
and how could this have influenced the
way we live in the city today so that's
that's what this is meant to do and I
think that's what the series is meant to
examine nothing either/or but
what if and could have been how do you
see I mean how do you envision Dubai's
architectural view in the next 30 40 50
years I mean over the last few decades
it's through the economy of oil right
Howard's how it's grown how do you see
it grow from how do you see it evolve
from an economy of oil to an economy of
tourism I I don't know to answer that
question in a very simple way but I do
know that Dubai is not dependent on oil
economically I think it constitutes
somewhere between 5 to 6% of its income
and I think tourism constitutes I don't
know what percentage recently but but
but it is I don't think oil formulates a
significant portion of its income
dependability from an architectural
perspective I think the city continues
to grow simply because the population
continues to grow and now the population
grows it responds to that and it's a
constant ebb and flow process
I think I did I said I don't know very
simply in the beginning and so my
question is about when you were saying
Dubai was modernizing and trying to
catch up with the rest of the world I
think like this idea of like modernity
is a very like let's say like a very
specific Western idea of what modernity
is and I don't think it necessarily that
that region needs to be catching up or
not catching up like I think there was
something else going on there for
example I know Dubai in its situation
there was this idea of creating an
infrastructure for business like as
opposed to oil as opposed to for example
let's say Abu Dhabi or the train earlier
on or or Kuwait so there was like a
different like from the from the start
like a different approach so like and it
was very much a global city I think from
maybe even from the 16th century when
you had the you know the Portuguese yeah
like so it's not a very disconnected
city I think out of I was just like a
few thoughts that I had in mind I think
this goes back to the idea of amnesia
like his historical amnesia what you
were talking about so like not retaining
like history not knowing kind of not
going like the long terrain like going
really back in history and I remember
there was this talk I think where I
should was talking about the archive
your project and suffer pardon that was
removed and he was saying it's gone but
you know it's both relieving and also
like a bit strange that okay it's gone
there'll be another archive where there
will be another like another stuff apart
basically so it's this idea of amnesia
or kind of this removal or you're not
knowing like this deeper history I think
sue the city that's just yeah just maybe
a common for this early question also do
you want to the only thing that I would
add is that we tend to see Dubai as its
as it evolves and its original
emotion whether it's modern and the type
of architecture that it pursues from
building the tallest tower to building
the next tallest tower and it continues
to this rhythm and it attracts people
and it offers whether we whether we come
to terms with it or not it offers people
from a region that's in disarray a lot
of hope it gives a lot of hope to to
geography where where people can realize
their potential whether it's it's
through creative means or artistic or or
economic or entrepreneurial you see
things evolving in that sense but
equally the device is another global
city in a specific geography just as
Singapore is and so is Hong Kong and so
are other emerging cities that will come
along in Africa as one so it's what we
tend to do it's it's our it's our role
to investigate and explore this past and
come to terms with it first and foremost
but also learn from it and understand
what we can continue in a sense and draw
a sense of meaning because I think we
are a generation that that are looking
for that sense of meaning and in all of
these spaces like topics of memory are
topics of connective memory are becoming
more prominent and and more important
and I think this is this is to that
point
I mean maybe it's a final question then
it would be interesting to ask you both
to ask maybe comment more on your
practice because I think it's really
interesting how like the topics you just
raised like how do you approach projects
to make sure that they they're dealing
with so many complex issues across the
kind of large expanse of time but are
very much rooted in now but it's a lot
about communicating to different
audiences like the value of history the
value of culture the value of urbanism
and architecture so I'm just curious
about what strategy I mean I guess be
beyond this project but across with the
many projects you've done I think it
would be interesting to hear a bit more
about how you operate or how you shape I
can a very different type of practice to
a conventional architecture office so I
think had endless conversations before I
mean we published them a magazine for
about a decade looking at cities across
the Middle East but we also did a lot of
exhibitions around the topic of of a
sense of belonging but more recently
we're looking at the most imminent
challenge which is eat our ecological
issues and having a sense of belonging
those are the two I think imminent
crisis that were looking at in the next
decades to come and I think this is
these are conversations and this is we
did a wonderful project with EPF and and
and practice based in India about the
water irrigation systems in the
southeast part of the of the UAE and the
Fela systems which are these are these
aqueducts and the waterways and how he
looked at closed water systems and how
cities can explore them so I would
sustain themselves off of a certain
water reserve and they continue to
expand so that project was it was so
rewarding for us to understand that
cities can be sustainable
using rain water or natural resources
and expand and then build 2 to 3 storey
buildings and more recently now we've
been involved with Evillene looking at
as I had mentioned the fact that the
I was founded on a soft plane and the
rolls of salt as something within our
urban fabric so I think I think it's
it's more important that as much as it's
exciting to look at architecture purely
structural or looking at the urban
planning from a broader perspective but
really looking at the crisis of our
times which are these two topics is
creating a sense of belonging and
ecology and how we can put as much
energy behind that I think is the most
possible so he works for me the dynamics
I guess I encourage everyone I guess
come approach both of you and ask you
questions more informally and we also
have a reception upstairs so please join
us in the front of this room but thank
you both very much
