welcome everyone this is the first
lecture of this second term the first
lecture of the year 2019 already it was
11 years ago when the lecturer tonight
left this school as a recent graduate as
if can arrive here in the fourth year
someone who actually understood that
this was a place where he somehow
belonged and that with the fear of not
knowing if he would fit into a school
that actually has such a long tradition
of experimentation he probably found a
home when I met as if for the first time
I actually didn't even think that he was
an architect he actually clearly had the
spirit of someone who took life from a
very different point of view than most
of the architects I happened to know he
had the visceral look into his eyes and
into the world around us every single
city that I've met as if there has
always been something that actually has
triggered the conversation that in fact
one would have never imagined that that
would have had lectures are somehow
extremely boring formats because we
constantly talk about things that we
already know but what is amazing about
this whole is that in fact even when one
tells the story that one already knows
that the story is changed by the people
in the room by the lights that are
blinding you by actually that camera the
stops working and what not and what is
important about this room is that it has
had incredible lectures but always the
one of the day is the one that we want
to hear what as if Khan has done through
his career and trajectory is to push yet
again that limit that we call
architecture talking about pavilions and
that's the subject matter that is very
close to my heart I don't know how many
theses I done villians we probably might
see a few of them bringing back
experimentation into architecture is
something that in fact he has always
done but I think there is a claim in
here that is what does that mean and how
do we do it as a school but also as a
profession and as a generation
interestingly enough when we're trying
to figure out the dirt if you want
behind as ifs career in here we found
something very fascinating that is
question that few people have asked he
was actually using the fact that there
was a new director entering the school
at the time he wanted to do a thesis
together jointly with Julia King an
unprecedented thing so they twist the
directors arm
don't try with me actually to actually
do a joint thesis and and and they did
actually with some conditions but the
adventures of their CSIS goes way beyond
that because it was in a totally
uncharted territory so in fact they
actually got a plane and went into the
land and actually got their own
cartographical representation to produce
their own architecture and and so but I
don't know if it is part of the lecture
or not but what is fascinating is to
start seeing that it is in fact within
the school where one starts pushing
those boundaries not mine and that in
fact actually one can totally see over
and over in the projects that that
hopefully we will see tonight and and
that we hopefully keep on saying in the
world outside of these worlds it is a
real pleasure to have someone who I have
considered a friend and actually whose
work I admire and that now that I am
here is the new director of the school
also is part of my family so please join
me welcoming as if can to his home
[Applause]
Thank You Ava and thank you everyone for
making the effort to come this evening
your patience will be rewarded I hope by
some some exciting things a taste of
what to define be working on the past 11
years but yeah to follow up on Ava's
comes from that history from here one of
the things also you shouldn't try is
rearranging the date for your final
examination which actually do and I did
do and we managed to successfully
successfully submit our examination on a
different day but it says it only
happened once and will never happen
again
so yeah thank you for having me here I'd
like to speak for about an hour and I
was kind of three things I want to talk
about really a bit of a history of
experimentation actors I'm going to
cover everything just some things that
I'm personally interested in and have
sparked my imagination and then I'm
gonna talk a little bit about what kind
of qualities I think might be needed in
architecture or from that architects
need to have in order to help those
dreams come true and I think if you're
in the DRL review I just caught the end
of it there was some mention of
metabolism and and a kind of maybe some
utopian ideas about the kind of future
of the city
I'm gonna talk about it a little bit and
and and keep you kind of my little bit
my take on it and then I'll talk a bit
about the future of architecture maybe
the future of the new experiences we can
have in architecture and this sort of
journey into uncharted territories which
which I'm really enjoying in my practice
and in the past eleven years so I'm
gonna begin with this some of you may
know this this is a it's pretty much a
sketch on a napkin and it's one of the
most important napkins in history in
fact and I'll explain a little bit why
was drawn by this this gentleman in
around 18-49 in 1850
this is Joseph Paxton and Joseph Paxton
would come to be the architect of the
the Crystal Palace so in 1851 which you
may know in Hyde Park there was a great
exhibition of the world of everything a
hundred thousand exhibits and Paxton was
the architect for this building now
Paxton wasn't an architect actually he
was a gardener and he'd he previously
built the amazing Lilly houses at
Chatsworth House kind of building for
royal tree royalty and using kind of
very simple materials he was using
wrought iron he was using plate glass
the taxes on the glass is quite heavily
taxed at the time eighteen 1840s so
glasses was as expensive as kind of
alabaster or something is is today so it
was it was a kind of rare rare
combination of materials that very few
people could harness only their very
wealthy
he's also famous because he the banana
that you are familiar with today that
you've all probably eaten is something
that he cultivated so he also is
responsible for bananas which is I think
less interesting than the architectural
okay so in in 1849 and you you'll be
familiar kind of with Victoria Queen
Victoria and Prince Albert Prince Albert
was a German husband of the Queen and he
was the Prince Consort to him
to the throne and he he came with him
came sort of not a lot of love actually
from them from the British public and he
sort of surrounded himself with kind of
new ideas of the day he surrounded
himself with a sort of ambition to
endear himself to the public of England
and one way he thought to do that was
through creating an
an exhibition of the arts which is
something he was particularly interested
in and the relationship between the Arts
and Sciences engineering is kind of a
time of the Empire he wanted it going to
show its greatness and British Empire to
the British people and this idea for an
exhibition that could be hosted in in
London in 1851 came about but in 18-49
Paris had an exhibition as well they
where they showcased all of the great
French innovations and he said we'll do
one better we're going to make it an
exhibition of everything in the world
not just everything that Britain makes
and in order to do that we'll actually
invite the Parisians the French to to
show their things there as well so
there'll be he'll be the greatest we're
sort of out doing them so he needed a
building to show these things in and and
they put out an architectural
competition and they had 250 entries
which is quite a lot for the day but all
of the entries were no two favourites
but they all came in over budget and
wouldn't have been able to be built in
the in the time that he had left sort of
two years to get this exhibition going
to build and so he was in a bit of a
sticky situation Henry Cole was leading
the Commission to put on this exhibition
was in a tricky situation and this is
when Joseph Paxton stepped in you could
have overheard the problem that was
happening and he combines his knowledge
from green house design with his
challenge and he said that if I can
manage to persuade the plate-glass
manufacturer who I'm working with to
scale up their gas production in kinds
of quantity and the sighs you know one
small piece of last 1.2 by 1.2 meters
and I can take everything I know from
the world of iron work and timber work I
mean they learned from the from the
Chatsworth House experiences I can
create a piece of architecture that is
capable of being delivered on time on
budget and and
being of can significantly amazing
world-renowned design and he he was
given nine days to to put his proposal
forward to the committee and so he he
and two of those days actually he had
other plans so he only had 70s so in
seven days he managed to kind of put
together a full architectural package
costing and everything for what would
become the biggest building on earth at
the time and this biggest building on
earth was delivered in in 15 months or
so from the date that was agreed to and
it came in 75,000 pounds it came in
about one-quarter the price of the
competitors who were who were making
proposals for the for the competition as
well
and what was quite interesting about it
you know not only was it using the
technology of the day in its most
advanced form its kind of dry
construction if you can think of it like
that it's like Nakano all of the
components were put together five
thousand mostly Irish laborers who
constructed this thing the price was so
cheap because he had convinced a
contractor to put in a low bid because
there's some kind of collusion there I
think but there was they basically
agreed that put in low price because
they could get all of the glass and iron
afterwards so it's kind of recyclable
building as well this is a photo of the
Interior and you see one of the elm
trees it was sited in Hyde Park and not
only did he cover and just give you a
scale a sense of scale this is ten times
bigger than Bedford Square so this is
this is a 100 thousand square meters of
covered of covered space and he just if
there were trees in the park he covered
them as well so this is also something
new that he brought not just a technical
expertise but he brought an idea of the
inside and outside mixing together it
was something that we take for granted
now that you might have a tree inside a
house this is this is a probably
first time it happened in a in a way
that the public could experience and
this is clearly from his his attitude as
a garden designer this this actually
this image here gives you also a sense
of scale this is not the building at
Hyde Park this is once it got taken to
Sydenham in South London an area now
Sydenham which is actually called
Crystal Palace that's the impact this
building had and it quickly in sidon
them when they moved it six months after
Great Exhibition they made it even
bigger and it only burnt down sort of 50
years after fifties after the actual
exit of early 1900s what kind of things
they have in there you know amazing
triumphant feats of engineering of the
day from the locomotion to early Ã¡i
which was shown here in this kind of
figures animatronic beings and so I kind
of talk a bit more but Paxton later but
he's he's work his vision and the trust
that he built with these with these
clients was something you know quite
remarkable and when he put those things
together and alchemy came out of it and
this remarkable architecture emerged and
now we sort of go 50 years later this is
this is Vladimir zukov this is in he's a
Russian polymath he's an engineer a
mathematician or organic organic chemist
he is a very important figure for
architects because he was a first who
kind of used his knowledge of of
mathematics and knowledge of engineering
and the new materials of time the steel
cables steel structures to create the
kind of first lattice attention
structures in in the world you could
have may have seen these it looks like
something from a futuristic film but
these are electricity pylons that no
bigger telegram on the photogrammetry
that shukoff built in the early 1900s
this structure this could be you know
today but this was built in 1897 so is
this the same thing in theory it's kind
of in bad condition at the moment but
first dye agreed structures shukoff
Tower this this work has inspired
architects all over the world continues
to inspire us radical ways of using
engineering I mean he's also famous for
inventing catalytic cracking which is
like how you get turned crude oil into
diesel and petrol so he threw his
imagination at all of the problems of
the day so they they were kind of like
fingers of the of the of the Renaissance
they kind of leave out da Vinci type
characters and they were interested in
this what they can do to to progress
humanity interested if you think about
him as well 1890s you had figures like
Ziolkowski so the beginnings of the
space race the beginnings of you know
Russian cosmos um had started 50 years
earlier silicon ski was dreaming about
antigrav being in space floating around
satellites way way before NASA existed
way before any of us thought about
rockets they were dreaming of that so
these people were surrounding themselves
with the other things of the day and
experimentation and believing in the
impossible happening was part of a way
of life and a philosophy I think of
moving humanity forward and then we go
sort of moved 50 50 years this is 1960
and we're in Tokyo now this is at the
world design conference in in Tokyo it's
it was it was convened by a group of
architects and designers who sort of
believed that through the participation
of human beings from the planet we can
create something new
can evolve new ideas and these these
were unusual times for Japan Japan had
its post-war Japan it had a nuclear
atomic atomic bomb had gone off there
and the the Japanese were in a unusual
state of mind that they needed to think
about a peaceful future think about
humanity's role working together this is
like the idea of practitioners coming
together almost like a university except
this was almost exclusively male apart
from I think Allison Smithson who's
somewhere I don't know in this image but
it was a remarkably had Louie Khan here
you had you know really the great great
architects no relative of mine but great
architects and designers of the time
including mr. sada who also had was one
of the organizers of this and you know
what's very interesting taking idea of
kind of was back to Leonardo da Vinci Oh
Vitruvius the kind of idea of human
figure in relation to a one end kind of
a scale of the galaxies a scale the
cosmos and at the other end the scale of
subatomic particles and kind of where
human beings fit within that so it was a
time of great self-reflection a time
like trying to figure out what is a
relationship between all of us and the
cities we live in and the different art
forms which we would we practice at the
same time you had architects like Enzo
tanguay at this point trying to kind of
deal with several things one kind of
national almost national romanticism
like Japanese identity is the Olympics
20 Olympic stadiums that was designed to
code in 1964 and at the same time he was
part of this new movement which was
called metabolism metabolism because
as cities were evolving the thought was
that cities should be thought of as
organisms city itself has inputs and
outputs it grows and if you take the
actors time this is Kurokawa Tkaczyk
hours work taking inspiration from
things like a DNA helix this is actually
not the sculpture but this is a housing
complex and it takes advantage of you
know off-site rapid construction
prefabrication size of steel work which
weren't possible at a time this didn't
get built but all of the their
contemporaries were considering new
forms of architecture of the city again
if you imagine post-war Japan there was
a sort of baby boom as well so there was
there was a practical
series of considerations about the city
Tokyo how is it able to identify in a
new way and these kind of questions
began to get answered in a very holistic
way and the most extreme experimentation
that took the Osaka in 1970 Expo and
here tanguay was a sort of one of the
main protagonists of bringing together
in a way all of his children you could
say who Keiko taki included Arata
Isozaki included to sort of map out a
series of potential architectures
experimentation that the Japan would
share with the world there at the at the
expo and you had and I'll show you
remarkable structures robotics first
ideas of computers related computer and
environment man and computer inflatable
structures you see add I agree too so
that's like influenced by Foucault of
just up there and then you've got the
you
massive flag so at the center of this
was a tan gaze grand roof project and
this is a this is a remarkable feat of
engineering it kind of became its if you
think of the Crystal Palace I showed you
which was a great exhibition it was a
global exhibition and it's the first
Osaka 70 was probably I don't know how
many didn't one every five years so it's
probably the 20 or something so I love
you a great exhibition but it continued
the idea of using the the engineering
the technology of the day and rethinking
the relationships between man and the
environment man in architecture so this
roof was thought of as a kind of
substrate for plugging in other
architecture that cities might be full
of these space frames that other things
could organically colonize and and below
it was a kind of series of things
remarkable artwork that's there using
that in a distance and a performance
space and whole loads of other other
kind of things happen there
so he had Kurokawa implement a sort of
early version of his if you see these
kind of red things up here that's an
early version of the Nook again capsule
hotel and then if you look at this is
kakaako's tower that he built their
exploit our it's kind of influence from
Bucky fuller and all of this but also
you're seeing in these two projects
robotic potential confute of taught
about robotic construction assembly as
project as as city needs it
prefabrication things that we think are
kind of normal today were thought of in
1970 and shown really for the first time
so in this in this up here in this you
also had some of the
from our own family here our halls are
key Graham did an X which is our Graham
also part of that international scene so
you had of idea discussion and debate
so Akram also proposed a fantastic
exhibition which was located I think
just underneath here and you know
Freedman was involved so you had kind of
different perspectives on what the
future of the city and in fact you know
Freedman sent me a message on Instagram
saying he sends you his regards so it is
very nice so so again this this place is
a as a seat of learning is also a seat
of experimentation where a lot of these
ideas have been born and and
materialized in the world somehow this
feels to me like the beginning of the
city that we will be living in in the
future maybe it's 10 years from now 20
years from now but these guys saw it in
1970 and earlier this again is Kurokawa
and this is it's a kind of collaborative
pavilion he did with with a thing
cosmetics company or something now now
this is really wonderful this is a
Sasaki's project for for for Expo 70
this is a digital blueprints for robots
and he designed I think it's like 15
meter high robot or something two robots
they had done different behavioral
characteristics they had pilots as well
but they were kind of symbols of a new
relationship between man and environment
and performance time and space and they
there
I mean imagine 1970 producing autonomous
what kind of idea of autonomous vehicles
and not just drawing it but making it
and saying and not with any cynicism not
with if there's no irony I don't think
there's any irony here this is for real
all of these things are real proposals
for the future so this sort of
like attitude of Inventure and
experimentation wasn't just at the kind
of the level of the individual and the
day in habitation the house or the
individual and and the city but it was
at the scale of the city itself and the
kind of means of the means the city's
networked within itself a network with
other cities so this is tangos proposal
for Tokyo Bay and if you look it up
there's an also an amazing proposal for
for Boston Bay which is done a copy as
early as like 1960 and there was a lot
of like all of them kicker taka and also
Kurokawa they were doing kind of marine
projects Ocean City's all that kind of
stuff like solutions to how we might
live in the future so it's kind of not
just new experience of architecture but
if they're kind of thought about what it
what it might mean to be what human
culture might be in the future how we
might live it of course super it looks
like a you know computer maybe a
computer chip because the car is the
center of this and how the car moves for
this world is very important at this
time so that's kind of one scale I think
I'll kind of return to those examples in
a little bit but scale between the
individual environments is something I'm
very interested in I'm gonna show you
some projects about this but in the in
the work that I get a chance to teach in
some places and I've been kind of doing
that off and on I don't get a chance to
do it all the time because it's very
busy at my studio but I did a I will
just share with you some images which
haven't really been seen before from a
workshop I did in Tokyo at Misano
University and this is about a kind of
introduction to architecture cuz I know
it's an open day today as well so maybe
some of you don't yet study architecture
but I shouldn't show these images
because it's kind of it was the way I
introduced architecture 280 design
students and this isn't mine
but it's the work of these students from
the science of design faculty at Musashi
know University Art University and
Musashi is quite interesting the science
of design faculties is run by Ken Yahara
who's you may know as the art director
Mooji who's got a lot of very
interesting theories you haven't read
about them grab a copy of designing
design or kind of see the exhibition at
the Japan house which is a Kenton High
Street is all his concept sense where
haptic he's interested in kind of human
senses technology nature all together
but what I was trying to do here is to
kind of get the students to explore the
environment around them and understand
the relationship in the human body and
and what is potentially architecture by
measuring themselves first missing their
fingers moving their hands moving their
bodies and measuring that against the
environment and rethinking rethinking
the petite environment this could be a
pneumatic architecture and when you
start to play with scale to kind of
fundamental ingredient of how we think
about the space around us but also it's
a unique it's a unique kind of design
tool and the human minds are unique very
stretchy very stretchy a tool that we
can conceive of a atom and a galaxy in
the same sentence we can think about
things we can't even imagine but we have
a sense of their relationship and that's
I kind of wanted the students to explore
and they invented they invented new
architectures jelly this jelly world
this landscape the individual on top of
this this dry leaf being clothed by a
water droplet and the surface tension we
were playing with the size of the figure
at which point surface tension becomes
something you can physically experience
and noemy a droplet doesn't allow you to
experience but when you get small enough
you can it becomes like a skirt how a
bubble wrap becomes a shimmering see
it's kind of mountain range of I think
it's a scrubbing sponge this sort of
archipelago of cornflakes this is
actually from the this is from the
second year who copied the first year so
the bubble thing came back but then
something amazing happened which was
this so this
[Music]
letting go and seeing what happens and
working with the materials around you
can reconsidering relationship between
things sparks new ideas its relationship
between architecture between materials
ourselves this is rice grains but we
just rearranged the grains into a into a
pattern and there's some strangeness
emerged that we hadn't experienced
before it's just some cardboard and and
this is some cookies which are arranged
by size which I had them do but but it's
so some of them are kind of it's just
about yeah looming in and seeing things
you didn't see before and I think that's
another
[Music]
important behavioral characteristic of
architects is looking closer so yeah the
idea that you might go for a walk in a
forest or broccoli
it may be wonderful a wonderful thought
maybe it's not to be taken literally but
it could be right and so I think this
this sort of approach is very much part
of like opening up the mind thinking
about projects in new ways and so in in
our studio we're constantly making
making making making making and truck
exploring it's just from my phone I just
picked something for today but this is
the this is DNA we were doing a project
for the Welcome founders Wellcome Trust
down the road and we found that if we
printed all of the human genome at one
point at one point text size you can
actually map an entire person on about
sealing about this size but you can't
see it it looks like it's just a texture
but we were saying that maybe you can as
advances in technology deciphering the
genome progress you begin to map out
constellations in the genome so what's
cancer is sort of that constellation and
height or color whatever so you kind of
relationship between the self the space
and and the science become become one
thing this is just exploring the
characteristics of of water which I'm
going to show you a kind of project is
turned into on hydrophobic surfaces and
you'll already know that's probably but
hydrophobic means basically doesn't like
water doesn't like water so surfaces
which repel water but that kind of
process of trying to see how the world
around us could be transformed through
design I've been kind of yeah
exploring that question for a long time
and this is since I since I left here
this is one of the first projects I did
early days which was it was just called
cloud and the proposal was a deployable
roof so it's by mixing helium gas and
soap foam you create foams that are that
are lighter than air so they can create
shading for you if you kind of anchor
them down these are my daughter this is
the other thing not to at the a my
daughter was born when I was in my fifth
year in fact him the holiday between
fourth and fifth year so this is but now
she's 12 years old and it didn't didn't
damage her too much I think but so this
is kind of developed a different develop
version of that cloud roof scape that
kind of aggregates and has it's its own
kind of lifecycle in tempo and it's
grown on the ground and accumulates on a
on a fishing net above his face and it
creates a shaded environment
so I'm not the proposal really was for
me was I thought the future market the
future of architecture is probably
lightweight it is probably deployable it
is probably has very little
environmental impact and well it needs
all of these things are things that are
needed but how do you get there is the
sort of challenge so this is sort of not
an answer but like a provocation as much
as a kind of test to myself how what
could it be
maybe it is a maybe it is it comes in a
can yeah so at this this is sort of 10
years ago starting with small scale
things residency's the design museum
residency I did trying to explore making
and our relationship with the stuff
around us this is a project called
harvest where I was proposing work
anyway asking the question would it be
like to live with to bring the City
Guard and the city front gardens into
your house these were these are plants
collected from the front gardens and
turned into furniture you know what what
would it feel like if your table
scratched your knee as you sat
underneath it and the kind of idea that
the process of making might have a an
impact on the outcome of the object
itself as as the the act of the hand on
one hand but otherwise the active kind
of physics and so here is a chair made
from it and I've several thousand small
plastic balls but depending on how they
settle because the moment of kind of
falling through the mold the pattern of
the chair changes so the idea that a
moment an instant moment has a kind of
effect on the has a mark on the identity
of something I find quite interesting so
this is sort of a physical
implementation of the expiration of it
this project is a there's a kind of
digital exploration so this is a project
we did 2013-2014 for the light in winter
festival in Melbourne and this structure
is at the centre of Federation Square
which is like left a square in a bit in
Melbourne and it records all the
visitors to the square and represents
them as kind of marks of light on this
structure and they persist here for sort
of half an hour in light in the form of
life so this was about kind of what are
the contemporary marks that we make on
the 50 well you know the circular form
is from Aboriginal original markings
that would have been found in our
Aboriginal site of course specifically I
mean all of Australia's in every site
but this was specifically a place where
there was incontinent so the kind of is
there's there's this structure was
created almost as an idea of a
counterpoint to an Aboriginal fireplace
that was being that a group of sort of
elders had created about 50 meters away
as part of the same festival so new
ideas of light and our relationship with
it our relationship with the city so
let's say way ways of ways of
representing architecture and ways of
Reps in the city ways of seeing also
very interesting for me this project I
want to share with you is was inspired
supporting Shanghai which inspired by
two forms of drawing one is parallel
projection which you'd see in fantastic
scroll painting Cheney scroll paintings
and versus perspective so you can have
Eastern mode of representation and
Western my representation and a year
that we did this project which was a
commissioned to do a con Street
sculpture in in a historic area of
Shanghai was a 500 anniversary of
Brunelleschi to proving of a theory of
perfect level projection so I mean we
all you will use these tools in our
drawings but the very interesting thing
is that they change the way you
understand space and there's a lovely
David Hockney documentary that's on the
internet somewhere illegally which is a
1984 the lab for the Met Museum in he
recorded it and he talks about kind of
relationship between Chinese theology
and the idea of kind of many points of
view as expressed in this kind of
drawing form that you see everything all
at once
verse is a kind of monotheism and single
point of view and no no divergent
thought almost that's that perspectival
projections have and so I kind of want
to do a project wherein in Shanghai in
this historic area we could try to
capture a feeling of parallel projection
almost but in the real world you can't
normally bring a drawing form into the
real world but I found that if we there
is a way of doing it if you if you kind
of get the angles right that you can
create a simulation of parallel
projection
so budget constraints of course applied
for this project so there was not as a
didn't conquer the entire street it was
a small thing but the idea of the idea
was that if you caught someone a moment
walking into this walking path says it
was though you were walking you were
seeing a person in a scroll painting but
in the real worlds the kind of life
history and the present day kind of
having a schism between them and of
course if you were riding your motorbike
down the street the street I'm there's
part of the brief that the street should
be the project but the project the
budget wasn't there to use the whole
street so the idea of the thing changed
as you move down the street was a way of
expanding the experience and the and the
very modest budget which we had
so I'm quite interested of course in the
way architecture sits in our heads like
what do we what do we see that's really
there and which parts of it we bring as
preconceptions or even or result of the
ways our eyes work our center three
dimensions memories we have and how we
use our senses so this project sort of
plays on this idea and this is a this is
a kind of reference image of the project
which was called mega faces and it was a
project for the Winter Olympics in Sochi
in Russia this is Mount Rushmore of
course this isn't the project but this
sort of example of how human beings
human emotions are kind of trapped in
this project in this in this sculpture
and when you when you scale up the human
figure the human face the emotions are
kind of scaled up almost proportionally
so the idea of kind of determination and
grit and aspiration are framed in a way
in this which is so powerful at this
scale that you sort of take it on when
you're visiting it and I think we we use
this daily at this sort of scale but you
know emojis have become like the fastest
growing language in the world and I mean
I use it with my mum now instead of Lee
instead of words which is quite strange
but the project that we were
commissioned to do was from a Russian
telecommunications company called
megaphone which means I think it means
big phone and everything Russian people
but but but the the the client wanted us
so their their network like I would - or
something their client they wanted us to
visualize that what they do and what
they do is provide bandwidth they don't
really have a product so the project
proposal was to use something that the
content of that of that the medium which
is emotions in my human emotions
transmitted back and forth and sort of
the project was in Russia and there were
lots of things going on at the time but
inclusivity and so on and I wanted to
kind of create a way of combining this
monumental sculpture of of say
large-scale like Vera machina this is
kind of great
like Soviet iconographic sculpture with
this immediacy of FaceTime Facebook in
this sort of world so the proposal was
for a building that could change shape
and a building would change they become
the face of the visitors to the building
so you would go in and and get 3d
scanned and as you were leaving the
building your it would change shape and
it would have the surface would have a
series of actuators this is a kind of
proposal drawing we gave to them
a series of actuators which would shift
and take on the form of the people
visiting it so you've got this kind of
moment of large-scale sculpture and at
the Olympic Games so kind of rather than
celebrating the you know the athletes
and all these kind of great kind of
heroes the individual becomes the hero
and in a way you become anyone can be
the hero right so I got to draw this
very northeast section which you should
never do put a face on a building and
it's just but I got to do it which was
nice so it's it's kind of auditorium
this elevation which could change form
originally we wanted to all surfaces the
building but it couldn't afford to and
and the observation deck above the ramps
and all this kind of stuff and the
client was wanted to see this thing
build so we kind of made enormous
prototype but is a mock-up in the Swiss
countryside one of our contracts was
Swiss and the client was determined that
it would be not monochrome like like
kind of
you know we've studied kind of a Syrian
bar relief and all that kind of stuff he
didn't want that moniker they wanted it
full-color and the only way that we
could show them that it was not a bad
idea was was doing this and and and and
and it turns out that a full-color
representation of a human being at 12
meter size when the scariest things you
can ever see so McGarity when you see it
at that scale you get that
fight-or-flight response it actually
feels like a giant is gonna eat you or
something very strange thing so so then
they agreed to have it monochrome and
this is a this is a first test
that was a client and the facade of the
building had 10,000 11,000 actuators
each of which had a gun stroke about two
and a half meters so you know you could
adjust to even the any pretty much any
face shape and that was a kind of what
you saw there was one maybe one
twentieth of the of the elevation and it
was sort of designed as a sort of
modular system so kind of from start to
finish it was a year actually for comp
from concept to to completion which
sounds like very little time very it
sounds like a lot of time actually from
a kind of university perspective but in
a real world construction situation when
you have to create new technologies it
was insane actually and make this whole
building and all of it and and we're
always debating if is it was it a facade
was it a kinetic facade was it a
building is it architect and this kind
of conversation you know if it covered
all the surfaces would it have been a
piece of architecture and it's a screen
you know this thing but that's an
interesting interesting conversation it
would have be more if we could afford it
to be more but so as a system you kind
of went in you had if you had a five
camera kind of 3d photo booth 76 of them
which made a which made a mesh of the
faces which seems really normal now and
you can even do on your iPhone but it
was different stuff was in 2013 was very
like very difficult to do and we had to
the software that meshed it we the only
way we could get this was from Geo would
you call it
the aeroplane technology they mainly fly
across a terrain and they map that they
make 3d terrain maps the same guys they
developed this system for us so it
didn't exist at the time this is the
back of it because once you create
something with 11,000 actuators each of
which has 100 moving parts in it it's
like a million literally a million
things that can go wrong and things did
go wrong other kind of hourly rate so
you have to create a good service zone
at the back so the two guys kind of
worked here for the period of the
Olympic Games this is the kind of
reality of buildings that involve
technology if it's not it's not
solid-state technology things can go
mechanical things can go wrong but that
outcome was not it wasn't just my studio
it was the outcome of you know about a
hundred engineers fabricators scientists
everyone coming together coders to make
this thing happen this is the pretty
much the first time it's switched on so
some of these which are dead pixels you
see here which we resolved these people
and whose early doctor from my studio
the first time we switched it on and
these sort of face is emerging out of
the facade it was it was it's very
strange also when you make something
like this you've seen it in science
fiction or you've seen it in somewhere
in a game or something and you don't
really you have a double tape because
you don't really you forget that you
haven't that you haven't actually seen
in real life before so it's quite a
strange feeling of kind of oh they've
done that yeah so the and and we in the
evenings we would play with it and put
all kinds of other stuff on it I could
you know so we this is playing about one
1/2 speed but you can kind of get a
feeling for it's a suggestion if maybe a
new form of kinetic architecture fill
for cities is kind just a feeling of
this what what what might it be what my
cities begin to look like in the future
so the kind of idea of kinetic
things was for me I've quite interested
in that from there from the a I'm eating
a lot of things you'll see but but um
this is the first project I did out of
out of school years I got this client I
was very lucky to have a client kind of
approached me in my at the end of my
fourth year so if those your fourth
years go and do public lectures and then
talk to people afterwards and you'll
find that your first clients probably
out there in the in the crowd somewhere
mine was and she wanted a beach cafe and
I spent my fourth year doing working
with timber veneers and laminating them
and looking at how you could how they
reacted to moisture in the environment
creating kind of like dynamic apertures
and and and sort of differentiated
elevations and things so this was a
building that did that it opened
enclosed to suit the trading conditions
of the England English seaside so in the
in the summer you the building that can
open up and have advertised itself to
the surroundings and the windows I can
close up and can only works fine for one
staff member so you had this kind of
also the idea that fish and chips taste
better in the sea air so why not open up
the building and of course it becomes
the inside and outside game kind of
happens here so in the evenings they can
turn it into a theater or a stage and
the beach becomes the the auditorium so
this kind of at a very small scale
relationship to human and and building
and kind of the dynamism across the
seasons was something I can a very
interested in but I'm going to show you
a few projects which
maybe three or four more projects which
some of which are competitions which we
lost that but so they're experiments
which kind of failed but or they didn't
get didn't get beyond the thought at the
moment of conception but uh but kind of
exists somehow in like imagination and
then a few that kind of did happen this
one is a diagram kind of which is a UK
proposal for the UK Pavilion in 2015 at
the Milan Expo and malonic feels like
like amazing kind of as you'd imagine
the collection of all of these wild
buildings but particularly interesting
if you look it up when if you check her
soda morons master plan proposal for it
which was basically to undo the whole
idea of nation branding and make every
nation because the theme was food they
said everyone should just get a plot of
land to farm and every country should
show their prowess and farming basically
it's kind of it was kind of about this
sort of slow food movement and anyway
the Italian government and all the
countries didn't agree to that so they
went back to the everyone putting
massive pavilions so the UK pavilion
plot was 80 metres by 12 meters by 15
meters I wanted to do a project not
about food but about how you feed how
you're gonna feed all the people on
earth 7.2 billion people on earth
because population is the biggest issue
in the food feeding the world
conversation actually it's 7.3 billion
now so it's gone up since since 2015 of
course so I figured out you can fit this
number of people on our on our site if
you as long as you make them this big so
you can fit 7.2 billion 1 2 50 scale 1
to 100 scale people within that volume
and there's a lovely kind of phrase that
Kenya how our users which is visualized
and awakened and the idea that if you if
you can help people understand if you
can help you understand something that
kind of visual means their mind will
shift basically and they begin to kind
of say enlightenment and I wanted to
people to kind of understand the
enormity of the task of feeding the
world feeding 7.2 billion people by by
literally seeing all 7.2 billion people
so the building was 25,000 with the
numbers here okay so the the building
consisted of stacks one meter one meter
by one meter by 15 meter in height of
one 200 people which were going to be
formed from polycarbonate and these
stacks became the kind of structural
system of the entire building think ed
Mugsy from akta who did the engineering
and it works I think but these are these
stacks of people and inside you have the
7.2 billion people are used as a kind of
three-dimensional infographic so you
know like you see all those graphs and
graphs and graphs about population but
it's not until you see this kind of
physical three-dimensional thing that
you sort of makes you your jaw drop and
you know this area illuminated in in
yellow here could be say the amount of
people eating curry at the moment in
India and the area on the right could be
the number of people in China who who
are you know having their breakfast to
this moment so this kind of way of
conveying national interests and in
ourselves and our habits and so on is
kind of integrated into the architecture
and when you leave as a kind of pledge
as a pledge to the rest of the world the
idea is that you would receive a 3d
printed figure of yourself because
whilst you are walking around we were
secretly 3d scanning you and and you got
a little pig little person out of a
vending machine of yourself and you
placed there yourself amongst everyone
has a kind of pledge of yourself so this
didn't happen but there's an output of
this which I'll show you I'll show you
in a moment this kind of translucent
sort of architecture
which is something I'm really fascinated
with did make a reappearance and this
was a project we did in in Shoreditch
in East London and this was again very
much about people and relations within
city it was a couple of years ago it's
called forests and it was a project
about new forms of public space which
are hybrids can infer the kind of the
idea of the third place which we
probably read about it's a mark mark
mark like the the idea of I think is
it's in some soup and super modernity
this kind of idea of things that you do
a place that can absorb things you do
not in your home and not in your
workplace it's it's a kind of place that
coffee shops have become but also
libraries took up that kind of a lot of
my I mean every evening of my life in a
library when I was sort of between the
ages of 8 and and 12 waiting to be
picked up to go home parents are working
and and nowadays libraries are reducing
and reducing cleaning in London so what
kind of spaces could could be offered to
allow things to happen there take up a
kind of mantle and what it what what
what kind of its kind of infrastructure
in a city what kind of people need to be
there what's a replacement for the
librarian which is a figure which was a
figure in my life and maybe your lives
as well now there is no library I mean
there is in the area of course here
wonderful arounds but but once you're
out there from the area there's there
are no librarians anymore so in fact
here rather than a library it's a it's a
kind of plant library and the plants
were things that people could bring from
their homes or take away from here so
it's a kind of resource of greenery for
the city and had some kind of digital
life as well and instead of a librarian
is a horticulturist working there and
there were places where as a first
example the dinner table was set up in
the evening you can go there and use it
this is a space for kind of individuals
to have a moment out of the city and
this was a place for kind of work
collaboration we're going to Wi-Fi and
batteries and so on
Shoreditch is a kind of can be a very
scummy area on a Friday night because of
this a transient community moving
through there of kind of you know party
and drinking kind of crowd and then you
voice other crowd which is the tech
startup world and you know all Street
roundabout you know and 1.5 billion
pounds of venture capital is invested in
in 2016 and you've got the same time
very deprived local neighborhood so the
idea of this space was to create some
sort of opportunity for cross
fertilization between those three three
groups whether it was successful not I
don't know because it was only there for
very short period of time but this kind
of idea of a salon where through the
infrastructure provision those groups
collaborate maybe someone gets a an
opportunity to think outside of a world
they were there in so this kind of
they're sort of open programme spaces
this is another one but it's around the
idea of play this is a playground at my
kids school if you get opportunities on
a playground it's like the best best
best project charter to work on and here
we just created a landscape and an
elevated platform a kind of room on this
hill and there's like a way of climbing
up and a way of sliding down and and
then you run in between those two those
two points and so this
we we also created money a new species
of monkey which no but this is it's a
it's a fantastic school because they
gave the opportunities and parents to
their gonna collaborate any kind of
education process in a way through
making Slee what is brilliant to say
that the head teacher brought did an
architecture project getting the kids to
build models of buildings for the city
and and who showed those things to kind
of develop their their kind of spatial
understanding and they normally would
build rockets out of a liquid bottles
but they actually gotten to start
building models of the London Eye and of
the gurkey and it was kind of stuff
which is quite interesting so that's
sort of scale of how kids learn about
the environment around them the
materials learn about gravity like some
fundamentals the climbing softeners
hardness risk it was like really
interesting process of exploration and
also getting the kids to be part of it
as a kind of interactive series of
workshops but I kind of going to jump to
a completely different scale of things
this is sort of returning to the idea of
cosmicism in some way and this is this
is our project for the UK pavilion in
2017 in in Astana a city which is yeah
very much utopian masterplan city in the
middle of Kazakhstan which is one of the
biggest countries on earth very
beautiful country and this project is a
sort of combination of it was a
combination lots of ideas that we've
been working a relationship team an
environment and ourselves and the and
the world around us the theme of the
expo was future energy and the project
began with a kind of black space and the
idea of the beginning of the experience
that the Big Bang and beginning of the
birth of the universe of birth of
transference of
energy into matter and a single note of
music which you may hear in a moment if
the sound works which is was composed by
Brian Eno I collaborated with Brian kind
of composed the sound of the beginning
of the universe and and as you walk
through this exhibit the first you
encountered was the the Sun NASA gave us
imagery from the Solar Dynamics
Observatory and the Sun being the kind
of source of of all energy in a solar
system but that energy is if you think
of any other life on Earth all of it it
exists because of this thing all energy
on earth exists because of this kind of
prime prime evil force
so our kind of proposal rather than
dealing with the idea of future energy
to solar cells
you know people people power you know
like which you saw on the other
pavilions hydroelectricity was like
let's just go to the back the beginning
let's talk about where it all comes from
and so at the center of this exhibit was
a yurt structure which yours you know
you if you're if you're kind of familiar
with nomadic architecture it's kind of
one of the most it's one of the original
forms of I've kind of an arc Alicia can
migrate from warm to cool climates and
so depending on the seasons this is a
Kazakh architecture the kind of
architecture the steppe these structures
will be moved around the landscape and I
used it an example of a future
architecture for me so I you know said
that in the future architectures
probably needs to be deployable it needs
to be lightweight it needs to be to have
some significance of kind of the human
behavior patterns relationships between
people the the earth and this is kind of
my interpretation of the year the year
is something which was handed down
generation to generation in a family
it's something that we packed and fit on
like one horse
it's a Greek symbol by one or two people
it's somethings made from fundamental
basic materials are available and can be
replaced and renewed really easily but
it's made 5000 years ago
so as a it's a kind of archetype of
architecture of nomadic architecture but
also it's probably I was proposing in
this exhibition is the most
sophisticated form of architects that we
aspired to create in the future you know
how much does your building way
mr.foster this weighs nothing right so
this is the score that you're hearing
from and this structure I was kind of
exploring the relationship between man
and the environment so made this
structure responsive to touch and around
around the structure was a panorama
which you can see in the background and
the panorama in expose it's a sort of
Expo jovica basically in panoramas
expose you always put panoramas
basically that's kind of classic nation
branding thing I'll just show my country
in a big way and this is this is sort of
the panorama but it's not a panorama of
any country it's a panorama which
recreates it from completely in
computing a computer and the panorama
which is sourced from multiple places in
Google Maps to create a kind of collage
3d landscape and then the entire
landscape was brought to life in like a
whole world simulation so we had work
with some of the best visual effects
artists all working at mates race which
is amazing for for me and they created a
world with its own wind its own Sun it's
own rain night and dark and every four
minutes there was a digital sunrise in
this environment so whilst we had the
real Sun at the beginning of the exit
beginning of the exhibition we had this
digital Sun which which which was born
through every four minutes and the that
yurt structure was a sort of input
the human being because humans relatedly
have relationship with the environment
every time that was touched the the
environment of the next day that would
appear this virtual environment would
change in depending on the amount of
human interaction let's say the dice
would be rolled differently for the next
day so that it would determine whether
it was a good day in paradise or a day
of storms and heavy weather
so there was something like you know 20
million trees in this world and this is
zooming in right so this is this is
about this is about real life size of
the office screen the entire panoramas
60 meters long
and then it should zoom in a bit further
so you see
[Music]
we took about so you know you hear
you're probably familiar with like
rendering difficult things we always one
of our biggest bugbears ways you know
getting the computer distributed
rendering rendering the stuff before
your before your previews up this is now
like an a4 sized bit of the of that so
every leaf on every tree in that
environment was was moving in response
to the environment around and every bit
of phone every photon was mapped and we
used we used 1,000 and get this row we
used about we had a month solid
rendering time on the Amazon Cloud and
we used nearly all of the all of the
computers on the Amazon Cloud and we
worked out I think maybe there was a
deal running that allowed us it was
quite early days in Amazon Cloud so we
worked out that to render that 60 meters
would have taken 250 years on one CPU so
whatever the calculation is imagine how
many CDs we use came in but probably now
you can do it on your phone
instantly I imagine escape it is really
disappointing but yeah so you had this
sense of relationships between a person
the environment a digital environment
which is kind of provocation because we
will be living in more so we are already
living and simulated some simulated
realities and this is kind of the
beginning of that trying to map that out
a larger scale and what's very strange
about this when you see a sunrise
digital sunrise you get the same feeling
as you get when you feel a real sign
which is very very strange but it's it's
a real to real thing it's high enough HD
is high enough strangely to get that
feeling when it when it surrounds you
which is kind of disappointing
I thought we would at least need 4k good
ad for that to happen ok so this is a
project which didn't happen which is our
entry for the Guggenheim Museum in
Helsinki I'm going to show you this and
one more product so this is a building
which was made the idea of it was to
kind of capture the environmental
conditions of the city the environmental
conditions or gather nature of
try to capture finished nurse in its
material materiality which in this case
is glass and it takes on the kind of
inspiration of like Tapia wirkola and a
lot of the kind of get quite romantic
design of the sixties finished glassware
and it places it on the front of a city
which has gone through a whole variety
of master planning exercises over the
last hundred years from kind of anchored
angles in the early 1900's to sort of
influence of Russia and Sweden and many
many changes over time but this is sort
of quite a picturesque City had quite a
small scale and marketplaces on the the
seafront marked there by simple changes
of floor material you know from gonna
gravel to textured of cobbles this is a
site location it's like if you were
following the the kind of architectural
press you before we probably know about
this the site and it was it it's a very
strange leftover site there's a
passenger ferry terminal we're in the
most prime location of the city where
they wither basically should be
something like a Guggenheim but it
wasn't so I think this was realized by a
number of a mixture of gonna art
collectors in a very kind of mayor with
some big ideas and also the kind of
Bilbao effect that they wanted to which
I wanted to bring there at the time but
both Guggenheim being kind of American
export which had already sort of been
around a lot and sort of finished nurse
which at the time I don't know if
there's any fins in the audience but I
think there was a if you've been
colonized a lot of times by a lot of
different people you just don't want
anymore
actually so there was this sort of
undercurrent of we don't need an
American Institute to come here so this
is one of the reasons why the googan I
didn't get built in the end because I
think the films are like what we can do
it ourselves when there's a chance but
that aside it was a very interesting
process of I've been visiting Helsinki
for like 10 12 years before was a
student here was a student the Bartlett
before that and had a lot of friends
there so the project was sort of series
of collaborations between the friends we
knew her designers craftsmen even atella
the the Finnish glass manufacturer made
our architectural models through their
kind of pulling of strings by Harry
koskinen and he was a director the
designer who is the design director
there and and trying to kind of pull in
what I knew about Helsinki what I
thought was amazing about it so the last
people at sea the kind of amazing
optimistic glass Palace which they had
there no doubt influenced by the Crystal
Palace - beginning and the kind of neon
lights there and this use of neon we put
into the kind of night scenery
it said Guggenheim facing America but
museum facing just a work museum facing
Helsinki and the grayness itself the
grayness of the Helsinki sky becomes the
grayness of the building so the
computing takes on the atmosphere and
from the interior this timber I've been
very kind of influenced by them by
across craftsmen who I was friends with
and the kind of finish the quality of
finished carpentry but also tried to use
this texture of the glass to open up a
new way of seeing the city so from the
interior the city presents itself in a
kind of in a new way through the texture
of the glass around it and the idea that
the the building itself you start to you
start to create a new relationship a
relationship with a piece of
architecture and the textures that it
has within it and you begin to know it
like it has a particular feeling when
you're there a particular like a new way
it filters the environment around it and
this you begin to know the text of the
building like a friend in a way so like
how you kind of know that
feeling of your cat's fur you kind of
should know the feet the building has
the kind of feeling like that I like the
idea in the sunrise of course it becomes
sunrise but in the winter the building
becomes winter said something dynamic in
all seasons and so they are actually now
it's good to hear even though the
project was canceled that we got it we
were finalists but no building got built
sadly even for the winning architects
because of the political political a bit
of a political struggle between
different parties that was happening
soon after this and it was used as a
kind of trading porn but now there will
be an Art and Design Museum in Helsinki
on this site it seems so or nearby so
there's a kind of great opportunity
there if you think you fancy a
competition to have your go on this side
so I came into the Expos I'm also
working on another expert at the moment
we we are doing lots of different kinds
of projects but this talk is about
experimentation and and and these are
place where I believe that kind of
greatest opportunity experimentation lie
particularly coz of the speed at which
they happen there's a map of all of the
Expos in the world there's a very funny
white region what you see as a whole of
South America the whole of Africa until
2020 was also the Middle East region
India so it's a kind of story of what
part of the world was seen to have
anything to offer the rest of the world
or the kind of the West not much of it
actually there was a kind of internal
discussion happening and the other
countries were seen as not really being
able to host this international
conference but 2020 and 2017 in Astana
is going to change that 2020 will be in
Dubai so we work we're kind of leading
the public realm of the of the expo
which means sort of all of the streets
and so a lot of stuff connecting no
international we're not doing the
international pavilions but we're doing
all the stuff that knits all of that
together so
it's a very interesting process and a
very very different scale because it's a
site which is you know 2 kilometers 600
hectare site that we're knitting
together and this is a site this is a
site on the kind of the first day I
arrived there 2 years ago and it's
actually really beautiful and so our and
it's it's sort of not what you think of
when you think of Dubai so part of our
job you know it's been many master plans
for the expo actually over time and so
because in order to win Expo you like it
really kick us master plan that's got
all the graphics and everything so
they've got they have an amazing mask
man but we're trying to kind of add a
level of a new kind of approach to the
public realm to that and it's sort of
based around the idea of kind of human
marks I mentioned kind of marks its
digital marks from the city and so on
before but this is trying to get back to
the the basis of kind of human footprint
in the sand literally and the
relationship with the environment around
this but particularly in that region the
the nature of the desert is kind of part
of the cultural identity of the place
you know poetry written about the desert
the relationship between oral history
written history linguistics and space so
literally working with written form of
Arabic and trying to bring trying to
kind of find a way to and this is the
master plan that kind of elements of
this element a lot of videos as we as
we've been given it you'll see you'll
find this a mouthful on the internet but
how to kind of make this opportunity in
2022 for the Arab world to speak and to
give some sort of message of pride in in
what it has and not purely in in and
what other people have to bring their
because what's remark about Osaka Expo
in 97 days before the UAE was was
even created a view AE existed as a
series of seven emirates but in osaka
there was abu dhabi pavilion if you kind
of go from 1917 kind of to the early 80s
a whole host of Japanese architects
started working in the UAE so building
building the kind of bedrocks of that of
that country building its institutions
Tanguay was if you look at the Astana
Kazakh I went there so the Expo is a
chances for people to ideas to transfer
so the ideas metabolise kind of went to
went to Dubai and that's to blame on the
Japanese know but you but the the idea
that the expo is a kind of opportunity
for discussions to happen ideas to
transfer and it really does it really
does actually happen in a very short
period of time anyway but Dubai has many
layers of history and we are trying to
kind of pull out some which which are
may be forgotten in a way another
project we do in London which is about
this at the moment is the Museum of
London on the side of the old Smithfield
market which is just here Smithfield
general market 1883 designed by Horace
Jones is yeah it was a city architect at
the time you can go to the you can go to
the stretch in Clerkenwell and you've
got kind of the Metropolitan meat market
still functioning but on the left-hand
side these areas have become derelict
and out of use for the last 15 20 years
so so the Museum of London will be
moving there taking a 7 million 7
million archaeological objects London's
history the last 200,000 years have
London before London to London now you
know it's a remarkable collection
they're gonna be housed it's gonna be
housed here and we are we are tasked as
kind of one of the group of
collaboration collaborative architects
standing Williams ourselves Jun Harrop
the conservation architect and Joanne
Gibbons
to deal with these buildings and and
creators turn a market into a Pacific
institution that is somehow
forward-facing as well as holding the
memories of London one of the ways we're
doing that we've been talking about is
turning to those sort of houses you see
there around the edge of this building
into a kind of hybrid institution of
museum and partners so the idea that the
Museum of the future can be one which is
which has an emergent content so in
those houses can be all kinds of things
from cinemas to residency spaces to
exhibition spaces to maybe there's a
space for the AAA in there somewhere I
can I can I'll argue for it but but this
you know the idea that if you bring
together archeologists and historians
with sort of futurologists let's say
people from here you create the future
of the city and museums
well universities aren't really thinking
about the future of the city and if you
think about UCL they think about the big
universities of cities are not really
tasked with the challenges of
contemporary city they may be there used
to be you know ruler of Venice would
invite the great thinkers of the day and
say you know how should we deal with
sanitation how should we deal with
bridges what's the approach we should
take to expanding you come and solve it
or what's the approach we should take to
warfare the odds eventually tell me
about siege towers and so on but that
relationship between city making and
kind of the study and experimentation
isn't really there anymore so we think a
museum could take that mantle on by
combining kind of all of its library of
knowledge about clay Roman London and
you bring Google or something here and
then Google can tell you about immediate
data about how London's worked in the
streetscape and so on and then you bring
design to that and you can use that
information and think about what the
future can be is that one of the things
we're trying to do they're moving in
kind of market
into a museum but this is how it is at
the moment so this is on the interior so
it's a kind of a lot of change I can't
show you any of this the actual project
because it's all under non-disclosure
but come back and check in 2024 and
there will be a museum here and you'll
be very welcome
and I'll take you on a tour of this
place and we can see how it turned out
so finally very quickly this is good and
this this slide is intentionally black
because I would like it to be a sort of
comparison for this this is a project
I'm gonna show you what you see the home
type of ilium we did it Pyeongchang
Winter Olympics this is the blackest
material on earth this is Fanta black
which the screen can't show basically
all your computer screen currently will
show this so that's that is the blackest
module on earth and we had the
opportunity to create a building covered
by the derivative of this called VB x2
and this is the project it's a it's a
building for Hyundai so again we were
approached by someone to try to
materialize an idea
so Hyundai the car company wanted wanted
to kind of speak about hydrogen they
were they had a new fuel that they which
they were they had to come technology to
run their cars with and we were asked to
somehow give an experience of hydrogen
hydrogen is a colorless odorless yeah
it's an invisible gas and the only way
you can visualize it is by exploding it
which wasn't going to wasn't going to be
an idea that they would play with Davis
agreed to although we did sort of
discuss it if there's a way of doing
something with it but so this project
thought gave to experience of hydrogen
to people I go talk about scale before
one was hydrogen at scale of the
universe so what you see here is a star
field
which is the which is the same stars
that you would see if you cut a hole in
the sky and looked out into space in
that direction
these are map this is from the European
Space Agency as a Gaia project Gaia kind
of maps stars over the visible universe
for this very nice website they have you
can look at what stars would look like
in two million years from now and how
they'll change
so actually we mapped them to two
thousand years in the future but no one
no one knows that now you know that it's
a but is the reason basically it's a but
we use this black material so that the
this is kind of frame this cut out of
the sky would be as powerful as possible
in broad daylight and I'd been working
with his company like 2000 since 2013
speaking about their black materials
which were at the time were only there
are only talking about for scientific
applications and we tried also to have a
room in the UK pavilion in Milan when I
was there proposed we may belittle
people for that and we didn't we didn't
win it we didn't develop it but they
we've always been talking for the last
five six years about doing something
together and this was this was a chance
the surfaces are building a concave
parabolas so they absorb as much light
as possible but broad daylight is very
powerful right so you have the number of
watts of energy which are landing on the
surface this this black material can
absorb like ninety nine point six of
those watts of energy but some of them
get reflected back which is still
visible so in bright sunlight the
brightest brightest pyongyang sunlight
you had this amazing thing happened
where you had a kind of solar eclipse in
daylight and with the shape the prior
boric surface of the building kind of
revealed itself on the edges and other
times and these are not photoshopped
you'd get this incredible just the
building would would be in silhouette it
kind of self creates silhouette or you
get here the star field emerging and you
could go and stand in it and so in this
way you experience kind of the
this kind of scale of stars within
within a kind of the void of these
facades of the building and quite it was
quite a amazing experience to walk
through those to enter the building you
walked through a black corridor and at
the center of the structure was a was a
completely white space it's kind of
absolute opposite and playing with the
kind of anyway removing the sensors
removing kind of experience and then and
then flooding it flooding it with light
and this space we visualized kind of
hides in a different way so you know
your bodies are made out of 70% water
age of 10 water but hydrogen is kind of
the most by volume it's like there or by
quantity it's the most prevalent element
in our bodies so and every day we
experience hydrogen the form of water
droplets in our sink and whatever we
wanted people to experience the beauty
of hydrogen in a way the beauty of water
so he created this this white room with
a with an enormous surface which is
treated with a hydrophobic coating which
means it repels water I explained
earlier and created a series of sort of
rituals where this would be invited to
take water from one place and and kind
of experience it in a completely new way
so this this first machine like turned
turn could have a massive water back
into droplets and you say here there can
afraid that an ocean is a but a
collection of droplets and this sort of
turned turned solid water in a way mass
of water into back into droplets and
these coalesced into into a kind of lake
that formed every every sort of five
minutes by the collective action of all
of the people visiting it and on the on
the edge of the edge of the table were
so happy ik trigger so
this is just my best effort on iphone to
film you think the water can water
droplets run across this this landscape
and of course it's a bit like a it's a
bit like a idea of mobility in the
future city knows those things are like
they're sort of like into intelligent
vehicles moving and combining and
splitting colliding and forming this
forming this this is this Lake every few
minutes so you know I kind of these
projects are these projects for me about
creating or exploring new experiences in
architecture they're about kind of the
opportunities a testing ground for what
the future city might be like and
sometimes they employ new methods of
construction new materials new
relationships between person and person
or person the environment new types of
behavior of course these are related to
all types of behavior as well it's not
everything's built on something else but
I think what what sort of for me is
important in a ways to think back to
like Paxton kind of go back to that
example everything that every glass and
steel building that you see in any city
around the world exists because Paxton
made that building
150 years later everything we see around
the city is related to that bit of
experimentation a little bit of
innovation so the kind of question I try
and ask myself in the projects that we
do is does it pass a paxton test anyway
you can apply that to your pros where
you can test it you won't be around to
find out of course but the idea that
what we do here in the in the university
what we do here you know in practice can
has the potential to to change the city
of tomorrow is something that is a that
we shouldn't take lightly it's an it's
an opportunity every project we do is an
opportunity to dream and to imagine new
possibilities for the way that we'll be
living but also the way our kids and
their kids will be living so thank you
for your patience tonight and I would
love to have some questions for you from
you if there's still time you're not too
tired and yeah thank you thank you for
that
does anyone have any questions
a fascinating lecture thank you so much
Ikeda ball one of the Situationists
International talked about the Society
of the spectacle big geyser
thank you very much for the wonderful
talk Keita Bohr talked about a society
of spectacle that you believe it's come
true just that's an interesting question
I'm not sure if I have the time to I'm
neither kind of a sexpert on on DeBoer
nor a kind of all this time they kind of
go into much black but I walk but I kind
of only answer in kind of in terms of my
into my projects you know we I think
there are some fundamentals fundamentals
about human beings experiences because
of our biology because we've got two
eyes because we are digits or certain
sizes and so on that our that we share
with our grandparents and our good air
grandparents and their grandparents and
ago so there's a this kind of
phototropism you know we we share with
the plants as well so there's sort of
some some fundamentals of of being an
animal on earth which are universal and
probably will be for quite a quite quite
a while but although things are starting
to change and our you know this this
thing as it gets integrated into our
heads or ears or wherever it goes to
quite soon and and the the platforms on
it and and what clever reward systems
are built within that platform to kind
of indulge us into the pleasure of
spectacle and we reduce our experience
the world into something of spectacle
it's it's imminent that transformation
but I think regardless of that there's
still the fundamentals of of ourselves
as organisms are things that we can as
we as architects can still work with us
because we can work with the other side
the technology and we we tried to do
that to understand it kind of going a
different way of your question little
bit but you know I quote maybe Kenya
Hara again it kind of talks about how
it's important that as we become more
technology driven that we don't serve
technology that we continue to make sure
that technology serves human senses and
he called that like instead of like he
coined the word like someone coined it
before but he's using in a particular
way sense where to describe like sort of
interfaces between them ourselves in our
environment which are designed to take
designs of ourselves in mind in our and
our our human senses so I think as long
as we design as long as we kind of put
the human at the center of the
experience this is I mean from my
perspective this is this is what I'm
interested in
this and this last one is my favorite
I'm trying to reflect on and at the same
time challenge you so this is about
experience I don't think it's about the
future of the city I see it very much as
an experience of poetic experience a
confrontation the whole space of
contemplation puzzlement where what you
see is not what you get interesting
terminology textile it's a sculptors
sensibility to some extent and an
artistic probing of a sense of self
one's body ones and and and in spatial
dimensions and very effective and
beautiful and but I feel what I don't
see I wonder how he would engage with
projects which have determined work to
do where some of these effects and I've
been thinking about us working with from
the architecture of phonological
ambiguity puzzlement and also
conspicuity and things like that
are you working somewhere else
you talked on projects which have actual
work to do and and where these become
instrumental rather than an experiment
in in a bonus yeah I think I've chosen
intentionally chosen a series of
projects tonight to to these projects as
I mean as you kind of noticed they there
as a family there are things which are
there to really to stimulate imagination
and as experiences they were they were
such as well and the the task of our our
studio which is very which is sort of
weeping in the opportunity now to
explore more is how as you put up
buildings that do something you know how
those experiences can become part of
let's say more the more pragmatic
aspects of
of yeah well yes not to say that these
are I mean these are in unique
situations but they don't have the
challenges or the entire challenges that
you have in a in a city but then so as
examples we're doing a very interesting
Contemporary Art Center in in in Almaty
in in Kazakhstan and this this is what
is it like to 3,000 square meter
building and it's something which is a
Soviet it's a reconstruction of Soviet
cinema cinemas are fantastic typology
anyway because they are sort of their
places where people went to dream right
and and the buildings were quite prosaic
actually they're kind of just sheds in
which so we have to kind of turn on the
lights in that shed and make it a place
to go and experience something new and
you know have toilets and all of the
these guys these kind of things and and
here we are kind of dealing with the
idea of anyway trying to think about
cinema as something that experienced as
something that plays out in real time
rather than song which has it kind of
has a limited time limited time scale so
this is very interesting project and
we're sort of what are we we're kind of
50% through that we'll go to
construction in like six months or
something so it's kind of is very
exciting the the Dubai Expo stuff which
I kind of could I can't really show you
much of this but it's because again of
non-disclosure stuff but it we're
dealing with we have to create an
environment that can deal with 25
million people over six month period so
it's a very it's very much a study into
the way people move and and then the
environment has to withstand a kind of
legacy the legacy use as well which is
turns into a neighborhood
kind of stuff so we have to think about
how how that let's say it's like Queen
Elizabeth Park right how like an
environment of incredible high density
cannot feel excuse me not feel empty and
and odd and barren once it becomes
emptied of people you know in the future
ten years in the future so this is this
is a one of the ways of resolving it is
with the environment we're creating is
one that is kind of has lanes of
different speeds of popov inhabitation
right from like yeah liquid stopping to
running and all that so all the way the
human body moves between that it's kind
of the environment and then
I think the Museum of London is
extremely let's say it's it's extremely
has extremely practical it has to deal
with but here we deal with time actually
as a the palimpsest is like the entire
thing but we have to kind of provide how
do you how do you create curate a
building that exists already has existed
for 150 years and presented in various
various fragments and various versions
of it to the people that walk around it
and this is what we're trying to do is
have the experience of that the
experience of the future are they kind
of said it through the the incubation so
I haven't and the the objects that are
placed within it as things that layer on
top of each other and those influence
and inspire people
but yeah where'd you see it how do you
move where do you go from A to B it's
all it's all part of it but these are
these are really the first chances for
us to apply in the studio to apply it to
buildings that will exist for more than
kind of moments in time so it'll be a
very good test to see if it works that
there's a if the first of those will be
they could be Almaty want to open the
beginning of 2020 and we're doing it
we're doing a museum in charge as all to
open in 2020 it also deals with kind of
contemporary contemporary a contemporary
art collection overlaid with a with a
within a collection of historic
manuscripts of the Koran it kind deals
with the idea of infinity as sort of an
idea of from all this stuff at my the
cosmos this thing the
than minut to the infinite the my new to
the enormous so we are in we have the
now it's finally the kind of the the
projects are there that give us the
opportunities kind of met him to
liberate this stuff into into buildings
which apart cities like this is this is
very exciting
watch this space I mean would they think
it's an actually in a certain way not
responding but trying to have some
closing comments because we can keep on
asking you questions
upstairs in the front members room is
that well architecture sometimes it
hasn't enjoyed maybe too much too
defines itself in relationship to its
own terms in relationship to its space
in terms of those things that work and
one has sometimes forgotten the
relationship between that object and the
subject and that the space of legibility
in that is skin and that perception and
that cosmology or if you want that
history that we all carry thing out of
your work actually tries to produce
architecture through that space but is
not just a billboard but is in fact that
a space between that surface that volume
that texture that idea of that universe
that is contained and that subject
viewer that is actually part of that
architectural project and it is in a
kind of a reverse scale that maybe
sometimes they presume that you have
shown today didn't have much interior
because the interior was towards another
form of interior and so in that reverses
scale I want to thank you for flipping
us the universe inside out and please
join me thanking him and let's move the
conversation and the questions upstairs
thank
[Applause]
