you all I'm not gonna pay a very long
introduction at all
but I want to say a few things about a
very very dear friend someone who quite
honestly inspires me every single time I
see his drawings the drawings of his
studio the drawings and models of his
unit it's it's a great great pleasure to
be able to introduce CJ this evening his
latest book which is just CJ I was
saying to someone on the train today
it's a bit like Woody Allen and that you
get a book each year like with Woody
Allen you get a film each year CJ is
that productive
he's also that exacting CJ and I were
just talking about there's a note in the
front of this book that his studio
designed it so working within a template
it is really CJ and his office's
production an extraordinary set of
drawings and ideas around two themes
that are very very close in dear to my
heart a couple of years ago he produced
a book about food what was it called
again CJ was Food City one subject very
very dear to my heart this one focused
quite a lot around climate change which
is increasingly a subject of interest to
me as I work in Norway and the people in
Norway talk about it almost apocatip
apocalyptically in the way that is
changing the landscape and actually the
infrastructure of architecture there so
two themes we kind of slightly run in
parallel that way CJ I've known CJ for
some time he's an extraordinarily
exacting individual the precision of the
drawings the precision of the text are
testament to both a precision and
exactness but also you'll an
extraordinary imagination an imagination
ah I just think almost second to none
there's nothing honestly more
pleasurable for me than to open another
book of his and also know that the words
are going to be equivalent to the images
CJ and that's one thing that as an
architect while do we have difficulty
writing perhaps there's a reason for
that but one thing that CJ also covers
is the text so not only are you
mesmerized by the drawings but you are
equally mesmerised by the text in the
book he covers extraordinary ground I
have no idea how far he's going to go
through it but nevertheless there will
be much more that he isn't able to cover
that still exists in this book after
this evening that's all I want to say CJ
I really want to bring you forward so
everyone please welcome CJ Lim but I
like to acknowledge the team that work
on the projects the case study the
research and some of the photographs and
so forth they're a very important part
of my world my discourse and they
basically they are the the people that
really made the most contribution to
most of my research this book tonight is
the third of the quartet the first was
small cities an eco-warrior it was a
book that looked into how urban
agriculture and nature would augment the
city most of the projects in that book
were commissions from the Chinese and
the Korean government where we look into
how food production
urban agriculture and nature could be
very much part of the human community
not humans and then the countryside but
it could be much more hybridized the
second book food city was looking into
food security and food cultures in city
within the book there was project a case
study called the food Parliament where
we started to speculate what the
governance would produce what sort of
tectonic would produce in relationship
to food security so back to tonight this
is as I said the third of the quartet we
look into climate change these are the
images we are bombarded with constantly
either in text or in journals in news
paper on the news on the internet on
YouTube
and we are very familiar with it and we
seem rather sort of hopeless in trying
to combat it when you get the leader of
the free world not believing in climate
change by the way I hope I'm not gonna
offend any nationality tonight because I
probably will because I will be
criticizing different nationalities in
their stands of climate change and and
so forth so this is these are problem
overpopulation - shortage of housing
these are some of the things that we
need to address in some way I don't have
the solution for it I'm not bringing you
any solution tonight what I do and what
my research team do what my teaching
does is that we just speculate and I
think that's really very important part
and so tonight I'm showing you how we
speculate and what our speculation
outcomes are this is a picture of
Maldives
um the islands and as soon as the ocean
sneeze these islands will go underwater
I can assure because they're the lowest
land in the entire world and as I said
climate change is a reality and poses
serious threats to infrastructure
quality of life and entire urban systems
not only poor countries but rich ones
will be affected and that's really
really important to know the research
tonight very much focuses on the threat
and the fundamental human requirements
to protect to provide and to participate
the stimulus for the research derives
from postulated scenarios and processes
glean from science fiction literature
fiction and as well as futurology as
from the body of scientific knowledge
regarding changing environments impact
on cities and what we want to do is to
look at it from a different perspective
from learning from how science fiction
writers have addressed some of these
issues rather than you know taking on
I'm the architect I'm the planner
I'm the environmental engineer how
I solve these problems a quote from one
of my favorite authors JG Bela
everything is becoming science fiction
from the margins of an almost invisible
literature has sprung the intact reality
of the 20th century what the writers of
modern science fiction invent today you
and I will do tomorrow the future is a
better key to the present than the past
if we were to interrogate the wall of
the built environment through the
ingredients of speculative fiction how
would the future city takes form I'm
always curious father and I think that's
a very important question for all of us
in this room I guess and all everybody
in the profession of the built
environment rather than just following
what is the inverted brackets correct
way of doing things I'd like to think
that us architects are like Alchemist we
create different concoctions sometimes
the concoction works and it does magic
and sometimes it goes terribly terribly
wrong and you know I can assure you I
have done more bump projects than I've
had hot dinners so things that you know
if you do a bad project for one term
don't worry about it it's not the end of
the world
so here tonight I'm gonna show you my
recipe of how you create an urban vision
through fiction first two equal portions
of brave new world and Animal Farm to
accommodate the themes of equality
freedom utopia the perfect world and the
role of politics add the energy source
and the building material extracted from
in watermelon sugar this is a spread
this is spread neatly across the
pre-prepared ground surface a great
expanse of salt water the pool of Tears
from Alice carefully at the city and the
city if applied correctly this has the
effect of separating the mixture there
should be two distinct territories one
of light and the other of shadow next
the collection of tangible and
intangible infrastructures from
invisible cities should permeate the
poorest urban mix a generous print
of Howl's Moving Castle provides the
means for the inhabitants to migrate
finally we animate the mixture within
time and with the understanding that
currencies from existing corrupt
economies would be useless here time
itself becomes currency slowness and OAH
are celebrated as community and leisure
activities so this concoction were also
sort of they see ingredients for some of
the the case study that you'll see but
what we did was that we produced this
urban vision and this vision was
actually drawn in a shop window in
Melbourne a few years ago I think the
character of infrastructure
quite simply defines the the nature of
the city and the thing is that you know
here this is an aerial view of London
I'm sure all of you are familiar with
you know you can easily spot at least
six to eight what we call traditionally
infrastructure tonight I think you know
you should have an open mind about what
infrastructure is and what multi-use
infrastructure should be and then we
also wanted to blur the boundary between
architecture and infrastructure
traditionally infrastructure would be
bridges things Engineers would do roads
and so forth and they are usually
single-use here within the book we
explored how multi-use infrastructure
would be much more akin to how we create
spatial poetics architecture
infrastructure exists in many forms and
guises here it opens the city like
Central Park infrastructure of in
Tiananmen Square here it's an
infrastructure of equality and also
controversy at the same time talking of
controversy or buildings infrastructure
that at odds if you go to the center of
Istanbul you will see the Sofia Hagia
Sophia and the Blue Mosque facing each
other these two are wonderful pieces of
infrastructure
architecture of religion they are of
epic proportions
just like the city itself I think my
favorite one will be this one in
Gibraltar where two pieces of
infrastructure collide I don't I think I
don't think I should use of a class they
meet in an inter junction in a junction
where the highway would stop always
traffic to allow the aeroplanes to
either take off all or land and the
effect of it is absolutely it runs
through the vein of the whole city then
because if the traffic stops for the
plane to take off or land the traffic
around the whole city would stop and it
would be affected so every inhabitant on
there will somehow feel and get
emotionally engaged in the aeroplane
taking off or land there are three
chapters obviously I will start with to
protect from Beijing to Berlin in our
7,000 year love affair with cities walls
have at different times and different
places imprison people and set them free
and so the first thing that one would
the first architectonic element that
comes to mind of any of us when it comes
to protect would be to build a wall to
build a fence and again making reference
to that man who wants to build this wall
you know I think building a wall cuz
sometimes we counterproductive it would
not be the right thing to do like on the
east bank here the image here is a piece
of artwork by Banksy you have to forgive
his language on the graffiti sometimes
walls are built to protect the entire
community here in palma nova in this
italian city just outside of venice this
the wall was to confine or to protect
initially they you know a pretty wealthy
community there but nobody wanted to
live there so what happened was that the
Venetian resorted to pardoning criminals
and offering them financial incentives
to settle in this
allistic renaissance infrastructure so
for example if you have a sentence of
ten years they will reduce it to five
years and they give you you know i know
how many thousand euros if you're just
willing to say that but still people do
not want to live there
it looks great area on an aerial
photograph but you know that's that's
about it and walls also protect entire
countries you know the great wall china
here i'm sure many of you are familiar
with but the idea of protection doesn't
have to be confined to a wall to sort of
to sort of isolate yourself yeah I think
you know the Ganges River for example
protects and it protects over half a
billion inhabitants along its length and
I think it's a wonderful infrastructure
for all is environmental wonders and
also health problems that comes with it
people wash to take water from there
they you know they actually pour all the
kind of human nutrients into it as well
as well as sometimes dead animals but
they also then scatter ashes of cremated
bodies into it but the thing is that
this is an infrastructure of faith the
faithful believe that a dip in this
infrastructure will cleanse a lifetime
of sins and help bring salvation that's
what many of them believe we built
infrastructure to protect the souls the
faith and the dead here and here in
Venice the cemetery is one of great
beautiful example of that kind or the
City of Angels in Buenos Aires here this
talking about protecting souls and dead
bodies and the dead I guess the ultimate
infrastructure to protect the dead would
be the pyramids you know the Kings would
be buried in there with their belongings
and wealth along with a few life slaves
but I like the proportion but the scale
of this sort of
the pyramids against the modern city we
built infrastructure to protect in all
forms we and at most times they have
rather unpleasant dystopic effects from
The Truman Show the artificial bubble
that Truman lived in to the vertical
city in high-rise the first high-rise
would probably be this the lighthouse by
Alexander the Great
later on film makers would create other
visions or even the great artists
architects Varys would just create this
vertical vision just through light and
shade to things only light and shade
simple as that and I think this is one
of the most wonderful wonderful drawings
of all times
absolutely stunning the Japanese master
ball movement attempted that this is a
project by the Great Architect errata
Ozaki where him and his contemporaries
even attempted to reach the heavens for
me the most romantic sort of vertical
construction would be these wonderful
needles in the landscape of in Italy in
Tuscany
it's in San Gimignano and they are very
very slender they're absolutely
wonderful against the you know the
fantastic hills of the the Italian
landscape they were constructed by
wealthy merchants to protect themselves
a family and from robbers and they think
that they would have enough supply
within the towers for any duration when
they were held hostage in there I would
say one thing if you have the good
fortune of turning out you must be you
mustn't have sort of panic attacks on
vertigo and things like that because I
when I went there the handrails were
doesn't comply with health and safety it
was just a bit of rail there and when I
looked down I myself
not quite literally but I think you know
delineations walls we build walls to
protect ourselves but a lot of times
delineation could be defined in other
ways too you know
the Vatican City which is a micro nation
has its own rules there's an answer to
Rome or Italy or the EU or anybody else
you know it's it has his own stone walls
but the real the territorial delineation
is you would find a white line in st.
Peter's Square if you would turn up
there I think you know micronations are
really unique like the Vatican City have
anybody seen the prisoner before the TV
series my god I feel my age suddenly I
think this was I saw when I first came
to this country in the very very you
know late 70s early 80s so they said you
must go and look at the prison the
prisoner is where it itself is it's a
place is this country it's a is its own
city its own the organization almost and
everybody within this organization is
known by a number this is when I start
to describe micronations as dystopic
entities
similarly Alcatraz and the Bay of San
Francisco or Principality of Sealand or
the the image on your right-hand side
would be the island the Danish island of
Elio these ladies they look quite severe
don't they they look quite scary and the
things that they are the guardian of
this piece of land which is about 15,000
square meters only they have the
sovereignty has its own rules as an
island they forbid anybody on that rule
the membership to read Robinson Crusoe
and also they they are very stubborn
they their time is 12 minutes 12 minutes
not 10 minutes or 5 minutes 12 minutes
behind danish mainland time I'm going to
show you the first of a few case studies
here this one is called London is
flooding question on London
is anticipate to flood that's for sure
the thames barrier will no longer be
able to do his job there's a plan to do
a second barrier in the temps but what
we were just wondering is that what will
really happen if we allow London to
flood that was there kind of the what if
you will be you you will find that I
will be using this quote what if
throughout the whole you know next 4050
minutes
what if London were to be allowed to
flood we were inspired by the drown
world by Bala so here without the
reptiles the lagoon and the creeks of
office blocks half submerged would have
had a strange dream like beauty but
iguanas brought the fantasy down to
earth as their seats in the one-time
boardroom indicated the reptiles have
taken over the city so this idea of
London would allow the flood nature
would come back so this paranoid city in
our terms is when we're thinking about
it was one third and homage to Bala one
third speculation into the threat of
nature and the resilience and its
resilience and once at a provocation
exercise in the notion of disaster so
there are only three hubs that we will
protect don't worry you you'll be
protected here at Bethel Square so we'll
protect Queen and country the city the
Bank of England and Bloomsbury so sorry
I didn't you I shall use a image there
but the things I use UCL so I have to
show my loyalty somehow so here I'm
going to use this scroll here and you
can see this is Queen and country
so Buckingham Palace and the Parliament
is protected
Bloomsbury is protected here and the
City of London and the walls are built
from digging up all the Royal Parks so
you can see these ginormous craters
where the soil is then dug up to create
these vertical defensive infrastructure
and the idea came from the Tower of
Babel
when when humans want to create these
logical structure to reach the heavens
to engage with God and but I think that
the reality was that I'm absolutely
fascinated this is one of my favorite
architectural images of these
architecture in Timbuktu where the
community
constantly have to repair the wall and
these mud walls so I could imagine you
know me and my my crowd from the
Bartlett and you hear from the a a would
all be participating in this exercise
where you will be piling on soil to hide
yourself behind these walls
just in case the floods were to come
just in case so here the things that is
also the project is also critique in how
paranoid we are and how dramatic we are
in many cases and yet we are still not
taking climate change very seriously so
here is one of the hubs the build wall
and the walls will become inhabitable
all the inhabitants of London will
actually pile into this into these sort
of battery chicken coops I would call
them and and and and then leave the rest
of the city and when the left so these
are the infrastructure that would
protect these hubs and their constant
warning just like any disturbing
condition environment they will be
constantly warning you that you know the
flood might come tomorrow the next day
it's rising and when you leave him the
humans were to leave the city then
nature would come back just like in
balance ground well and then we might
even end up having just you know it's a
forest that we can actually shoot for
our food I think what I'm trying to say
here is that this is the project not to
do yeah we should not build walls we
should not be we should not react in
such a knee-jerk reaction we should not
build these things that protects only
the select few and I think you know I
think with the purposes that the project
almost as a critique of the way that we
have been programmed to think of how to
protect oneself or how to protect
community or how to build defense
systems and rather than work with
climate change and so the things that
you know I'm more interested in how we
can actually embrace climate change as
in a resource as an ingredient rather
than
to actually be very aggressive to us it
I think we should all change our mindset
that maybe sea level rise is not such a
bad thing after all
the grass is Sun sunshine the heat
island effects is not so bad and in
pollution can we make something out of
that too
so anyway on to the next case study
swine undersell turing sky every I think
for me the every generation would have
their superheroes and mine was served
created by Stanley spider-man I think
you know in Gotham City where Batman we
have spider-man through Queens Fantastic
Four located in midtown Manhattan and
even the Green Lantern exists in what we
call coast city which is basically Los
Angeles and I think you know Stanley
said something really interesting here
in one of his comics for the United
Nations he said we need to create a new
generation of global leaders thinkers
and doers to tackle the world's most
pressing issues like climate change
inequality so as I said early on we need
to change our mindset and I think you
know if we can't change our mindset now
maybe the younger generation could could
could start thinking in an alternative
way and so here there's a project that
actually engages with two things of in
Denmark one is Greenland is actually
melting away because of the the Sun and
then you know the second problem they
have is a big industry anybody from
Denmark here ok you have to forgive me
if I I say something wrong about your
culture then one has always projected
itself as a white knight in shining
armor for climate change they are doing
everything possible I think to hide the
fact to ignore the fact that their pig
industry is doing a lot of damage to the
environment and that's something that is
not addressed at all so here our
proposition is to really create two
superheroes what we call the dynamic duo
one is the one you know just like Batman
and roll
one movie floating in the air that will
be the end I Swan and then the swine
squad as in the Suicide Squad they will
be the pigs so here there will be this
infrastructure that sent across from
mainland Denmark
across to Greenland to create this new
shelter to reflect the sunlight back
into the atmosphere and this
infrastructure would sustain itself in
the air using the methane gas from the
pig industry so the pig industry is
actually doing something good rather
than you know doing something bad and
these are come some of the images of
that one of the other problems is that
Denmark you know always talks about
equality and democracy and being you
know happy and and I think demo is voted
the most happy country in the world demo
has six million human inhabitants and 29
million pigs that's fine you know that's
not a problem but the things that you
know if we want to talk about democracy
I think we should also respect the pigs
in Denmark so what we propose that since
the pigs are contributing to climate
change or saving Greenland they should
actually have equal rights so here the
idea that since the pig is contributing
the urban condition would be augmented
houses apartment blocks they should all
be augmented to give the pigs equal
rights here and here this is when they
achieve equal rights they're marching
through the city
another project set in Denmark this one
specifically in Copenhagen Copenhagen is
one of the cities that is experiencing
high level sea-level rise and they are
really concerned that the islands will
be the land would even be it would
shrink even more and what you end up
having in Copenhagen and many bits of
Denmark will be these tiny archipelagos
and here we will we were speculating
oops sorry
a what-if project what if Copenhagen can
achieve immortality through quick
freezing of hint of his infrastructure
in anticipation of future resurrection
just like what Robert attinger did with
cryogenics he's frozen himself you know
with his two wives with his three cats
two dogs five neighbors in his basement
you know and he's hoping that one day he
will be thawed and then resurrected
that's what his son believe David
believe that we're obviously sad but
we're able to freeze Robert under
optimum conditions so he got another
chance so the things that you know if we
take this position of what if we were to
freeze you know the heritage and culture
or what the sugar that the Danish
community believes in could all that
heritage and culture and hygge be
resurrected when the sea-level were to
drop and decrease so what we've created
is to as the sea level rises we will
bucket these things up and create a
series of spires almost like ice lollies
so they would actually and within these
ice lollies you would actually freeze in
all the kind of cultural elements and
the things that you the Danish society
will find important and they would
actually become the new spire of the
city and then when time comes you know
they could be thought and being
reconstituted to provide
I love the audacity of the Roman
engineers they provided water and
physical communication through roads
this is the aqueduct and the Romans have
always boasted they are much better
engineers than the Greek engineers
themselves before they have actually
because of these infrastructure they
have conquer much of the Western world
some of them are less bombastic like the
the aqueduct idea pipe bullish this one
here the Wells in Venice they are about
a network of 600 of them were wonderful
infrastructure to provide water on the
island I like what Saskia Sassen said
she said about infrastructure from
sewage to electricity and broadband they
should be covered with transparent walls
and floors if you're waiting for the bus
you can actually see how the city all
works and begin to engage and I think
that's really really clever so whereas
we tend to hide them like you know could
you imagine if we have a transparent
floor to London we can see how the whole
London Underground system would work the
provision of transport is always a sore
point suited for discussion of any
planner environmentalists and and
anybody who have interested in green
environments you know but yet we are
absolutely reliant on it you know and
I'd like to think that you know there
are better examples to come but my
favorite one is the image on the left
hand side the sampan in the fifth
element where the sometimes were to dock
against Bruce Willis's window blurring
the boundary between public space and
private space the image on the right
hand side on their hand is not a piece
of science fiction it's real can
somebody tell me where it is yeah say
Germany okay where in Germany
it's in Wuppertal in Germany and it's
not a science fiction piece of science
fiction is I love this piece of
infrastructure it actually does not
confine itself to your sort of planning
grid in any shape or form it actually
has life is own and in animates the
whole city other infrastructures that
actually provide sort of connection
would be these two marvelous inhabitable
bridges in in Italy one in Florence and
one in Venice I would say that they were
the precursors to the elevated walkway
system that you have in the city of Hong
Kong where the roads in Hong Kong will
left two vehicles and the elevated
walkways will become the new ground for
human activities but I don't think you
know it's as simple as that that you
know infrastructure takes you from
embankment a to be I would like to think
that you know there could be other
poetic activities happening like this
one the bridge over across the Bosporus
where you do fish from day to night
could somebody tell me what this image
is from fantastic okay you make me feel
slightly younger tonight so you know it
- it's from the album cover of Pink
Floyd I love this image because of the
the Flying Pig next to it yeah but this
is what I call the utilitarian castle
and in the film children of men the
power station was portraying had the
role of the Ministry of Arts and I love
the kind of imagination they place
within the film what they could do with
the power station rather than what is
happening in reality which is very very
sad they are other sort of you
television castle like this one here
next to oval cricket ground the Gasol
meter all
across the skyline of Manhattan these
water tanks in the underground system or
back to east on board the system it's
one of the most beautiful beautiful
underground structures I have ever seen
and for those who have not been there
and if you're going there when you go
that you really have to savor it with
your eyes not with their ears because
they try to make it touristic they keep
playing this loop of very cheesy
Pavarotti music so and just ignore it
and this savor it with your eyes it's
absolutely fantastic but I guess the
real queen of all or king of all
underground infrastructure utilitarian
castle would be this one the stepwells
in india it's absolutely fantastic
just imagine Buckingham Palace inverted
and cast into the ground itself and this
is where and the negative space would be
where you the monsoon rain will be
captured and used throughout the year
each floor is about five meters tall and
you can actually step down into it it's
really a absolute ingenious piece of
work I think you know science fiction
writers are they are much more prolific
they have great imagination in imagining
how we can source water in the in the
novel dune Frank Herbert wrote about
many devices that you could harvest
atmospheric water and how you can
actually even recycle human sweat and
perspiration and urine in what he called
the fill suit that all of the unit his
characters would wear and then the water
would be recycled when they were having
droughts in Los Angeles a few years back
the city actually did contemplate using
a lot not a social but a lot of the kind
of devices suggested in the in the novel
itself
remember this is 1965 and and we are
still having problem in many many
countries and places around the world
where drought is a major issue this here
I'm sure most of you are familiar with
this image is probably one of the
greatest living out
in the world this was when REM
speculated and I think you know for me
that was the peak of his imagination
delirious New York is one of the most
wonderful books of all time for in the
20th century anyway and I love this
image where he the the the the
architects from the USSR trying to
escape to the free wall using a swimming
pool I guess infrastructure of mobility
started with Noah's Ark I guess at that
point this is you know when we realize
the impact or what Noah's Ark set out to
do we should have realized the impact of
the flood so we shouldn't be so
surprised with floods and climate change
at all because even in the Bible we have
the big big flood so the next project
20,000 fish above the sea wasn't in a
way inspired by by the idea of a piece
of moving infrastructure this
infrastructure is a first aid kit that
would actually sail out in big big
schools of them and a modders of them to
places which will face sea-level rise
like the Modi's for example and it would
contain fresh water it would contain
medical supplies it will contain food
but most of all it will have a lot of
seeds to grow your own land and so when
this fish were to disome arrived at the
destination and this or hers schools of
them they would actually deconstruct
like that image over there here and they
would form that the framework for the
inhabitants to plant their own ground
you know so that you know they they
don't have to become climate change
refugees and this will be the landscape
that will be created
I hope that our fish or at least a
20,000 fish would be a very very very
poor cousin to the walking City or the
in Sin City by Peter Cook here where he
said that you know this infrastructure
will fly to boring northern city I
didn't say that he said that I think
nobody from North Carroll okay but and
then he would actually then these
components would drop down to bring life
to the city the next project
the city of a thousand lakes it was not
a a sort of hypothetical project it was
a project we got a commission from the
Nanjing government to look into how we
would actually plan or regenerate that
the the lower part of Nanjing if you
look at my palm Nanjing is divided into
the historical part the modern
industrial part and the countryside and
we are asked to look at the the lower
part the lowest part of it the
countryside and when we were given the
brief we were at odds with ourselves
because when we visit a site
my first instinct was nature is very
important part of it and I was very you
know my mindset was very much like what
will Morris would think in news and
nowhere that rather than the brief which
was very much akin to Bellamy's thinking
in Looking Backward where industry
technology would be king it would be the
only thing I think I just need to brief
you a little bit for those who are not
familiar with these two authors that
they hated each other
Bellamy wrote the book first and said
the future is all about technology and
then three years later William Morris
was so incensed and he was so inspired
by it he wrote this other one to counter
it and then seven years after news from
nowhere
Bellamy actually retracted some of what
he said and wrote a compromised novel
called equality where nature was brought
back into the fall of human inhabitation
so back to
sike in nanjing this is the the lower
part of it as you can see the gray areas
and the black areas are all water so
water was about two-thirds of the
surface area of this development that
we're going to do and we were very keen
to persuade the government to not build
skyscrapers we want to persuade them the
economy and value is in the nature it
has the water feels that they have there
are not four just fish there generally
for crop farming and the crab from this
area would fetch the highest price in
China and so we what we did was we
inserted a tiny bits of architecture
here and there but the rest of the time
we kept drawing we try to convince them
of the poetics that and the value that
already exists there already rather than
searching and installing unnecessary
things they should value what they have
we got at their doorstep and how you
know when you articulate nature in fauna
flora water and and rain and clouds you
know you could get different sort of
pattern and texture and color and and
then you know even the flat landscape
they have you know when the passing
clouds for example you can actually see
the shadow of these beautiful clouds
that are passing by so it becomes a
canvas for nature to perform that's what
we're telling to sell them yeah I guess
it was quite brave of us to lose the
project but the things that you know we
tried to tell them not to build
skyscrapers that's the main part it also
this place reminded me of isaura
in invisible city where it was this
definitely the city of a thousand lakes
but what was really strange when I
wonder was the whole place was a bit a
touch of it has a touch of Logan's Run
about it because the inhabitants were
either the age of one to about twelve
and then everybody from the age of 75
and above and nobody in between
apparently everybody in that region
would go out to bigger cities to work as
in in the factories in construction
industry
and so forth and they only come back to
the to this place when it's harvesting
scrap harvesting season which was most
bizarre and then you know but for those
who didn't know Logan's Run Logan's Run
is when city where anybody after the age
of 30 they have to die so for example me
you know I would have died twice already
you know Chris only have died once
thank you I think we were also very keen
to to change their mindset about where
you can do you know we are so programmed
that when we build anything has to be on
land you know you can build on water you
can actually live on water please the
school in macoco was one of the
wonderful most poised examples I've seen
in recent years and so we're introducing
many many sort of floating structures
for them that they can build on and they
could change the way that they legislate
you know land and property and land
value I think you know it's don't only
mean that things so but things are in
science fiction film this one in Avatar
nature was king wasn't it so we followed
that thought through in the project in
Maribor where we were asked to look into
how what we can do with the forests
again we said we're not gonna do
anything what we're gonna do is just to
put certain sort of little fireplaces
for hunters in in the forest itself and
we see the forest that surrounds the
city as the the inhabitable supermarket
where you can get you know everything
fresh everything local from fruits to
berries to to mushrooms to sustainable
hunting season or wild boar and deer and
again we want to project the beauty of
what exists already so what we inserted
were these sort of sort of fireplaces
for hunters to really gather during
winter months okay Pleasantville how
many of you have seen Pleasantville the
film
big one um come on you must have seen
plasma reese witherspoon she's not that
old so Pleasantville is a
black-and-white movie in general so you
know I'm gonna be very generic about
giving you a general description and
when the inhabitants were to break any
of the rules then it would have splurts
of color coming through and this is this
is it so the the film you know
perfection is actually seen through
black and white so here
Pleasantville never rains the highs and
lows rest at 72 degrees the fire
department's exists only to rescue treat
cats and the basketball team never
misses the foo this is what perfection
means in Pleasantville to be honest I
think perfection is a fruitless endeavor
and this is a problem we have as
designers and planners we plan we design
perfection into it and we burden
ourselves with all that to come to
project this thing I mean you know take
for example when you see these sort of
buildings or especially domestic
architecture in magazines in glossy
magazine they look absolutely perfect I
mean I'm sure the inhabitants tidy it up
before you the photographer turned out
for it so the things that you know I
would like to think that you know we
could do better by not burdening
ourselves two to one to create these
perfect environments so we were
commissioned to look into this site in
Australia
and even from Australia here because I
probably will be insulting you too I
don't mean it I'm just kidding so this
is fisherman's been just outside
Melbourne it's a disused port and we
were asked to look into a master plan to
provide all sorts of topologies of
housing and house types flats apartments
recycling water recite harvesting solar
energy we gave them the whole world but
what was really really funny when we
were working on the project
we realized that they have no provision
for social housing it's only for a
certain economic group of people and
I've seen many of these certain types of
gated communities in South Asia in China
in many many places and it's very
unhealthy so we we didn't quite there to
protest outright we did it sort of in
the choir you I will show you the
drawings how we protested the
inspiration I guess came from Alexander
McQueen the designer I read an article
that before he became super famous he
was commissioned to do a winter coat by
a gentleman a London a man anyway and
what happened was that the man was
really unpleasant as a client so he used
his sort of tailoring pencil and brought
[ __ ] in the in the back of the coat
inside before he put the lining so for
years and years the client was wearing
[ __ ] on his back so the things that
we didn't quite do that with our client
but we did something else but we felt
that you know this idea of achieving
perfection in this kind of horrible way
it's just like in these two novels here
the the ad word one or the Laveen one
the Laveen one was really really extreme
where you get the perfect front lawn the
perfect house the perfect back garden
the perfect wife the tall blonde woman
that never gets old and in the end it
turned out she's a robot
or they're all robots anyway so here we
were really not pleased with what we
were doing so what we did was that we
actually poke fun in the drawing so in
the living room itself we have the
perfect husband with the perfect
housewife counterpart she you know she
has to be a housewife I don't believe in
that I'm just telling you first we did
it as a spoof we did it as this is the
kind of primitive thinking that they
were heading to us and then when you
look across you get the perfect bungalow
houses but they're not on the ground but
they're stacked up into towers and then
here on on your left-hand side while
wait they are waiting for the bus or the
boats to come by you know they would not
be stand
they're being miserable they will be
performing Strictly Ballroom and then
the highway will be closed off and they
will be they would have this beautiful
landscape of seasonal flowers and the
children will all be very very happy and
and for those who are religious you know
here for example it doesn't matter what
religion you are the religious building
for example here the church will come to
you rather than you coming to the church
and then of course we even created the
perfect nosy neighbors who appear
through their binoculars and twitch the
curtains and I think the a20 to such an
extreme it became almost a driver to the
project here if you look up on the
ceiling of these stacked bungalows we
even created the perfect electronic blue
sky with the perfect candyfloss clouds
that will pass by no rain of course you
can't have rain you know but it would be
have the perfect sky I think what I'm
saying here is that you know in fiction
in reality you know these sort of
scrutinized choreograph environments
like these two here even in the oval one
they are very very unpleasant places you
know they actually not just invade your
privacy but they are discriminating in
many many ways so the last chapter to
participate this is a quote from a
congressman called Ray LaHood he says go
to any major American city
you see roads bridges infrastructure
that needs to be fixed today Congress
doesn't have the political courage to do
what it takes and they don't really have
the vision of America the way that other
congresses have had the vision of
America he's absolutely right I guess
you know when you have President
Eisenhower who championed the interstate
highway system and then Kennedy took
America into space into outer space and
president Hoover will be who were them I
think who present who was a very smart
man not because he commissioned the
Hoover Dam to produce electricity and
blah blah blah
as a social infrastructure to engage for
all to participate in during the
Depression years that was a smart move
he was very concerned that you know he
didn't know how long the Great
Depression was going to last to give
state handouts was not solving any
problems so he dreamt of this major
project that like wanted to engage for
all those who were willing to work to
come here to give them jobs to give them
sort of a place to stay a place of
security and safety for themselves and
their family so they built both the city
as well next to it and I think you know
the who them came to symbolize hope for
what American industry could achieve the
the author JB Presley said the
infrastructure embodied the very image
of HG Wells science fiction it's like a
beginning of a new world a wall of giant
machines and Titanic communal
enterprises this is first glimpse of
what chemistry mathematics and
engineering and large-scale organization
can accomplish when collective planning
unites and inspired them I think it was
a wonderful inspiring piece of work not
for his engineering as such but as a
social tool token a social tool our
social landscape here this is in Holland
and the polders are wonderful pieces of
landscape man-made and they always said
God made the wall but the Dutch made
Netherlands and I think they have a
point there this is not so much God made
these floating platforms and communities
in in Peru on lake titicaca nature gave
them that this here this wonderful
ladies salamé this is photograph taken
by me I was on the islets at the place
this reed here is called totora reed and
it actually you know lives very happily
in the freshwater lake and it provides
the material and resource to make
everything in you that you can
see here from the boat here behind him
the houses and the platform the floating
islands the floating islands do not have
concrete steel or timber structure
inside it it basically is just layered
layers and layers of this material this
Reed and it's fantastic and when and I I
guess you know we teach sustainability
we teach recycling of material we teach
also so things in architecture school in
the Western world but I have to say that
is the most sustainable community I've
ever come across in real life in text in
pictures or in anything else
they even have you know okay it did this
thing here the solar panel didn't come
from the read but you know they actually
could power their TV and microwave that
so it was pretty amazing and what was
really fantastic was that you if the
infrastructure was not concrete steel or
wood is something really kind of much
more tactile much more organic because
they have to be replaced very very often
because the bottom of it you imagine
soaked in water it will rot and it has a
cycle to it it has you know so seasons
play a large part in this infrastructure
that they live on I have to say I've
been very fortunate I've been to at
least 80% of places that you know you
ought to see so my bucket list is sort
of pretty good in that sense you know
and a lot of places and infrastructure
you when you go there you know after you
read about you I've seen the picture
it's not that wow this place did not
disappoint me I was really emotionally
attached to it it was this the most
clever fantastic piece of natural
infrastructure I've ever seen I mean you
know for example when I went to Los
Angeles for the first time I want to say
Sunset Boulevard right and I know I
thought we'd see Julia Roberts there but
all I saw was hookers and drop bushes
when I went to Paris to see I'm gonna
offend the French now when I went to
Paris I I thought that this Eiffel Tower
of yours is going to be enormous but so
for some reason when I saw it is much
smaller scale even the Great Wall of
China looks much smaller when I was
there I mean it's not a criticism it's
just that you know
sometimes when you read so much about
some some things you have a different
projection of it but this place was
amazing talking about something very
very real - something very very
artificial I call this a heterotopia
City
this is loss and this Las Vegas and you
could get every everything that I loved
the cheesiness of it
I loved everything that you know the
highbrow would actually scorned I loved
everything that is American about it
there's another had to topia for general
participation which is palm Dubai this
one when they build it they Chuck so
much sand and concrete into the water
that it destroyed most of his corals and
ecology around them you have to say I
mean you know we cannot blame the
Americans and Middle Eastern for
everything I mean even the Romans did
terrible things when they built the
Colosseum because the things that you
know not only did it throws slaves to
the Lions but they also flooded this
place you know it was used for maritime
rehearsals and performances so it was
that the center of the Colosseum was
flooded I think you know arenas and
Coliseum's are incredible infrastructure
to cajole everybody to come together to
cheer or jeer here this is an a great
example in fiction because somebody tell
me where this comes wrong thank you
and this one that's very good from
Thunderdome what I love about this one
not this is the not the choice to our
own version yeah this is a tina turner
version is that that the arena is not
like that it's inverted the engagement
of the audience is that they have to
cling on to the outside structure to
peer into it I think you know I I just
love the this whole environment that of
the spectator and the performer and
similarly heterotopia also exists in in
our doorstep this is down the mall
during the London Olympics where they
constructed they wanted to construct
sort of Copacabana beach I guess
on the mall for the volleyball the the
beach volleyball games I've been to Rio
and having the beach on the mall is not
quite the same because the queen doesn't
look so hot in bikini I think sometimes
you know we also remember infrastructure
how it was used once upon a time and
memories are very powerful tools as we
all know here the picture on the right
hand side you know this is probably a
railway station a tube station not so
far from you that during the Blitz it
was used to shelter many many in
Londoners and this picture in Normandy
where these war bunkers happen I was
there to take this photograph and this
man actually said that he was he said
that for a long time I was very tragic
because these infrastructure were the
things that he engaged in he was part of
the the battle at that gun finally I'm
going to show you the that is and
there's one more case study but I'll
show you the final so my final and
favorite image of infrastructure this
piece of reduced structure only lasts
for five to eight days it changes color
from white to pink sometimes it actually
controls everybody the rich to the poor
the old to the young the suited men to
the uniforms schoolchildren all to come
together to picnic underneath him and
this beautiful infrastructure is under
threat because in many places in Japan
because of heat island effects you know
spring would winter with jump was
skipped spring and it would jump
straight into summer and that the window
for these wonderful blossoms to happen
becomes shorter and shorter and shorter
and I think you know I I would think
that you know if Donald Trump doesn't
believe in climate change he should make
observations of the blossoming season
and they are being truncated and
becoming shorter and shorter I think
this video that you're taking needs to
be edited I think I probably will be
sued by many people from Woody Allen
who has to Donald Trump so it needs to
be edited my last case study here called
corporate Republic the search for utopia
a map of the world that does not include
utopia is not worth even glancing at for
he leaves out the one country which
humanity always land and when humanity
lands does it looks out and seeing a
better country set sail progress is a
realization of utopias this last case
study is set on the equator itself the
equator is the ideal site to exploit the
drastic changes in priorities and daily
habits of global in citizens and to
attract private investments and
restructure business models they adapt
to new demands and participation this is
a project that we would use the rubbish
that you and I yes you and I dumped into
the ocean in the Atlantic Ocean and the
Pacific Ocean there are heaps of these
rubbish sitting out there now and we
could use them to to make physical the
equator and this will be a land that
will be free for all to engage you know
there's no sort of the citizenship is
open to everybody and it will be open to
climate change refugees as well as war
refugees and this is also where we would
experiment with you know the idea that
capitalism might not be so bad after all
so it will be the opposite of this
utopian environment in the film Brazil
Brazil the film not the country and in
Brazil it was a very disturbing place in
our condition we like to see this as a
very utopic
condition the main resource there would
be cactus cactus is the one plant that
would grow very well in very extreme
heat sunlight and the water from the
cactus will be bottle because it's the
purest water you can get on the entire
planet and then the pulp itself will be
made into suntan lotion because the Sun
is getting aggressive
we need suntan lotion one of the reasons
why water is going to be very very
expensive is because we have
contaminated our rivers reservoirs lakes
rivers and you name it through our
culture or industry and so companies
like McDonald's will no longer sell you
hamburgers they will actually
participate in this Inc by selling you
bottle cactus water or suntan lotion
everybody will be will have a job if
they want to work and this is the
corporate Republic the Employment Bureau
it would actually turn up
it was sale along the equator next to
this land where cactus is planted and
where as it sails along is always 9
o'clock and 5 o'clock so people would be
working constantly so hard work will pay
off this city here was inspired by you
know many cope many company towns
corporate cities that you know we all
know from Bournville in this country to
Boulder City that was built to
accommodate all the workers of the
Hoover Dam to for example Volvo in
Germany
these are company towns yeah that
everybody in that city or town relies on
one industry only and here it's based on
that similar model so we are to explore
if in industrialization or capitalism is
that bad it's a question because you
know we are so politically correct these
days you know capitalism is always seen
as bad so we are trying to explore if
capitalism and this idea of occupying
the equator would allow us to break all
boundaries of nationality and territory
my last image here I think you know I
hope I've in my sort of drugged out
state from boots not from anywhere else
I've been saying you enough to leave you
to think that I'm a storyteller tonight
not an architect because I think it's
not really helpful at most times that we
think my god I'm going to be an
architect I'm an hour
I need to resolve architectural planning
issues and I need to give a solution
rather than you know you spend time
speculating because as I said you know
sometimes you know when you're an
alchemist most you know you can come up
with the right answers to address some
of the issues and you can actually
address it you know in an indirect way
rather than you know have a really
aggressive attack on a problem so I like
to finish with this quote the purpose of
a storyteller is not to tell you how to
think but to give you questions to think
upon so thank you all very very much
any questions okay I'm sure I'm not as
entertaining as a drama that you have
here in the school now it's been pretty
chaotic actually so okay please I had a
question that's maybe not relate to the
book directly but more in terms of your
practice versus okay so I supposed to do
with the practice and your academic work
but like do you find the aesthetics of
your work kind of limiting when you're
doing competitions or trying to convey
an idea to people or more pragmatic
let's say that the aesthetics limit the
design potential I think we have two
departments should we say there's one
that we do the hot culture which is some
of the ones that you've seen tonight I
mean he says it with great arrogance and
then the other part we would do they the
high street where you give them five
ideas in stage one and then you get into
stage two you reduce it to two ideas
because if you you go from five ideas to
ten ideas you definitely lose the
competition or you lose a commission
usually I was advised that by the the
one of the my clients on a big project
he said the problem with you and your
office is if you keep bringing too many
ideas to us it's very expensive your
ideas every idea costs us money so
things that you know no but in all
seriousness I think you know the
projects the research projects we do are
very much part of the exercise that
would feed the other projects that we
have we were brave enough to tell the
for example the project in Nanjing that
building skyscraper was a bad idea you
know they should really value what they
have at their doorstep and we should
only do very tiny interventions into the
landscape and I think you know we've
come to a point that we just say this is
what we believe in and I think you know
we should really be be like that we
should really believe in what we do
as architects as designers because in in
the 21st century I think a lot of
practices a lot of architects myself
include at one point you know we have
become these sort of helpless creatures
that are dominated by what they climb
one that what they want to tell you to
do and in a way you know the same with
not just in practice but the same with
schools - in a way because you know
students join certain units for example
because they know that they can get a
job afterwards you know and because the
office they want to go to demand that
kind of expertise or that knowledge and
I think this is not the way to do it we
should really believe in what we do and
that's what I think we do at least what
I do in my research and my practice now
we do believe in what we do you can
either take it or you can lump it I mean
I can say that maybe you can't attack as
a student are you a student yeah
I don't okay so you can't say that but
the things that you know I think it's
very very important that we need to
empower ourselves intellectually
creatively to make advancement in the
built environment culture because
otherwise we keep doing the same thing I
mean you'll find out that you know when
you have an office or even working for
practice the client tell you what they
want and because they've seen something
that that they didn't say oh why didn't
do it exactly like that if we keep doing
this vicious it would be a vicious
circle we would never advance I mean we
as well burns live in caves so you know
I think so in terms of the drawings I
think a lot of times we try to
communicate in certain ways I think the
set of drawings here will inspired by
the like comic books we wanted to draw
like comic books we I didn't want to
draw we want to draw the kind of
narratives of the project rather than
the traditional Orthodox plans and
sections and so forth we want to draw
the spatial stories that you know the
oven interaction within the the the city
itself and those were important yeah
yeah on the flip side would people be
like oh this is exactly what I want then
you're like oh stuck in a narrative
that's great that's that's absolutely
fine but the things that you know I
think you know I think we also need to
challenge communication to insight as
well you know I I don't believe in you
click a button and then it render itself
or worse still you you stick it and a 3d
printer it comes up all the models are
not white and yes you know that's not
not good
for me anyway anything thank you very
much any other question yeah
whose responsibility would you say is to
kind of implement changes like this it's
your responsibility not me because I'm
too old now because in Logans run out
like twice already so you're so young
you haven't got the first stage of dying
yet no seriously I think all of us need
to engage in it you know student are you
student yeah not a goldsmith okay all of
us from designers to non-designers one
of the reasons why we did the drawings
we did was that we want I also want you
know it sounds really grand but I want
what I'm trying to say to go beyond
architectural and planning circles I
wanted to really engage with sort of
somebody like my mother who doesn't know
anything about front door or back door
you know she can look at the picture and
say oh that's intriguing you know and I
want people to engage in the whole
culture and politics of the built
environment that's really important
that's why we drew certain drawings the
way we did and I think you know all of
us should be involved in the Coe
discussion of sustainability and climate
change I hate the word sustainability
and climate change because it's so
generic you know I actually don't know
what the definition of sustainability is
because I think there are a million
definitions of it but you know it it
would only make progress if we believe
that we can all contribute in it so the
things that now we talk about recycling
materials and exactly when I was a
student in this building we never the
word sustainability never occur
recycling it does
happen and now we are edging a little
bit towards ax and I think you know
maybe when you come to get to my age you
know maybe there will be more
advancement in that area but we need to
empower ourselves as just normal
citizens who are not even architects to
actually lovely our politicians to
really say come on we have to do
something about it it doesn't matter if
climate change is true or not but we
need to really protect mother nature we
need to do something that doesn't keep
destroying and damaging and poisoning
our earth
I mean I'm seriously believing it I mean
for example you know anybody out there
could actually do something like we
should boycott Tesco from importing
raspberry from some outerspace country
you know to our cities in the UK in
January I think it's disgusting deletes
raspberry and strawberry in January we
are not eating seasonally and the carbon
footprint is enormous and that should
not happen I mean simple things like
that and and and the things that you
know if we collectively are interested
in that subject I'm sure we could
actually make advancement in it I'm not
saying you know CJ doesn't have the
solution tonight you don't have the
solution itself but collectively we can
do something and I think places like
Goldsmith and the a and the Bartlett and
schools you know not this schools of
architecture but generally educational
institutions can actually engage the
younger generation even sort of you know
primary schools you can engage with them
so I think that's really very important
I don't do you agree with me thank you
give me a question No
okay thank you very very much CJ thank
you all very much thank you
[Applause]
