welcome everyone to PhD question mark by
design my name is Mark Morris I'm head
of teaching at the AAA I've been invited
to share today's symposium by the
organizers of this event
Alif muhammad Lucas and malade who have
framed the discussion today loosely
around a lack of consensus they say
within the school regarding what a PhD
by design really means they point to a
convoluted understanding of its non
written components so there's the hope
today that somehow we maybe provide more
definition in that direction we'll see
if that's so the lack of consensus
actually sounds like a positive or an
opportunity and it sounds rather AAA but
perhaps this is not felt in the eyes of
a new doctoral student wondering how to
even begin their project had a director
of research and structure their work so
we need to put ourselves in their shoes
we might step back and ask whether the
PhD by design constitutes a new type or
rather a subtype after all the oh you
certificate one gets at the end of an a
a PhD by design is identical to the PhD
one it might be a question of genres of
study and research output if the
question really comes down to quote non
written components unquote we might
remember that the PhD itself even in its
most traditional stance can often
include tables and figures PhDs in art
history for example include many figures
and writing two images analyzing images
using images to illustrate conceptual
points has space and value in a
normative PhD PhDs in music and
Composition includes sheet music
acoustic analysis and even music tracks
stored as digital files these non
written components are essential in the
scenario now the history of the academic
degree going back to the 12th century
was organized originally across four
faculties of the medieval University a
basic Faculty of Arts faculties of
theology medicine and law these last
three were the higher degrees Faculty of
Arts the basic degree and as these grew
out of monastic centers of learning the
term master and doctor were largely
interchangeable doctors tended to teach
that was their only differentiation the
PhD is a much later invention made
distinct from the master of art at the
University of Berlin in 1810 the arts
faculty which in Germany was referred to
as the Faculty of philosophy started
demanding contributions to research
attested to by dissertation for the
award of their final degree to be called
the doctor of philosophy in the
nineteenth century both the US and UK
University started awarding phd's
directly following bachelor's degrees
there was no sort of middle zone of the
Masters and these PhDs were largely
taught rather than focused on research
in the way that we think of research the
PhD requiring honours or masters in
front of it only becomes the norm from
1917 onward
so it's only the PhD is only a hundred
years young and it's still evolving and
today's symposium I think is part of
that evolution now the AAAS PhD by
design is described online and in the
prospectus as quote studio based PhDs in
architectural design unquote
and as part of the AA's admission policy
a PhD by design applicant may submit a
portfolio alongside the normative
elements required of any ph.d program
applicant in that light the implication
is that the PhD by designed like the
newish PhD in art is a double-whammy
where there's a written and design
portion each perhaps speaking to the
other we might interrogate today this
notion of studio-based PhD the most
interesting qualification of the PhD by
design put forward by the organizers of
today's event is that the PhD by design
engages with design discourse as both a
contribution as well as a technique that
to my mind is a different take in
contrast to studio-based and we may find
it still an emerging characteristic of
this newish it's about a six year old
program now genre of PhD so this
afternoon is organized as two parts
firstly we'll hear from the invitees the
doctoral supervisors for up to 10
minutes apiece they've been given the
task of presenting a scenario of their
own approach to THD by design now to
gauge that level of different
interpretation of format the same topic
on immigration was suggested by the
organizers however some will instead
speak directly to their own association
with PhD by design per se and how they
view its contribution to the discipline
a more general conversation both
approaches are valued secondly after a
brief tea break we will reconvene here
to have an open discussion on PhD by
design guided by questions from the
audience
and the rest of you as colleagues the
goal for today may not in fact be to
better define this loose term but
possibly to acknowledge the usefulness
of its looseness and challenge ourselves
to experiment more radically with this
type of scholarly work
I'm indebted to Brian Hatton who
referred me to James Elkins 14 reasons
to mistrust a PhD Elkin quotes Carol
Becker of Columbia University previously
Dean of the Institute are so I'll
finished my intro with this quotation
from Becker and please in your mind as I
as I offer you this quote substitute the
word artist for architect this is Becca
the work that artists produce may cover
all kinds of issues globalization
identity politics feminism cultural
criticism of all types all issues of art
history there is no one discipline that
the work actually addresses as in
chemistry where there's a secure body of
knowledge but constantly evolving so to
say that artists need their own type of
doctorate doctorate as if they need
something which doesn't put the work
into the contexts in fact that others
might relate to but rather secures a
different type of degree just for them
for their type of production and its
focus is the topic of study I think that
artists get excluded from existing
doctorate programs because the field
doesn't take their kind of production
seriously as intellectual production it
makes much more sense and it's far more
subversive and respectful to bring
artists into existing programs and force
these programs to accept their work as
work as serious intellectual
investigation and research that
addresses a myriad of issues so with
that I'd like to turn over to our table
as I say I'm gonna keep everyone for
about ten minutes and we'll kick off
with Paula Kadima from the sustainable
Environmental Design to follow
thank you thank you Mark hello everybody
I think that those sitting there we'll
have to turn their heads
I prepared a simple proposal for for
today designed specially for these a
symposium and hopefully to contribute to
the discussion on the topic so this is a
fictitious proposal entitled enhancing
the dwelling experience in height and
timber buildings in London timber has
been claimed as being a very sustainable
material and a good alternative to
traditional construction materials such
as concrete and steel and timber is is
light is a strong material is easy to
assemble and and in its most modern
engineered form the cross laminated
timber CLT is also fire resistant there
are numerous examples also in London
which have been using this material to
build in height and this is one of the
examples it's a tower in Hackney the
Marygrove nine-story building nine story
block building and it's fully built in
CLT another example is a ten story
development in Dalston 121 units and
this development is claimed to
use one-fifth of the material which
would be used if it would be built-in in
traditional materials and also it is
claimed to have had 80% less deliveries
on site to be built this is a more
audacious vision
it's the skyscraper by PLP in
collaboration with the University of
Cambridge and it's fully in timber so
this is a bit of the background and now
I would like to focus on the problem
although timber buildings are thermally
very efficient and they may use to help
us decrease our builds bills for for
heating in the heating season they may
also cause a problem of overheating in
the summer period and the growth the
growth Marygrove building has been study
and can also demonstrate this fact
adding to this problem there is another
problem with the housing crisis in
London and the pressure to build high
and dense buildings the tendency is to
the flats to become smaller and and the
the double-loaded corridor access is a
typical way to compress and increase
this density of residential buildings so
this will decrease and and in and
contribute to to the overheating problem
so this car does usually are long dark
stuffy they are not naturally ventilated
and they contribute to the to the bad
quality experience of the inhabitants we
know however that the streets open to
the sky from the Batali's and can no
longer solve the problems we face today
they are no longer sustainable and so
what this dissertation proposed to do
the aim is to explore a variety of
design solutions for timber residential
blocks with alternative layouts and
naturally ventilated access corridors in
order to minimize the overheating
potential of the dwellings while
tackling London's need for high quality
and high-density housing that provides
natural and healthy living environment
so the methodology which could be
followed by a sort of research like
these would include at the beginning
like most of the theses a critical
review of published literature also
including examples of built precedence
on a different stage it could include
some fieldwork in London so a few of
examples could be selected and studied
further monitored measured feedback from
from occupants and the result of this
fieldwork could be used to support both
the departing statements but also to
validate the models which would be used
to later inform the design development
and to assess various schemes which
would be elaborated so a large part of
this research would be carried out by
design on the developing exploring and
fine-tuning of the various proposed
design solutions while the analytic work
with the use of specialised tools would
be model would help to model and assess
the environmental performance of
selected design parameters in forming
the design development in terms of
outcomes the this this research could
provide could include drawings and other
visualizations it could also include
videos for instance some of the testing
instead of using simulation tools could
be using laboratory experiments such as
the wind tunnel and could be carried out
with a series of photographs of filming
and these filming could also be included
on on the outcomes of this dissertation
it could also include 3d models and of
course written and numerical fellows and
that's it thank you
Thank You Paula want to turn over to
Maria gratia Chi and she'll be speaking
from the city architectures dream thank
you thank you to the organizers actually
for having me here as Mark just said
actually I represent a program that is
headed by Vittorio oh really so I would
say that actually the presentation comes
also from him similarly to Paula I also
thought of bringing Ashley something
from my own experience in fact actually
to the symposium so what I'm going to
present now is in fact current research
that I am carrying out and that we also
discussed in a series of simple of sorry
of seminars that we had with purgatory
in the fall semester but I'm going to
try to see actually how that could be
formulated more in the vein of PhD
thesis
I cannot invent material that doesn't
exist so I'm basing myself an actual
research that I am carrying out right
now so the first point I guess in sorry
there's a mistake the first point I
guess in any research is actually to
have an issue or a starting point then a
question of positioning the issue in the
wider field a question of actually
finding examples that can back up our
hypothesis and I think that actually
this is common to many thesis but I
guess that on top of that what we are
trying to do in the city architecture
program and what I also do in my own
work is also to back up that type of
work more theoretical type of research
with drawing lead research that I really
see as a form of design that then can
lead to a typological analysis and
eventually through the development of an
alternative scenario I would say not be
similarly actually to the proposal that
the colleges presented so first of all
the issue in this case I think there's
an issue actually with the message
space that we I think we have all
realized by struggling as designers and
as citizens and this issue actually is
in a way to fold on the one hand we have
a problem with designing the city at
large we all know that actually urban
design is a discipline in transition if
not in crisis on the other hand actually
the domestic domain that we live that we
experience as users is increase
increasingly homogenized and in a way
struggles actually to cater to more
specific uses we have a number of design
proposals types of experimentation I
tried to stretch the limits of what an
apartment is today but I think that
strikingly if we look at these examples
and here I have a particularly good
example from a very interesting project
by Sanne of 2001 we see that all these
different types of apartments are only
different on the surface from a formal
point of view but they all entail a
handling of a package of spaces that
every single apartment
we designed today as designers has to
comprise the bedroom the bathroom the
living room the kitchen and so on and so
forth so it's like we have a kind of
flat fact that we can only deploy in
different shapes but not really
challenged actually from within and I
think that this is an issue because it
reflects actually a subjectivity that
has been packaged in this typology that
is in fact actually very very inflexible
so I would say that to a model of
housing a corresponds a model of citizen
ultimately so I guess the core of the
city of the of this kind of question
would be how can we imagine different
way of being the citizens of being
people ultimately by challenging the
typology of the apartment as we have
been taught to design as designers and
this really comes from my experience as
a commercial design designer of housing
of course there's a question I think
when we develop a thesis that is not
just just a professional investigation
where is also an academic investigation
to position yourself into a field and I
think that to me to text particularly
have been very
important in positioning myself in this
inquiry there have been country planning
of the kid from the kitchen that is an
important text for a specific strand of
feminist literature the challenge is
gender roles from within the house not
challenging actually the problem with
gender roles in the workplace but really
within the house and on the other hand
the very famous book by Jacques Jacques
Danza lower the policing of families
that really goes to show how the
contemporary family the Modern Family is
essentially a project a project has been
carried forth also through architecture
and I would say through typological
manipulation now as you will see this
positioning the positions myself into a
theoretical field but not so much into
an architectural field and I think that
there's a reason for that that is that
actually this type of radical critique
to the modern apartment I would say
really comes from a field that is I
hardly ever architectural that is
actually field of theory especially
social theory political theory or
feminist theory so I think there would
be grounds here for PhD by design in
that actually we as designers with a
design knowledge can come in and
challenge the same problems actually
that these writers have done from a
theoretical point of view really from
the point of view of architecture as a
discipline of space ultimately and of
typology particularly this my specific
interest and of course to back that up
there's a question of actually backing
up this position through a research that
has to be rooted into examples and we
all know that actually this is one of
the most difficult things actually when
we construct a thesis going to find
references that can really strengthen or
even challenge actually our point of
view but let's say that that can bring
us to new assumptions and I think here
that actually the question for examples
is for me to fold in a way on the one
hand there's a there's almost like a
need to really challenge what a house is
from the root of what European housing
is and then a more specific specific
critique to modern housing and the two
things are of course in continuity but
they are not exactly the same so I would
say that on one hand
what I've tried to engage in last year's
is actually a very long term genealogy
of the formation of the house in the
West and I think if you see actually
this diagram is a series of housing
types from from pre mod from actually
ancient Greece more or less from the
Year 1000 to the Year 500 before the
current era you can see that actually
there has been a progressive growth in
complexity actually of the housing types
which is exactly what I want to
challenge why do we need specialized the
spaces and it turns out actually this
dynamic of specialization of different
rooms within the house it's actually a
very very long dynamic that didn't start
yesterday it started probably a few
thousand years ago so it means that
actually aside of the research maybe has
to go very very far back in order to
challenge categories ultimately it's a
question of challenging categories that
we've been taught as designers at what
here - in a very strict way the second
part of the research is maybe more
focused and is focused on actually how
we as modern European designers have
come up with this toolbox so that we now
deploy pretty much in all our projects
now and I think now I'm giving you just
a few examples to see how from the
Renaissance to d8 in the eighteen
hundred's we go into a progressively
increasing systematization and
specialization radio of rooms that tend
to be very typologically undefined up to
the fifteen hundreds took then become on
the contrary incredibly defined in the
eighteen hundreds also due to
technological advances obviously that
allow us to define certain rooms as
kitchen bathroom and so on and so forth
so inter looking in these examples I
think it's quite important for a
research to try to be as rigorous as
possible with the material obviously I
guess so my simple way to try to define
the field of intervention is to try to
pick a set of examples they have a
certain kind of affinity in this case
it's all books all architectural
treatises on housing and that I think I
hope would allow me actually to to make
these examples are somehow comparable
I'm not going to go in-depth into what
they are just to say that they go
actually from the 1550s sebastiano
serlio that is actually the very first
treatise on housing through the sixteen
hundred's pyramid it is actually the
first commercially successful successful
treatise on housing through other
editions actually of hand books are
pretty much on how to build your own
house that I think proved the point of
how actually an increasing technological
specialization of different rooms has
also defined an increasing
differentiation of roles within the
house gender roles but also class roles
age roles and so on and so forth and of
course that happens through a kind of an
analysis basically of these of these
texts that set forward actually an idea
of what the house should be so ideally
if I had to compact all of that into a
thesis I would say that the thesis would
comprise of three main parts first part
that it has to do more with a
positioning actually of the idea
theoretical positioning and
psychological positioning then a core
part of backing the up actually the
hypothesis through examples and through
fight accurate topological and
socialized is actually of these examples
and then perhaps actually to use that
analysis as a springboard to come up
with a conjecture for for an actual
architectural project that can challenge
in fact actually those assumptions so to
enter the second part of the thesis I
think actually that analysis through
drawing is particularly important
because I think it does allow us to
enter into a type of topological
analysis that is very very close to the
artifact to really speak about space
about the proportional space about the
way the very way which actually we
design space that's something that I
share with parataram with the people
that actually work with us in the city
of attack Shore program in that we tend
to try to produce as much as possible
drawings that are our only drawings of
the case studies we treat so for
instance here I'm not going to talk
about the examples but there's like a
kind of cross-section of housing
examples that have all been redrawn
skaila with a specific type of
methodology to show actually how this
construction of rolls basically within
this house has happened and I think
maybe actually the original scene or the
first moment that this actually
subdivision of the house happened is
really in the Neolithic era where we go
from a round house that cannot be
subdivided to a rectangular houses on
the contrary can be subdivided and
therefore can hint at these choreography
of roles that I was discussing before
and I think actually in this type of
inquiry the fact of actually really
sitting down and trying to redraw these
examples is incredibly important for us
this is already a project because in
deciding what we represent or what we
don't represent how we represent things
how we classify actually the findings
that we are drawing there is already for
us a project it is a project of really
understanding from within the space
really through the means that we have as
designer so that obviously text but also
drawing so these are all drawings done
on purpose they are not taken from books
and so it's all a matter of actually
reinterpreting the the the findings that
we have into our own language and
hopefully I guess at a of actually
getting in-depth into this redrawing
kind of almost like owning this
historical project as if they were our
own but in a critical way should in
theory become a good springboard to them
propose some kind of alternative
scenario I think for me an alternative
scenario would also entail a critique of
what we're doing right now as designers
in our century that's something that
again as I was saying before I know very
well having worked in commercial offices
and having done this type of job here I
think there's a proof of actually the
how limiting our job is today you see
that actually in this famous scheme by
Alexandra kleiner the apartment grows
but the ingredients that the apartment
is formed off don't change so all of
these apartments have exactly the same
spaces that they are just inflated or or
shrunk depending on how many square
meters you have to sell pretty much and
I think that looking for an answer to
this kind of problem of the limitation
that we have when we think about housing
is very very strict a typological a
straightjacket I would say a possible
solution for me and this is not my own
project so I'm going to use a project
that already exists would be for
instance the experiment type of
experimentation that autonomous are
carried carry in France in the last 20
years I would say where they really try
to actually challenge this typological
differentiation of the apartment from
within and by adding semi exterior
spaces that are not psychologically
defined so they do it by adding
greenhouses by adding balconies by
adding extensions to existing buildings
and I would say that that this is for me
really the core of what this experiment
would be about it would be about
building a kind of consciousness about
the way in which we have been scripted
as the citizens through the scripting of
our own house and then using that type
of awareness to think what could be a
scenario that could ultimately in fact
actually subvert these roles or open
ourselves up to a different way of
reading the family reading the apartment
but also reading our own way of being
designers and I think that actually the
type of it's a road map and that I try
to show you now is something that is
shared by a few of the people that are
working with us today and it basically
goes from the formulation of a project
problem to the understanding of that
problem in a specific context through I
think the very genealogy of how we as
designers have faced that problem in
previous times and then to a proposal on
how we could potentially subvert it into
a future so that's it thank you
[Applause]
thank you very much Maria I'd like to
turn the table to seamlessly Ana's who
is gonna speak from a point of view of a
sustainable Environmental Design and
also from his role as chair of the PhD
committee
[Music]
[Music]
I want to address this question of the
PhD by design directly and and and say
straight away that I find the expression
rather than liberating as perhaps some
people felt it might have been perhaps
fifteen years ago very limiting and I
will try to show why and and to show so
that we do not really need it that we
had more freedom without it I look at
some alternatives because the the
problem is not with the PhD we know what
the PhD is the problem is not what
design we think we know what design is
the problem is with that small world by
so I looked at alternatives you know
over the years I've been in this
business for a long time in fact I
started supervising PhDs in the 19th in
the late 1970s and many of the
prospective applicants have come to ask
the question well shall I do a PhD or go
back to design and others becoming who
did actually took it actually take the
PhD of course it's always possible to do
a PhD on design so there is legitimate
PhD or why not in design a very
acceptable
which in fact can develop into a PhD
with design and so address PhD and
design rebirth and needless to say there
is no problem from the outset to do a
PhD with no design so then I wonder what
can be a PhD by design so let's look at
some possible difficulties of the notion
is it getting a PhD for doing nothing
but design which is what I think
literally the expression by design means
not surely not so then if design is the
day in the page d what happens to the pH
in pH D so the question is there of how
much pH for PhD or field if you wish and
then similarly how much D for design in
the PhD I mean these were not
necessarily questions that existed
before there were not problems they are
now problems in fact this this kind of
problem has existed with every single
one of you or others who at some time or
other either thought about doing a PhD
by design or think they were doing it
not thought they were doing it
so what oops sorry more questions than
answers by using the term in fact it's
right forward to to think and and to say
that all PhD is required good planning
and we might use the word designing in
many different ways the scientists will
design experiments and there are
analytical computational operations and
so forth all of which need design and so
hijacking the word design on the by
design is not is no good because then it
somehow suggests that anything which is
not my design is not design in fact even
here we have this confusion in
admissions that one stream is considered
by design or in architectural design and
and the other is in the research but
isn't the one in design also research
and couldn't the one that's called in
research also include design so then
about text anon text and the upper
material and so forth but a PhD thesis
what to the extent that it remains a PhD
a philosophy doctorate does rest on
words in terms of the phases the issues
the literature and it has to end with
what is a page or more of conclusions so
words are there and maybe that's all
I'm saying as thinking about this that
have flexible the PhD the philosophy
doctorate has been it encompasses all
possible disciplines and yet what we do
when we do it is very specific
incredibly specialized them are very
specialized yet the degree is just a
Doctor of Philosophy we all become
doctors of philosophy well we all become
doctors in fact you might find yourself
as a doctor being called on an airplane
to look after somebody who's ill and say
well if you booked your ticket and use
your title doctor I said doctor doctor
Eric de neige we have a patient to be
all doctors so then that philosophy
doctor it is quite flexible in structure
in contents and in the media use nobody
stops you from using other media either
for research or as the end product now
coming to the crunch which is then
exactly how and how much design is to
feature in a PhD what that is open and I
think mark alluded to this at the
beginning it's a good thing for it to be
open it's open to experimentation so the
learning process and it's open to
critical review so that eventually it
can't escape if something is loose if
something is not right then eventually
it will be found and corrected
aged in architectural design 10 years
ago almost of the day we started
discussions with the Open University
about the creation of a PhD which we
eventually called PhD in architectural
design that got started as a discussion
as a conversation because of the so
called PhD by design so the fact that
the PhD by design was them and was being
advertised by a number of friendly
neighboring institutions prompted us to
start thinking about this as well both
in terms of a PhD by design as it was
called and in other formulations in fact
the term PhD by design has remained with
us only because people come and look for
it and immediately perhaps get confused
but you know I tried to explain that so
formally we went for repeats in
architectural design this was the title
our great with the Open University and
adopted by us on all formal documents
and and that had this beginning which
said that it was to enable candidates of
architectural background to make
productive and creative use of their
design skills within the scholarly
tradition of doctoral research you know
living a lot of room so that was our
proposal which I am had edited myself
and which was submitted on the 6 July of
2008 was approved and from the beginning
of the 2008 nine academic year we were
advertising pitched in architectural
design and people were perhaps hearing
PhD by design now I would also like to
show this this is taken from pages 8 and
of our ph.d program guide of this
academic year
I shouldn't have to read these to most
of you because you your members of the
ph.d program and have hopefully read
because this describes exactly the the
room of maneuver we we have within the
thing that we call PhD in architectural
design in which if you wish can continue
to call PhD by design one thing that we
perceive with this it's the part of the
sentence it's highlighted involved that
it's a viable option under any of the
thematic strands of the schools of
graduate programs including history so
this is the strongest possible admission
of the notion of design as a tool of
research and of outcome that can be used
by people like ours who have been
trained in it and this is one of the
main skills possibly for many of us the
main skill with writing coming very much
behind and one of the reason in fact
that we insisted in making sure that the
kind of products of architectural design
can be included is because we feel those
of us who have suffered you know to have
to learn the techniques of writing and
of needing to read a lot of papers and
so forth that well if we do that at
least let's also be able to use skills
that we think we have learned the other
is that the origins of this PhD in
architectural design go really bad pilot
describe the project which in a way
describes projects that we have
in in our program sustainable
Environmental Design since the 1980s so
for more than 30 years we've been doing
projects that could be taken to be in
this category of PhD in architectural
design what is new for me is the
broadening the fact that it's more
inclusive
so that simply to underline the fact
that we see that room for researchers
well as the object of research and then
we come to the submission with the Open
University we had very lengthy
discussions about submission and what is
really interesting it's big is the fact
that within the university since the PhD
exists in many different under many
different disciplines and they're quite
open there's no limitation I may want
music shade severe immunization
equations if you're a mathematician
similarly there was the question of the
size of the text in a conventional PhD
we have a 100 thousand words
maximum there is no minimum because you
could be writing the equation for
special relativity again with something
as clever and that might be all that is
needed so there is no minimum however
it's very important and I think this
could be useful to some of you preparing
applications it's very important to
redefine the maximum no way a PhD in
architectural design of 100 thousand
words because then it means you've
killed your architectural design it
didn't count so the agreement which we
have formally is that your text sorry
your architectural design input whether
it is under the research or under the
product terms takes the place of words
and therefore if you ask me I would say
the limit for a PhD in architectural
design if you have really put design in
it and this time the limit would be
between thirty and forty thousand forty
thousand would be the maximum perhaps
thirty thousand being acceptable
which is about double what we have for
the the monsters so that's about this
running a bit over time yep and and and
that's it reading oh yes there is the
question there is the bomb the design
component is not predetermined that
would very strongly suggested it stays
like this that you are free as
candidates and the supervisors to do so
and the the the question of Examiners
came up what their examiners are
qualified well examiner's should be
qualified in the sense that they should
be qualified in architectural design and
as examiner's and then of course they
can examine it is not an issue the only
the only thing that may need to be
brought to the survivor that is not in
the thesis you know the dissertation
might be some physical model some
experiment that needs to be run and
needs to be done live otherwise
everything else is like a traditional
PhD Viper and then just I repeat because
I think many people had the idea that
PhD by design was a different degree and
perhaps a different certificate it is
not it is the same degree and the same
certificate
okay thank you thank you seeing us
[Applause]
I wanted to next turn the floor over to
mark cousins who wanted to speak on
fraud themes related to the question of
PhD by design not necessarily from a
perspective his of history and theory
mark the table as yours I'm perhaps not
a very suitable person and in any case I
think really what I would want here this
afternoon is more people talking about
like their experience and the crucial
question I think is their experiences
whether themselves or with their
supervisors or whether they have a sense
that the AAA
is developing a sort of I don't mean a
model certainly not a definition but a
kind of practice of what these things
are
I mean in a sense my I I was originally
skeptical I thought if you have PhD is
by design does that mean the others that
we do should be called phd's by accident
[Music]
my problem listening to Maria and Paula
is I kept thinking the problem with them
is this doesn't feel to me like a
substantial distinction it could be done
under the rubric of the ordinary thesis
so what's being said where you know
there's obviously no easy line first of
all I mean after all the ordinary PhD is
very open I've actually just supervised
one which supposedly is coming to
examination Bay soon where there is no
text just to put notes
so you can see like it's not only no
design no text idler and if we can let's
say that when successfully you could
pretty much say there's no end to what
you could do under the for devil after
all the definitions of PhDs and this
would write about is that they are
original work now it's very important to
recognize that original started off say
up to the end of sixties as putting
something archival on the table if you
were a historian you did PhD you ended
archival research if you were a literary
historian or critic you would go and
find the text to edit your you know it's
a an act of scholarship that sort of
changed after sixty eight and you
suddenly found people in sociology
departments doing a PhD on multiple you
mean without even me now speak German
now and so originality now become much
more like you know it ought to be quite
interesting or something and it's not
obvious that someone said it before but
you know there's no great definitional
definition so you know I think both
those as prospective ba G's could easily
have been done under the interesting
rubric the justification for having this
distinction would be if and when the
students and staff who are supervising
them sort of collectively produce a sort
of a a type where they can kind of
integrate the design whatever my
skepticism however is is still there
because while I don't examine any faeces
in architectural design
I have always designed examined quite a
lot in the finance and I tell you even
now after decades of this you still need
this so like extra half an hour with the
other external examiner where you sort
of agree on an ad hoc basis how are we
going to approach this you know there's
a text and there's a sort of our work
you know how do you get to it I think
the issue is less fearsome in
architecture because as Maria said there
is no reason why design can't be
investigative there's no reason my
design can't be a critique so many of
the intellectual functions of a text can
be equally made parallels who designed
and I think that's very important but
again it it kind of it minimizes the
difference it says the same function can
be fulfilled by different modes of
discourse so that's kind of very
important I would have thought the kind
of tactical issues or the strategic
issues within the AAA within this group
of teachers and students our questions
like how is the design integrated in the
text certainly in the art world you've
got the text and then comes the rest if
you were doing that in the architectural
wonders if physically they the design
was all one and quite distinct from the
text you'd think that strange why
wouldn't the design be distributed
through the text I mean I think there
are all sorts of custom and practice
questions which the experience of the
staff and students would lead them to
say actually we think
this is a very productive and slightly
collective way of doing it
it's not in that sense about definitions
at all it's about do some teachers and
some students wish to engage in a type
of work in some sense yet to be invented
and I think upon that and upon your
experience of what is happening hangs a
judgment on the value of it they can't
be given like an abstract you know after
all I mean as someone who writes writing
is a forward design the organization of
writing is a form of design I mean at
that level you know many things can be
said to be designed it's a you they're
not these like two different worlds and
none of them are exempt it seems to me
from the overall to my mind practical
definition of a PhD as one which after a
while the student can reduce to being a
problem and the PhD is some sort of
solution to that problem within those
terms
yes it's not that the PhD by design is
necessarily justice justified it's only
justified by an emerging practice an
emerging practice you know it's
dependent upon all these issues I think
it's quite good to lay out for the
examiners how you've done it and how you
want I I've always thought it'd be a
good idea if it
Bayesian period you know the student
makes a commitment to say like how they
want the thing to be examined and then
since a statement of what formula will
be taken so that the XD examiner's are
under the constraint of examining it in
the form the people want so you don't
get things I think I thought Texas was
quite interesting but Boyd the design
was awful
that shouldn't arise in my view so I
think there is two grants for skepticism
I mean it has yet to prove itself by
custom and practice to be a new useful
instrument at the AAA but that's how it
proves itself it's I don't think we're
going to get anywhere arguing
definitionally but you know you should
all think how does your design come into
a thesis because in a sense that's a
normal question you know architects have
habits of how they put them into files
or a portfolio or whatever but it can't
be like that
and so the certainly questions in my
mind will be raised it was like text
then design doesn't seem to have any
intellectual justification of the
obvious message of it all the
underlining is have to be principled
intellectual reasons for doing something
otherwise I think people should get on
newer they won't thank you mark
[Applause]
in the spirit of getting on we're gonna
turn the table to Mike Weinstock who
wanted to speak again on the more
broader themes of the day not
necessarily an mtech perspective I think
he also wants us to get on Mike it is
gonna be slightly in particular but I'm
gonna read a short excerpt from a longer
paper about design and design research
and impacts located in should we say the
scientific end of the spectrum of what
counts as design research so designers
long been regarded as a kind of craft
proceeding without necessity of a
reflection upon theory as knowledge is
embodied in physical artifact of the
building or a city is thought to be
sufficient to study the objects
themselves to learn how to design a
magnet innovation came about by eras and
existences in the operation of copying
that accumulated over generations design
research we may say as an intellectual
study commences with the scientific text
by simon in 1968 the sciences of the
artificial artifice of making but
sciences of the artificial which is a
later publication of an earlier essay
and speeches that he made about right
1962 there's a little bit of dispute
that some people attribute design
research and design science phrasing to
Buckminster Fuller around the late
fifties that in terms of publication
this is the earliest and the most
systematic Simon is not an architect it
was a cognitive psychologist and he
revised and updated that text throughout
most of his life
and I think there were three or four
editions published 1962 text the
architecture of complexity hierarchical
systems is regarded as his kind of
masterpiece of his life and it's
rewritten as chapter 5 in that then he
has certain characteristics of it
which are taken up I think in the UK
seen as a formal the first formal course
of design research was by an engineer
called Archer who founded it at a Royal
College of Art in the late 1960s and
they started to run a course and ph.d
program in design research and he
described it boring very thoroughly from
Simon hand from Fuller systematic
inquiry his goal is knowledge of or in
the embodiment of the material
configuration composition structure
purpose value and meaning in man-made
things and systems and in response to
what Marx has said that would of course
include full text oral novels films and
so forth although specifically as an
engineer he was referring to structures
but he also had that very kind of
broader vision of what it could be and
there's a number of papers since then
had some commentary and small amount of
significance to major cross design I
think the paper is design early ways at
knowing and natural intelligence and
design and Bank goes to the point of
establishing that there is potentially a
new form of knowledge
chainable designing and I think that
Maria's point occurring as approach to
design and I think that's common to the
fundamental foundation of all written
PhD is it's about you know making you
knowledge the principles which I will
come to and comment on a little more at
the end across many disciplines and we
need to have a design research is far
from unique and architecture is almost
the last professional discipline to
adopt design research that it's design
is a unique class of inquiry that may
include some combination from a larger
set of principles and those principles
are relational form and behavior
integrated knowledge from the natural or
cultural sciences a specified degree of
mutability such as a relational model
capable of adaptation to different
circumstances or environments testable
propositions and principles of
implementation and an expository design
and that expository design can be
conceptual physical or computational and
that it can be used for testing and
evaluation so I think I won't go through
the rest of all of this for this the
rest is a kind of unfolding and I'm
picking of the impact of those
statements I think in terms of their
work in in our research group we're
particularly wedded to the idea of the
relation relational model has a
specified degree of mutability and I
think this in our world bridge is
exactly the kind of fusion
ideation and new knowledge but it is
something that we can test and can be
evaluated and it resides within kind of
kind of critical acknowledgement of
complexity sciences the city and the
cultural promotion of urban spaces
though there are particular aspects of
it I think I'll leave it at that
[Applause]
before our coffee break we had the last
of the presentations by our team marina
Natori speaking from a position of a
history in critical thinking but also
interested in the question but by the
organizers she's taken it as the road
map for her response
yeah
thank marking thank you the students for
taking the initiative and bringing all
of us here I think it's the first time
that we all sit around the table and
discuss even if we don't get to
announcer still it's very important to
be here and I would like mark talked
about PhD and I think but the PhD is or
how we do it or how we approach it has
been discussed by all of us but I would
like actually to focus for now and for
the sake of our discussion on the second
design which we seem to all take it as
self-evident term and we all know what
that means because we are coming most of
us from an architecture background or we
from the point of view of a designer and
I would like to interrogate the term
also coming from a more history in
critical thinking perspective I think I
always start from the naming and what
the name means so but actually what the
name does not mean or does exclude so
when we say PhD by design I'll start
with the title that the students care
which PhD by design with the question
mark
I'll leave the question mark for now I
think CMOS dealt with preposition by and
as I said we dealt with PhD so I'll
start with the design when so what my
question is what we categorize under the
term design it's the investigation of
certain phases of the process is the
material outcome
is the social function of the material
outcome is design a very specific
technical knowledge or design as it was
also raised especially with Maria and
Paula it's a means primarily a means of
investigation and inquiry of material
special configurations but also of
conceptual configurations so I start and
I would I start by saying and by
returning to what Mark said that
actually writing it may also be design
or may be seen are considered and
treated as a design or I would say as
project and in this sense this also a
way of the demonstrators a way of
approaching the process of the PhD but
also to approach history and to approach
language for which for me also it could
be considered as projects and here use
more the term project rather the design
and I would for now I would just
emphasize that by also having recourse
to one of the historians we discuss
quite often with my students my frittata
for who wrote in his text the historical
project that history is a project and in
on all senses of the term and elsewhere
he wrote that history is an analytical
construction that it's never deaf never
definite and it's always provisional so
coming from that perspective or point of
view I would add that the history of
language like a history of our
discipline the history of technology or
technologies or practices it's not one
of straightforward replacement of one
meaning
the meaning of fun practice by another
practice or another technology
biotechnology but it's a process of
accumulation and accumulation of new
meanings new reflections or reflections
which not necessarily displace the the
other one so we have we have to deal and
we have to encounter and engage with
that historical process and as I said in
this process it's not so much to trace
the meaning of a word and I would agree
again with mark that it's not about
defining terms here but it's about what
the terms of what the names we use may
exclude this so I go I'll go all the way
back to the beginning of of the term and
design or design you which it was
introduced in the fifteenth sixteenth
century as this angle which meant
drawing but also the process of creation
in order to show that actually this is
that term allowed artists historians or
architects to define architecture as a
distinct discipline as a distinct
practice later on as a distinct
profession so in one way design
it's a term which lies it constitutes
the essence of what we do of the other
of the discipline of architecture so I
that's why I would like us to frame it
more as a disciplinary question and it's
the meaning of design it's complex and
it has had and has been used in many
different ways so it has a complexity
and multiplicity so the Zegna from asked
was first used by the art theorist or
historian or artist Giorgio Vasari in
his work on the life so in the
of most of painters sculptors and
architects which was published in 1568
signify doors used to signify a visual
expression of the concept which which
one has in the intellect and also in
another part of his text he is using
design to mean how to signify the
principle of all creative processes and
it worth noting here that six years
before his publication
Vasari had set the first Academy of Art
the first formal academy of art in
florence in fifty sixty two and it was
there where design was introduced as a
curriculum in one way as a way as what
meant indicated the process of learning
and training in order so the artistic
young artists were not longer to train
or to learn through their participation
in the through by assisting the master
artist for the master builder but by
participating in discussions and
theories about the formation of the
artifact of the material activate so
here we have a shift of emphasis from
the material through the process of the
production of the material artifact and
in one way here we have a distinction
between intellectual labor and the
manual labor so design was introduced
exactly to establish the distinction
between the concept the idea and the
translation of the idea into the drawing
rather than the building actual building
on the actual production of the material
artifact so this is I think it could to
bear that in mind that design men means
exactly what we do and also design was
established within the context of the
Academy the context of the teaching of
art or the teaching of architecture so
in one way is what
aloud also architected architecture or
arts to be taught and not to be learned
through experience so in one way it's
what it's exactly the as semo set its
object of study but it's also our tool
is what we do that's what we do as
architects it's our field our practice
but it's also the way we what we learn
what we say is the object of education
that form that way of understanding and
also documenting and communicating the
production of the material artifact
whether this is a painting or a building
or indeed a city outlines a new form or
different form of knowledge and also the
interrelationship between the
intellectual labor and the conditions of
production so it's not so an observation
which would come as to me after having
said that is what is the the social also
function of the process because design
is a complex practice it's what we do it
situated within primarily the academic
framework and it's part at the same time
of its part of a complex social practice
and it's in immediate relation with
material cultures and material
technologies without meaning based on so
we work with this but it's not the
objectivity to is more to think and to
develop the method towards that in this
sense going back also to at Marea
present at the beginning I want also to
say I would like us to open the question
of what are the social kind of qualities
or principles or ideas we are aiming at
with the designer and with that process
so in the end in our context today with
the expanding informational economies
the new technologies of modes of
production the innovative material
research we often claim to propose
alternative ways of understanding and
designing cities without always
acknowledging that at the end what we do
is to amplify or alter or eliminate
areas and forms of existing existing
forms of social experience and perhaps I
would not go through the rest of my
notes because I think it's more
important to pass on to the discussion
but I would like to say that following
on this a PhD by designer comes up with
against a double difficulty or if not a
double aporia for me that comes also
from the possibility of having a PhD in
design under work one concept or one
category so for me we do know we would
not even pay PhD in design but I would
say more PhD in architecture because
design is something actually it
constitutes the core of architecture as
architecture is to be taught and to be
practiced and I will stop here and hope
that more things will come
thanks very much foreigner
[Applause]
all right we are reconvening
[Music]
in the coffee interval a question was
already raised by a member the audience
about the requirement of academic do
they need a PhD to teach and it's a
question of when do you get on the
academic ladder has it were indeed
plenty of professors of architecture
currently teaching not have a PhD but if
you were to go out now and search for
jobs in academia at any university any
polytechnic any school you would
absolutely have to have a PhD to take on
a junior lectureship so this is a
requirement entering academia and this
is relatively new apart from the AAA
which means to be apart from many things
by design but I think it was an
interesting question to raise other
people currently in our ph.d program all
of a cohort imagining a life in the
Academy or do they have other purposes
to which they want to use their PhD I'm
sure that's the case
but it's an interesting question at
least to get certain balls rolling but I
wanted to open as I promised the table
to any and all questions from the
audience we can come back to that one
but we had many ideas put forward and
just to kind of rehearse as we were
running along Paula talked about for
example the range of design work that
might be entertained within a PhD
including multimedia and of course she's
the only one that truly abided by the
organizers request and presented a
in-utero
PhD by design proposal the Goldstar
Maria pointed to the fact the premise
you cannot even enter into the scenario
of the pH to eat without having an issue
and without taking a position and I
think this is really key how you take a
position how you draw on examples that
not only she said to to justify your
stance but to challenge your stance you
to work through examples that are
counter to your premise that was a
really fascinating angle
I think CMOS with his prepositions opens
up all the problematics of nomenclature
and having been part of some of the
write-up of these genres of PhD accepted
with the oh you in the oh you might be
another kind of discussion we have today
he sets about how do we look at this
rather cynically how do we look at how
it's been framed and how this
institution has adopted a model that may
or may not suit it at the present time
mark talked about the PhD as
contributing some idea of a regional
work for an act of scholarship what
would that be how would that act he
described how does it enter into the
text he also talked about custom and
practice that some of what we do not
only as PhD researchers but as
examiner's is by custom and practice so
be interesting to interrogate the habits
whether they be good or bad habits
surrounding the PhD Mike entered into
this world of design research
architecture he said almost the last
discipline to adopt design research has
a serious endeavor irony irony but also
I think true on scientific methods to
say they're not so scientifically and
they could be applied to anything
including questions in the humanities
I think marina ended by opening up that
interrogation of the word design but
also allowing the intellectual versus
the manual labor if you will or the
writing as its Shore versus the writing
as a sort of intellectual practice or in
fact a joy after all why would you go
into some three four or five year
turmoil if not for some bad whisper of
joy so there's that so that's where
that's where we've landed so I thought
for the rest of symposium we should be
open to your questions but follow along
or her some of these themes raised in
the first part so I'll open the floor
yes please I just wanted to make a
footnote about the sort history of Bhd
up until the 60s very few people who
graduated ever wanted to do a PhD it was
because it was scholarly and it was
actually probably in terms of their
career because they didn't want to be a
teacher that is to say they lived in
universities on fellowships and
scholarships which enabled them you know
pretty much for their lifetime to do
scholarly work in the archives
so we've seen you know a sea change
since the 60s in what a PhD is and this
terrible way in which it's rapidly
becoming the currency for like you know
tenure track job and that in itself is
kind of absolutely lamentable especially
it's spread there was a whole kind of
decade when it spread to Australia it
now goes like a sort of planes from
China and it's an incredibly ill
adjusted instrument if what you were
trying to do is to breed a teacher hmm
it's it's a it's like a fish nor fowl
you know it's a long piece of writing
the standards of a PhD aren't
particularly high you know more kind of
Freeman you very rarely fail them they
usually come yes you've passed with a
minor punishment attached it's the
situation we inherit in which we have to
live with I mean there's no there's no
outside of that but no one should get
too idealistic about the nature of a PhD
nor a sense PhDs are in some sense I
mean I belong to an generation which
wouldn't have dreamt to do what I did
someone but I don't compare being in
archives I mean
everything else it ruins your cuffs
horrible it's still hard to follow that
but there we are indeed the brine you
maybe want to kick us off
architecture mr. Saab yes although the
word does have Providence back to Albert
at least I know a dream 40 makes the
word design one of those words that he
links indelibly with the modern movement
the if if somebody starts talking about
design almost invariably they somehow
operative is it were within or from the
modern movements in architecture and
this in turn seems to me to suggest a
certain inclination towards the kind of
attempt to tsiyon ties architecture and
this scientism is a bit of a problem
here because the remains certain genetic
war about the creative work of
architecture which allows it to arts
rather than to science of the technology
and the serious theoretical study of
design that mike began to describe i
remember coming across this when i was
looking through the staff list lancaster
university they seem to have a whole
faculty the people of doing this kind of
thing it's okay but design isn't always
architecture and the trouble is that the
word design could be used for purely
technical operations such as the design
of instruments which has neither
architectural nor creative in the
expressive sense
connections associated there is so that
is one question is why don't we just
call it PhD by architecture I think
design is a unique form of inquiry I
don't think it can be both scholarly and
I can be it's as mark would call it the
practice of the world everything we have
on the table this microphone all of
these things are products of design it's
an a peculiar artifact of the small
industry of what early Western
architectural theory up until about the
1980s that is aligned only with art and
is something similar to water and I
think there are other cultures and other
civilization other societies in the
world civilization that have never made
a difference between arts and science
but then you move into I mean that has a
kind of great rationality everything
there is designed but you move into what
I take to be the current Greg Linton
position that there is a field of design
within that there's no special reason
for having schools of architecture no
not quite in the Greg lien position like
that I'm principally objecting to their
scientism that there's some kind of
diminution or loss of value by
emphasizing design as a unique form of
inquiry I think there are things for
example if we talk about you were
talking about the social values and
social purposes of space you know they
one would say that they can be read in
an open texture their bodies in above
tissues and it's perfectly possible to
use scientific method methods to
catalogue uncover and discover high
cultural values that they're not they're
not separate things scientists aren't
you know little gnomes they're just
people like us they wear the same
clothes they go to the same films they
they sleep in the same kind of bed you
know and they they had dreams and
aspirations and values as architects
didn't I
he's also very peculiar thing that seems
that happened from 90s onwards it's
beginning to be seriously questioned
from the 90s onwards but that period you
refer to it from 1960 to 1990 is more or
less when science disappears from every
Faculty of architecture across the world
and from every graduate school prior to
that you couldn't become an architect or
think about it without understanding
something of science and even if your
interest was purely textual archive oh
they're writing you would have but it
would have had to have a knowledge of
science it was regarded is in a culture
person had some knowledge of science but
then if this is you know large
scientifically informed at least field
of design what then become
the reasons for isolating architecture
for the rest of design that is a problem
isn't it then the scientists that they
have a clearer notion of research method
and research areas we are all over the
place we can we try to claim any and and
and then we have to educate ourselves in
the particularity of that area of that
discipline which in some cases makes us
really very vulnerable you know who are
you you know you can hear I have heard
this said to me who are you to be here
and and and then you feel like whatever
the field was then you have to be at
least like them to start with and then
to find yourself within your own field
if you can still manage and and and fuse
that or whatever it is that you wanted
to do I would say that I think you know
we're overloading the discussion I would
like to ask the organizers you know who
raised the question who mentioned that
they they felt that there is no clear
definition or no consensus about what is
meant or what is expected I mean I would
I would like them to to say something on
this so that we can respond on specifics
well maybe we could start by why we
wanted to organize this event so it we
kind of came up with this idea after one
over the PhD meetings last year I think
and there we had a debate around the
table back then I think actually CMOS
brought it up it was about one of the
PhD thesis I can't remember right now
but that's not the point so it was about
what is actually PhD by design what does
design mean and then we started you know
also discussing you know PhD in itself
is a form of design just like some of
you have mentioned and so it was really
different about to discuss what I think
in a way what design means because I
think it comes down to the to the
question of what is designed when we ask
what what is PhD by design right and we
I think I can speak for all of us we are
not in search of a definitive answer but
we thought it would be very intriguing
to hear your opinions and to see to
start this kind of conversation you know
among you see different programs and
different research interests and to kind
of carry it forward maybe in the next
term or next year as well and to open it
up to other schools of architecture
because we're also aware that for
example other schools have different
modes of PhD by design so not only it's
it's it's an it's necessary discussion
within the a a but this this discussion
is also taking place outside the a so I
think and and you know obviously
thinking about the fact that it's sort
of a new form of PhD I think it's great
to start kind of talking about it and
also opening up to the PhD students here
and whoever's interested to sum up why
yes I think adding to this we
essentially cross-reference different
PhD programs both in London and abroad
and we came across definitions and
blurbs which mentioned terms like like
practice led practice based studio based
and there was an intrigue to really hear
from the supervisors themselves how did
he find these terms and how we can
relate to these because essentially also
at the a often you arrive and then there
you don't really see a studio because I
think there has only been a studio since
one year at the a or one of the half
years and a situation we'd like to hear
more on students if anyone has question
who would be happy
I have a sort of really pragmatic
question a bit in response to you mark
from the problem of people needing a PhD
to get a job and is one of the issues of
calling it PhD by design to do with your
CV and being able to be published and
the a lot of architects might want to
say apply for an academic post but
they're not published in a peer-reviewed
journal because that's not how they're
sort of practice is normally published
so is it in part to do with that
problematic of what's considered part of
that as opposed to but I think really
the question which comes up today is
this you know it's been going for ten
years
yes the question is is the fine sort of
informal processes or custom and
practice is there an emerging sense
probably most acutely amongst the
students perhaps also amongst the
supervisors that there is you know you
could tell that this is a PhD by design
done of the a a for example you can read
people's beer and if it's only talygroes
PhD you can see that he was supervised
by the Gerber you know I mean that level
really of detail is there a sort of
emerging knowledge which would help you
supervisors to know is do your informal
you know do you tend to handle the
distribution of design in the CSIs in
typical web has it had an effect can I
can I just try to clarify because I
think PhD by design is a notion is a
ghost is a ghost notion about which we
speak and it's okay to speak it's not
what we are doing what we are doing is
that individually the students here have
permission to incorporate the thing they
call designed within the context of
their PhD in in amounts which are
negotiable now if you wish to continue
in your hands to call this PhD by design
to do so but whenever you interact with
others or within your own mind that
expressions I tried to show can confuse
you that the pitch deep by design is a
ghost and and for others also I think I
would stay is it's a ghost in in the
sense that you know it's they can do
anything they please and but usually
usually when we say PhD by design we
always refer all we have in mind the
final document and PhD by design is a
PhD which halves a what we call design
component that means that there is
less text and there is some visual or
graphic material but that's the I mean
if you if one takes a set of drawings or
image is and tries to write a text
through and around this visual material
the one we could see the PhD by design
so in one way it's like graphic material
which you produce not you analyze
because one could say that as an
architect we can also work through
existing you know through the built or
through the graphic or through the
visual and that in one way the approach
is the approach the architectural
approach the viewpoint so what
differentiates this which again a PhD in
architecture for a PhD by design is that
the PhD that final document has some
graphic material or visual material
which is your own production it has a
project of your own so but that's where
my question is and it's it's no small
point because the next chapter of your
life having concluded your PhD
successfully is to turn it into a book
whether you're tenure track or just vain
you want the damn book and so suddenly
the PhD by design original work material
that Maria showed for example it's
suddenly the best thing a publisher has
ever seen as a proposal because the
copyright issues around most PhDs that
write two images found images died a
slow death on the altar of there's no
way to afford the publication around
that PhD the PhD is permissive you can
use copies of the Mona Lisa until your
hand hurts but to turn around and
publish it means you have to have
copyright permission from the Louvre and
pay the fee and those fees add up so
there's something interesting about the
PHP design in a very practical level
that divorce is out certain production
that is yours that is truly yours and
can move in different directions
including a book so a PhD by design then
becomes right
I wanna PSD with do-it-yourself pictures
do-it-yourself by design for in
architecture actually it's called PhD in
architecture on a different school one
of the biggest questions in actually
qualifying your own world and your own
words I think for me comes through
meeting two types of knowledge one which
is thought and understood which is
usually seen in the text and the other
one which is you know but you can't
quite tell and what I mean this is Paulo
Noi but in any case I didn't quote him
but as a designer and architect there
are processes by which we work which you
can read for example if you have ever
tried to ride a bicycle at 10 and never
did you can read a book to learn how to
ride a bicycle
or if you hurt your hand and you need to
wrap it by a sort of bandage how hard
should you press so there are sort of
certain sensitivities that come through
experience of your own practice and your
own tools so in order to actually
understand that other form of knowledge
which could be called tacit that could
meet your thought process you also need
to know your tools and that tool may or
may not be a pencil or a film or
computer and by knowing that tool you
would also know how to experiment with
that tool and I think we didn't really
talk about experimentation much today
which also contributes aspect
to original knowledge which is one of
the conditions of the PhD in any case
beaten archived either and archived by
text or drawings or buildings or the
apologies of whatever or beat an archive
of your own processes I also think that
maybe defining the terms is not an issue
here it's more about what AAA wishes to
pursue in this and there are questions
that are quite interesting to be unique
as this is a unique school that I also
intended and I would believe that
actually quite a lot of PhD by design or
by architecture by whatever has happened
at a time when I was studying so I don't
know if that helps but that that's water
what I would contribute to the debate
well thanks very much I'm Richard wolf
and I'm a member of the air in a part
three alumni I also teach at Kingston
and Oxford Brookes on the Riv a studio
course another building crafts College
which is a vocational course I think
what's very very interesting here is the
notion of PhD by practice or by design
turning into an autobiographical element
this I'm observing this and I don't
think there's any harm whatsoever in
talking honestly this afternoon about
other courses and other programs which
are out there okay so it's very very
interesting that mark mentioned about
this blizzard of PhDs has all swept to
Australia well a lot of them now and a
lot of those programs are now being you
know imported at Westminster the RM RM
IT course which is incredibly successful
in which I've actually sat in on - as it
were
test drive whether or not it's of
interest to me that the critical thing
about it I think is this notion
the work being not original work of
scholarship which places the historic
aspect on it but the notion of it
becoming autobiographical and then as
you quite rightly say about the notion
of straight to press yeah
the monograph okay and I've been
certainly in the last couple of years
too many book launches next door through
that wall through about 14 inches of
masonry and what I've actually observed
are many PhDs by practices turning into
an autobiographical monograph of the
authors so the subtext which is what you
mentioned the notion of PhD being a
prerequisite an obligatory requirement
for access to an academic career which
wasn't the case when I was studying in
the eighties and when I was thinking of
studying here's that I think is the
driver that I think is the driver for
this particular program I'd like to
offer a response to the lady over there
and to you I think there is a useful
distinction to make between PhD by
practice with a capital P referring to
the architectural profession and what
Mark would and how you would say is
practice is to do with ways of doing
things so I think that we are pursuing a
different mode of doctoral degree that
is not a PhD for recognizing innovative
path research within a practice I think
that's quite a different discipline and
a different topic
I think the great promise of PhD buy-in
for whatever design but your own
preposition that is the openness for
example most a great deal our work is
not to do it images but to do a code and
they have all of them published papers
in peer-reviewed journals three or four
long before it comes to the vital and I
think that the promise of object making
architecture visible or achievable
through means other than text
can include many great things they
should be the promises it would be much
much wider and it's not a simple
division between an image and a piece of
text the same thing that had actually in
many I want to get too technical but it
in too scientific because it will upset
Brian but many codes are written with
text so you know to be a code writer who
also had to be you know very clear
knowledge of language and I think that
those boundaries are blurring my own
views my own research and looking at how
education has changed in my lifetime in
the a
and across the world is all the
disciplinary boundaries not a
professional ones but between separate
categories of physics of maths at
language genetics are all blurring I
agree with what Mike says and I think we
should grieve the rest of the discussion
that in a sense definitions will get you
nowhere I mean for example you know a
good example of a PhD by design would be
a typical PhD dermatologist in which
does like reconstruction and
traditionally made through drawing
archeologists didn't bother about you
know should be by design who this goggle
PhD but you know that's a typical piece
of research work which has to use design
and drawing as its kind of but it would
be kind of silly to my mind just start
saying oh well let's go get these
archaeologists I mean it's not about
definitions as I say I mean I've said
anymore it seems to me the question I
mean in a sense the reason for dividing
the PhD by researcher
is that there's a practical question at
stake did you imagine there's a group of
students who would typically concentrate
quite a lot of work on design they could
variously weave it into their thesis so
it does or doesn't have a break and they
would emerge kind of a notion of sort of
smart practice which does it the
question is really has that happened if
you're to assess whether it's being
worthwhile and continues to be
worthwhile our students help it by
seeking there's you know a group of
people doing this and supervisors doing
it and it collectively pulls its
experience on what works sometimes on
what hasn't worked and that seems to be
the test object which is why I think in
a sense you know it's it's when a
student says actually I wouldn't have
thought of doing this but my colleague
said why didn't you do that how many
students are normal PhDs always kind of
like thinking of questions between the
organization of the thesis and what they
want to say where it goes how it you
know how you structure it how you
articulate it and that becomes in just a
certain group of people who have certain
common problems which they share that
seems to be both enough of a reason for
calling it some
identifiable and you know for them to
talk together and whatever I mean you
know it's not exclusive it's not
definitely for its it really follows a
kind of unplanned kind of history I do
buy the bread something in an
institution which seems to be creative
and it seems to be on average quite good
at and then people say actually it's
very good place to go do you know Steve
I design I think beyond a certain point
the only interesting thing really is the
experience of the students ooh meant to
be doing it and because we are repeating
ourselves ourselves here without moving
forward and and it would be nice if if
we had in the room but some people who
are engaged with the process at the
moment and others who have completed it
and and we don't have enough attendance
tend to organize something else for
weekend and and and review this
experience over the last 10 years it is
10 years I have documents to show that
the discussions we have the reason for
failure of consensus as as as you
mentioned which were very acceptable and
mark a great with this because why
should we agree with the form of the
contents and so forth but then what did
we know also and the only way in which
we can know is by hearing from you I
know that elephants finish the PhDs we
have her experiences and and and the
others all all for you that
you are doing a PhD in design so maybe
you can say something when I started two
three years ago we were just talking up
in the bar when where did we hereby
design then and I'm sorry I never really
read the prospectus so clearly I should
have been more clear
so yeah I mean just to kind of puts you
through our shoes when we came in I
remember discussions started happening
between me and other students I don't
know how it came about but are you doing
a PhD by design or I do a PhD by
research I don't know how that question
came about but suddenly it just started
to circulate kind of like a like a
disease around the studio and then some
people or at least us perhaps the ones
by design that well we're also doing
research so let's call what they're
doing by history in theory so then that
brought up the second kind of issue
which was well since we're doing
research that means we must provide a
proposal of some sort and if they're
doing history in theory then that's it
must be an analytical or an analysis of
some historical circumstance in
architecture and I don't think I was
right but when you start to see and what
was very useful is the the research
proposal presentations that we used to
do after three months and you start to
see some mirroring of you know those who
are doing PhD by or in architectural
design seem to go towards the path or at
least mimic or mirror a path of a
master's thesis that is a little bit
more thought through while others and
even I remember sitting in some of the
other research proposals and not real
understanding what they were putting
forward because it wasn't sitting within
what I thought was designed per se but I
think it's just my personal perspective
and how I felt about it so that's that's
what what I found most beneficial as a
PhD student personally is the the idea
that I was able to communicate with
other PhD colleagues who were under the
same as
set program under the same theme as mine
and that pushed my work significantly
forward simply because I was you know
communicating with others who had a
similar direction of what I was doing
although it was very interesting to talk
with other students with from other kind
of streams that was what I felt was was
most contributing sooo to the thesis so
that's well maybe I do remember from my
times at the GSD talking to the head of
the thesis program at the time this was
master's thesis and I remember him
saying that actually in US in a weird
way by design theses are probably the
most scientific theses around because we
don't have a canon of methodology unlike
other disciplines like medicine or
sociology in sociology or anthropology
one does a survey or in economics it's a
different method that is that defines
the Canon sort of so in an ironic way
design is actually the only time when
you have to justify your own method in a
in a most scientific way because one
needs to argue because there is no
established Canon and when I arrived to
this program here I didn't really need
to have a method statement in my
proposal it actually took a while it
took around one year to finish the
preliminary proposal I'm now in my
second year and initially I didn't
really have to put forth a methodology
section because it was assumed that the
method in this iron is designed but this
seems odd to me because I think one
needs to argue and justify what we're
actually doing and this is part of I
would here
but also I'd like to add something about
my own experience I may be wrong but my
perspective toward the PhD whatever by
design or design non design is that I
think that when I when it comes to my
thesis and research when I find it
different from other methods and PhDs
that maybe others trying to read between
lines and find bits and parts connecting
together make sense of a whole like a
bigger scheme but like with my case I
have to produce something to make sense
of something and argument I'm putting
forward and that that was my like
initial kind of experience and like
thought about like what is a different
approaches to work PhD within a a which
we call a designer research
well I could offer some experience maybe
from the non by design side it seemed I
mean compared to the brief which
mentioned discord or like a lack of
agreement on the term lack of consensus
I think the first session presented
basically a consensus which was best
summarized by Marina according to the
kind of disciplinary character of
architecture and design being a linchpin
of that disciplinary character I think
the challenge from my own work within a
research or history Theory PhD is
historicizing and theorizing about that
discipline and about that institution
and then the question of design the
question of architecture becomes a
question of ideology and actually it's a
struggle within the history theory side
to specify those boundaries again so I
would maybe put forward a defense of
history and theory as a separate problem
which can address architecture as an
institution according to say critique of
ideology or something like that and then
from that perspective the difference
between saying having drawings or having
text having all text having some
drawings there may not be a qualitative
difference between the drawings and the
text insofar as it's in a disciplinary
proposition or or a project in that
sense so actually it's a more it's a
deeper kind of conceptual theoretical
problem I think it's I think you're
making a really interesting point and
the
expensive actually making again one on
this fun you know points about words I
think that there is or the we can assume
a difference between project and design
and I think depending on which word we
use for me this definition PhD by
project or by design is incredibly
irrelevant and stupid smart was saying
before or on the contrary can be
actually quite quite useful as you're
pointing out right now I think both
types of work and I did a PhD by thesis
or let's say traditional PhD myself both
things are projects indeed yeah because
you need they need to have an
architecture they need to have a
structure they need to be did in
somewhere so I think on that is
something that mark has explained very
well earlier and I think we can all
agree on that
having done though a PhD written PhD in
a traditional university with very very
strict rules that in fact actually
forced me to write at least 70,000 words
in order to you know in order to ask to
defend my thesis I I would agree
actually with what Mike says that there
is a fundamentally different attitudes
the type of inquiry when also to what
you were saying if you do it by thesis
or by by just written written text or
whether you assume much with the
standpoint of a designer there is
definitely a burden of proposition of
being propositional that you have
actually when you work to design there
is a different sensibility as you were
saying that definitely I am was not
allowed to use in my thesis thesis but
of course I gained another type of
freedom that is actually what you are
hinting at is a possibility to be maybe
more critical from certain points of
view so what I mean is this I think that
they are both both versions are both
undoubtedly designer sorry undertand
that'll be a project but I do think that
the PhD by design can perhaps normalize
a certain a certain way of doing
research that is slightly different from
the thesis so that doesn't detract from
one from the other but it puts you in a
very different position I actually
started out of my thesis
just going to the autobiographical
hoping that I would be able to go into
up by design Pro final product because I
am myself trained as a very conventional
designer like I've done this for many
years I was not that that at least
that's a weird writing for a long time
but also I really wish to engage with my
topic that was the architecture of the
street in a very propositional manner I
was kind of told by the university that
this was not possible that the thesis
had to have certain academic academic
criteria of scholarly writing that had
to have at least 70,000 words I could do
everything I wanted on top of that but
it wouldn't really be assessed by the
Commission so it was somehow not
considered and and I shifted throughout
actually the writing of my thesis I
realized actually that this thing that I
could not do as when I was saying
sometimes that seems that definers are
the things that we cannot do I realized
that actually left me freer from a
different point of view that actually
that I didn't have to assume the
standpoint that the architecture of the
street meant actually designing a
straight but it meant actually being
extremely critical in fact actually
ending with a completely negative
outlook on that that this is not
possible for me anymore right now today
so each of us has a different story has
a different standpoint but I do think
that actually a different attitude with
a video thesis that can even with a very
same initial issue that we were talking
about before actually leads to quite
different results and to a quite
different outlook however one of these
two things that is that easy so can be
approached even by somebody that just
has an art historical background well I
do think that by design
theses can only be developed if you do
have the baggage of tools that comes
with being a designer even that you ever
practice or not I don't think it's that
important but let's say that you have
been trained in in the culture of design
as both marina and Mike actually were
explaining is something it is actually
quite quite definite I had to wear the
hat of an art historian actually for my
thesis and it was interesting it was in
a form of estrangement for me coming
from again this very commercial
traditional background of being a
designer and it was an interesting
exercise that ultimately changed my life
but I think I could have done an equally
interesting thesis that would have been
completely different using the baggage
of tools that I had in my training as a
designer the sensibility the capacity of
understanding certain things but even
really just the methodology of going
through a specific set of motions for
your investigation that you would never
do if you tackle a thesis from an art
historical point of view I don't see
that one or the other is better or worse
they are just different experiences that
we all have in different moments
definitely the thing that I do regret is
that that choice was not left back to
myself but it was imposed on me from a
framework that was in a way that I
couldn't choose somehow now so I think
that actually the freedom that we have
here to position ourselves within one on
the other is is an incredible incredible
luck actually yeah there's a question
for the audience but in front of that
and we will take that question as
follows of you while also at the
responder the preview just to follow on
what Maria set apart the positioning
because it's not only to have the
knowledge of the tools but I think it's
also how we engage with the tools that's
matter if it's text or drawing but it's
how they're both it can be both
treated and considered and thought from
the point of view of the project and
decide we who engaged in this sense it
can be you can use designer in a very
conventional sense and then for me would
not make any sense so you can use text
in a very conventional sense or you can
use both of them in a very critical
sense and I think for me that's most
important I think we have in this sense
and I did something we can all share the
idea of positioning and what we want in
the end to pose as a question either
through the text or through the design
well I just wanted to tell a different
story
I'm now a PhD supervisor here but I also
did my PhD at the AI mid-90s I applied
CMOS was my supervisor and at the time I
didn't need a PhD for nothing I came
from practice I was practicing for 10
years I probably did a PhD by accident
so Siemens has proposed several words in
between PhD and design such as PhD or
design PhD on design PhD and design
probably I would add another one
PhD towards design in a way I wanted to
become more knowledgeable on on the
fields of sustainable design I looked
everywhere where I could continue my
postgraduate studies and I came across
to the program the environment and
energy program at the AI and I said
that's it I want to apply and get
specialized here however when I called
up I was a bit shocked with the fees so
I said well I have to find another way
on how to achieve my aims and these was
through applying to a grant well when
you apply to grant you need always to
give give something back they wanted the
book I said okay then I'll
do what I want which is to get
specialized in the field to contribute
to my design or to my professional
practice and I'll will end at the end so
the whole process was very exciting very
interesting and when I finished I
decided that I would not only practice
but I managed to combine both I was
practicing and teaching and I think that
this was this was important for the
students because they they they they had
this different view of someone who was
currently in practice and someone who
also had some scholarly experience so
this is a different story by accident
question so I've been following the ph.d
program at the AAA for a while now not
having done a PhD at the a myself but
very much experiencing up close I'm
gonna try to pick up on certain things
that were discussed by by mark maria by
students here and maybe it's more of a
comments last question to the panel
Danika brain zone for me design and in
the way time involved in teaching at the
AAA and different programs and somebody
lab is through teamwork so for instance
mark mentioned something about having
this group of students come together
exchanging ideas same to the current PhD
students being able to share the
different knowledge that they are
engaging their research on with the AAB
then tapping into that strength that has
always made the AAA going at the bar
meeting people exchanging ideas part of
that direction may be to have PhD by
teamwork or would that ever be something
possible in the sense that we move away
from that sort of lonely aspect of the
PhD candidates student struggling within
themselves
that's just food for thought perhaps
answer you from the point of view of our
working group of the city architecture
which is actually a part of collective
that started as a ph.d program in the
Netherlands that was actually where I
studied that was called the cities a
project that is kind of going on with
the second incarnation now in a DA and
in both versions something along the
lines of what you described really
happened in the sense that actually
having a series of regular seminars and
regular exchanges did mean that although
each of us had a very definite position
with completely different is this
subject and completely different
interests and background and so on and
so forth there was a kind of sort of
shared discourse that in the end very
much actually shaped the flavor let's
say or the bias of the thesis still
keeping our individual our individuality
I'm not sure if this can be you know
forced on people but I think we can
definitely foster these opportunities
actually for dialogue and that's
definitely why we can see what we
conceive of ourselves as a program where
of course there's a head but the head is
not alone there are the second
supervisors mark Campbell myself
Adriana hood Sam Jacobi and so on and so
forth they're all kind of contributing
to the discussion and and of course then
obviously the candidates that I think
sorry if I make a small note also here I
think we should not call them students
also by the way because I think by now
they are basically developing their own
individual research exactly the same
happens with the mtech and sustainable
environmental designer Hinton and in
fact to generalize every single program
at da that has a studio of some kind and
including it is is a place where
psychically happened in fact where the
training also the preparation for the
PhD happens because one thing that I
think we should pursue is a more
economic way towards the PhD and that
can be achieved by people going through
our masters programs which trained in
the particular research methods of each
program and and make it very very easy
to proceed from their mark or the MSE
towards the PhD because essentially I
mean in our case unicity that it's just
a progression that uses the same
fundamental core knowledge and and and
methods you
we're not troubled by having groans very
much to the a prominent grant funded
research but it's a normative model for
example a TR from at sekolah for example
within a chain PhD s where the kind of
leader writes a overall theme and
individuals contribute within certain
kind of boundaries of the set so and
they bump this they have of course as
they then fully funding the disadvantage
is they can't really change their mind
in the middle of the second year and
kind of slinger outside the boundary and
say I've had an amazing discovery I
don't want to do that anymore I'm gonna
do this so I think that the question of
individuality is in outside of the a
anyway there's an exchange between fully
funded and partially funded and complete
freedom we have to kind of Scrabble and
find the money yourself or join a
collective group but I think that being
an individual within a collectivist I
hope
a very strong position to be in
mark teamwork I mean it seems to me I
wasn't quite sure what is meant by it
I guess there are research projects in
the Natural Sciences in which world one
person can partake in a PhD but then the
forms of work are in a sense very very
constrained in it clear it's in a sense
it's more a kind of rational division of
labour I don't think it's applicable in
any easy way outside I'm all in favor of
every possible form of cooperation
discussion whatever I'm the word team
just like gets up mine should be
reserved for organized sport and you
know God forbid that the AAA would start
everyone saying well I'm a good team
player I mean we exist in order to to
present the antithesis of a team I mean
you know I mean there are certain terms
which are so soaked in sentimental
authoritarianism like community people
work together on project what do you
call them it's nothing
colleagues and I also together with that
team sports is everything it's the word
team seems to alarm you breakfast it's
let me - yeah
and I'm sure as you move from scientific
method to the odd piece of wild and the
bridges here people need to discuss
disagree I mean let's let's remember the
central of art of somewhere that's
trying to think is disagreement yeah I
mean you know she'll be a teach I'm a
disagreement they tell we're a team you
know no and secondly the other thing I
would defend is the idea of personal
supervision yeah if you put your letting
of them together and do a supervision
you know it's like I mean imagine it
there is something important about an
individual supervision it's kind of
irreplaceable to really helping a
student and a supervisor I mean you know
supervisors ought to have to write
papers on what they've learned during
the process of supervision but you know
you can't just
you can't reproduce it in a group
without reducing it as we have on
council someone who's like always online
education yeah I mean you know I can see
the point of ordering groceries from
waitress by online but you know getting
a PhD online I mean know there is a
purpose in people being together and
finding ways of agreeing sometimes
agreeing with people they didn't expect
you and above all disagree
a better word at least in this building
would be Association which doesn't imply
agreement yes I wanted in the last five
minutes we promised the room back a
quarter till two it hasn't come up yet
although Maria you you mentioned
assessment that PhD by design doesn't
really ask for or does it special
examiner's a PhD is unique and that it
actually has a defined climax of IVA is
there a moment where you have to take
your examiner's your guests aside and
explain by the way it's PhD by design or
is it just examined as any PhD well you
you want to make sure that the examiners
will be fair and and and therefore look
because it's up to us to nominate
examiner's so the the supervisor of the
students would nominate and then the PhD
committee hopefully will agree or if
they don't agree then others will be
nominated so then one would look at the
following first that these people can
examine a PhD hopefully they have done
it before in fact jointly because there
are two examiner's they have to have
done at least five previous examinations
of PhDs and then secondly in the case of
the by design okay you forcing me to use
this they they should be able to account
for the value of the design component
that that will be crucial because as I
said before we can reduce the number of
words usefully accounting for the design
contribution and the examiner should be
able to confirm that so but the
responsibility rests with us as a school
to select them properly by me that
applies also to the examiners of the
undergraduate school and the master's
program but by the way since I have the
microphone just to tell him that mark
between fifty and seventy percent I
would think of the master's programs
work
down in teams in groups if you wish if
you prefer that
and some masters program including them
they can landscape urbanism even do that
at the dissertation level yes we done we
don't have any individual serious
tensions unless the comb man so you know
but what should my call you should call
them colleagues the individuals we
should call them colleagues but we
should call the entity can I think that
we discussion about there being an
individual within a collective endeavor
most of us would kind of understand
that's what the studio is and that
doesn't people outside of this don't
understand why we use studio metaphor it
doesn't convey the sense of being an
individual and striving within general
theme that the person next to your
colleagues are also doing the same thing
might be doing in a very different way
so I think there is a problem in using
that as a description because we always
seem to understand more or less what a
studio is we can have quarrels and be
emotion
disagreements and we're still more or
less heading towards the same thing the
word cedar does not combine a hammer
side of architecture may see artistic
wafting about by the paintbrush and
chemically structured interesting
cigarettes and maybe the multiple PhD as
a way of continuing architectural study
is that the only way of finding a studio
is to go back to school because
historically you joined an office and
the office was supposed to be a studio
both modern modern offices are not
studios an interest I think that's an
insight
pretty much I think what we're talking
about is what you might think of as a
Italian tradition rather than
Studio grad schools throughout the world
call in studios and there but in the end
they're much more like kind of Atelier
where there are certain forms of
practice that are evolved it may be very
different artifacts or ambitions about
how comes but there there's a kind of
collegiate nerd approach outcome the
aims can be quite different in the ways
of doing things can be quite shared and
I think that's the Atelier tradition
which is but then I can't see that we'd
ever attract any students at all if we
said PhD biotivia and on that note I
think Brian that was a beautiful point
to raise at the very end it's about
continuing something or coming back to
something I'd like to thank again our
organizers leave Muhammad Lucas Malad
you've started something you can have to
finish something there will be a part
two and a part three but I think you
started something today that might have
exceeded its function as originally
framed but hopefully useful to you and
every PhD student at the a thank you
very much
[Applause]
