so thank you and ago that was like
really probably the broadest
introduction I've ever had so I want to
shape this more as a kind of open
conversation step in or tip in anytime
that you want to you I'm actually in the
process right now of trying to bring all
of the different threads of the work
that I'm doing together somehow my
practice so far has been quite
experimental okay has been quite
experimental and quite intuitive there
are probably two forms or methodologies
that somehow anchor my work so I'm just
going to introduce seventy one now and
one a little bit later one is the title
of this lecture which is the I am which
is drum poetry it's a form when I did I
did my masters in African art history
and I was studying Ghanaian or African
art and all of the terms and
terminologies that were using to
describe and talk about the art that we
are looking at were hermeneutics
phenomenology semiotics all these
Western theories and so I began to ask
myself what were the terms on which
these artworks were created what context
were they created in obviously there
wasn't so much in writing because
everything that was documented was very
much a post-colonial and so it looks it
started looking into oral histories and
literature's and came across this one
musical language which one said I am the
drum poetry in which all these
philosophies and histories were
encapsulated in this language that was
told on the drum and I'm going to show
you you rather than described because
it's quite hard to understand we my
language is a tonal language and so
there's two drums as you'll see and one
male and one female and the drums mimic
the the tones of language
and there's some things that I've said
on the drum that I'm not said in
language the form of it is was very
inspiring to me because it was it wasn't
the way that history is told in the West
which is all I know there's not just one
way of history telling but the dominant
form of history telling which was linear
which was very much about facts and
dates
this form of historic history telling
was elliptical it was what was not said
was it as important as what was sad it
was sick it was a cyclical in its form
so it didn't just fold it full of a
straight line it was flexible in terms
of you could you could put poems he
could move poems around to retell and
tell em tell again stories every time
that you played also what was
interesting was that there was
transferred subjectivity the I of the
perm could be your embodied I but it
could also be an eye of some of these
centuries ago so that kind of
transference of subjectivity as well
which I found interesting that I could
be a man it could be a woman there was a
kind of flexibility of meaning and of
space that I found really interesting so
I'm gonna play you the film before I
move on it's a very short film and
actually it's a very very first film I
ever made so it looks a little bit dated
now but it's the one still that grapples
I think most directly with that I am
what I try to do is I come from a
kingdom and gonna call that in my BA kua
where we have divided drummers divine
drummers and I film these young drummers
talking on the drum and then I guess try
to kind of make comparison or parallel
between historical forms of Education
which usually took place in the palace
and then contemporary wonders which took
place in schools in universities so
you'll see that happening and at the
time I took made this film which was
2006 I think there was a clip so the
solar eclipse and I really like this
idea of this metaphor of the passing
over of
and present and it's it's my first film
so that's very young but you'll see it's
only very short it's like four minutes
[Music]
[Music]
that's what you're popping in your wine
wonderful that's what you're fine
open your wine your boyfriend what to us
move
as to any free ts2 only freedom of my
body
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I think that's it
so um with the firm it's probably the
film that I've missed closely or the
work that I've missed closely try to
mimic the form of the I am which is that
it's cyclical there's movement the
stillness and there's movement and so I
literally tried through the form of a
film to translate what the drummer is
doing on the drum into a film language
so I'll now go into how
that kind of fed into the rest practices
there anyone have any questions about
the drum language before I move on or
maybe you want to ask at the end thank
you so I worked it when I was still
living in London I live in Ankara now I
worked for a while at the British Museum
and there were these you know the Adam
time they're talking drum behind the
glass cases and then I'd get home and
I'd see the attempt a mother talking
drum in the courtyards of you know in
this case the palace this drum for
example is is a few it's at least a
hundred and forty years old and you'll
see not in the front but at the back of
it you'll see like holes in it you'll
see dust and it's kept in a special
place but it's not temperature
controlled it's not you know removed
from people it's brought out at
festivals at least once or twice a year
and one thing I found really interesting
the same with this this is a war smoke
or a better curry in a museum and then
this is one on one of my cousin's
actually which is also quite an old one
that comes out and one of the things
that I found really interesting about
this different performance a historic
sizing was you know it's always so
privileged that archives the idea of the
archive the idea of preserving things in
museums in archives of keeping them away
from people of keeping them at certain
temperatures what value did this other
form of historic citation have and I'm
still asking myself that because to a
certain extent I also have a
preoccupation with the archive with this
encyclopedia that I'm trying to do but
at the same time I'm trying to bring in
this open endedness
this kind of flexibility of preservation
this in a way other way of thinking
about history in which you let the thing
like let time into the equation rather
than freezing it
this is we have in English we have
strange words for these get-togethers we
call them servers which is a colonial
term that came from India we call them
festivals which doesn't really describe
them very well either
the three word for it is a fattier which
means the meeting of the year which is
probably the closest translation this is
this happened last year at the end of
last year and the two men that you see
at the top the shanty honey and the
kings of very ancient kingdoms and the
one had chopped off the head of the
other in the 17th century so he hadn't
crossed the river to come and see him
and the first time they'd been coming
together and the cloth that you see on
the ICMP honey is I think 300 years old
again
it's it's this kind of completely
different way of dealing with objects
and these these occasions that you see
is when all of these objects all of
these designs all of these materials
come out they're they're these kind of
totally works of art where Org example
contractor as boys would say where you
have poetry you have music you have
design you have art and so when I
experienced this and looked at it I
thought again how can we translate in a
way this historical way of being into
something that's contemporary and that
also takes into mind the museum other
ways of historicizing other ways of
expressing culture with a few friends in
2011 started a child offensive like
Contemporary Art Festival it's called
the Charlie water festival it's now
become hugely popular
I think tens if not hundreds of
thousands of people come to it every
year but it was really started with a
bunch of people sitting in a room
thinking about the same thing
our museum space is right for our
context our gallery space is right
time we didn't have any kind of funding
we didn't have any kind of support a lot
of artists were just literally making
stuff in the streets so we thought how
do we bring this together in the same
way that museums and galleries spaces
bring artists and artworks together but
do it in a way that is no I hate that
word authentic but it's contextual to us
and so this is the Charlie water
festival you have kind of and what I
like about it is that it kind of
collapses times as well you have the
past you have the kind of historical
parades and rituals and think that that
happening at the same time as you have
contemporary artworks so the three at
the bottom of three contemporary artists
stage Bernard and Elizabeth and then the
ones at the top parades that have been
happening for centuries and centuries
and you have these two happening at the
same time in this festival I started to
think at some points as well how because
what I have a love/hate relationship
with museums in one way you know they're
these calcifying graveyards of where
objects go to die and then on the other
hand they are these contain spaces which
you can enter into and be transformed
and they can be quite transcendent in a
way and so I thought how can I bring
what's of value from the museum or the
gallery if space into my context and
still make it something that is
applicable or something that people can
still relate to you relatable and so I
don't know if anyone's been to West
Africa you'll see you know that these
kiosks come every single corner
they are bars they are seamstresses they
are mechanics they are hotels they're
everything that you can think of is in a
kiosk and so when I was thinking about
what form would I use I thought well the
kiosk is the most obvious one because
it's the one that's least intimidating
it's one that's most ubiquitous
and it's the one that's in a way most
open to people and so I created the kind
of Museum in a kiosk first of all in the
article architect called DK or CEO sorry
he's a brilliant cunning architect and
then I did a kind of research exhibition
at this space that I had at the time and
worked with four artists really thinking
about the structure of the kiosk there
the structure of the kiosks
you know like Yale for example almost
like in a biological scientific study
went and really looked at all the
different forms of kiosks that they are
under the study like Yvonne who I'm
working with still now and she was like
19 at the time did went around the whole
country looking at different types of
Chios and kind of creating a typology of
them and then DK who created this was
just looking at how can he contemporize
the form of the kiosk and then in to
that you see Mia we brought the kiosk to
the Charlie water festival and I've gone
around the community looking at
collecting objects documents photographs
from within that community because I
also wanted to ask people you know what
is of cultural value to you rather than
imposing this idea of this is a museum
I'm gonna create something and you have
to come and see it and hold it of value
because I've decided you have what is it
that you hold a value and in what way
should I best represent it and so that's
what I did with this and it was kind of
it was quite overwhelming actually it's
it's it did even far better than I
thought in terms of people coming in at
some point some ends and actually I made
a film of this of this whole thing but
cements who's a artist but he's also a
priest of the water in in our crowd and
he came to the kiosk at some point he's
like I'm gonna come to your shrine in a
second to do a ritual and there's
like this this isn't a shiny he's like
it is I'm coming I'm coming back in a
second
and so like even people are coming in to
see the Alex and before any it he comes
and he's wrapped in a white sheet and
he's got you know parade of people
behind him and they're all carrying this
baskets on their head and he kind of
gets throws everybody out of the kiosk
and he puts the thing down he closes the
door and so for about 15 or 20 minutes
and he does this ritual where he kind of
like puts their water on somebody three
times
he makes me kind of put my hands in the
water and kind of bathe him like to
cleanse him cuz suddenly I've become the
priestess of the shrine he tells me and
said the museum the kiosk saw me takes
on a completely different form and yeah
I kind of I really like this about the
mobile museum that it's unpredictable
it shapes itself according to the
context that were in we did it again in
the next year where we collaborated with
photographer Orpheum agave who travel
around the country documenting different
festivals and then this is the beginning
of us doing deciding that we were going
to take the mobile museum all around the
country and so we did a recce I traveled
all 10 regions of the country asking
people and again to the film about this
what is our T what is culture to you and
we asked everyone from fishermen to
weavers to priests to monks - Madame's
to children to QA ters and lecturers to
every kind of person we asked what is
what is culture to you
and how would you like it to see it
representative is it applicable to your
life in any way this is some of the
methodologies that we used in trying to
collect information you can't sweep see
it now it's don't really want to go into
it
and this is a new structure that young
architect Latifah she's meanwhile I
think she's about 2425 now he created
this new Museum for us because we wanted
a structure that you can take apart and
put on a back of a truck
and so you can with this and what I love
about this as well is that the chief I
think is diabetic and she gets very sick
periodically and so she kind of wove the
biography of her sickness into the
structure itself so those white squares
or rectangles that you see up here is
when she had to rest or when she was
exhausted and I really might for that as
well that she kind of took the kind of
objective idea of architecture and turn
it into something very personal and
subjective as well and so this is what
the mobile museum looks like now when I
get back to her crown next week we're
just about to set off with it these are
the kind of objects that we're
exhibiting in it we also work the whole
idea is that we I didn't want to create
a space that was separate from people we
wanted to like there are new spaces
opening up in in our our independent our
spaces but they're in a way very much
replicating the forms that we have in
the west of these white cube spaces
where you know very few people go they
all drink wine or openings you know Pat
each other in the bath it's like you
know the arts community you go home you
know and then it all happens again the
next month so we really thinking about
what kind of space can we create that
actually does have some kind of impact
or exchange with people in communities
and so we've started now doing research
into you know like some of the issues
that contemporary artists that we're
working with other museums throw up how
we have this
forums we ask people we do NGO fairs we
we black it's actually become quite
scientific we measure what the impact is
because we're really in a way trying to
create a new form that hasn't really
existed before and therefore we almost
need to be quite scientific in it
because in if we succeeded in what we're
doing it could provide a model for other
people so we're actually documenting
quite intensely what we're doing which
brings me to the cuts encyclopedia so
the console encyclopedia actually came
out of an idea where I was working with
David Adjaye
on an exhibition in Brussels and also I
wrote an essay he did it the thing where
he travelled David as the main architect
he's done very well for himself
and he traveled around across all 54
countries of Africa and he asked me to
write an essay for the book that he did
which I did and then he asked me to come
on board for an exhibition that he was
doing in Brussels and kind of provided
away the narrative of the exhibition in
some way I want the research and while I
was doing that I I kind of thought why
not do this for the whole continent
creates a kind of compendium of because
after this actually after I did the
exhibition of David I went on a tour
with a group called invisible borders
from and this came out of actually and
we went by Road from Nigeria to Ethiopia
and we went by donkey by car by
motorbike and everywhere when I would
ask people about you know the arts and
the culture and even though it's
somewhere like I just have about
Ethiopia is very very rich in culture it
has you know the Coptic squirrels it has
a huge long long history of photography
obviously the architecture there was no
way you could really find information on
this and so
out of these two encounters and also
doing research I came up with this idea
of doing a pan-african encyclopedia and
I had an idea that it would be something
like this 54 volumes one for every
country there was a lot of we had a lot
of discussions I kind of got together
actually I have that in another slide a
lot of people to discuss things you know
where we're gonna get the funding from
what languages are we going to use is
the it's a paradigm of country one that
is actually suitable when there is a
colonial construct we're still thinking
through a lot of these things last year
I talked to and interviewed these two
artists that I've known for a very very
long time who are also musicians and
what I would have termed before
traditional priests when I when I talked
to them and they haven't been that
forthcoming with me over the years in
terms of knowledge it's only really now
after knowing them for maybe like I
don't know almost 10 years that they're
starting to open up to this knowledge
when I went to talk to them they said
actually we're not traditional priests
were knowledge keepers because we didn't
have religious systems historically we
had knowledge systems and so they
started to break down this very complex
knowledge system for me and told me that
as I started doing research realize it
was a pan-african knowledge system that
was you know in the West in the West
Africa as well as East and other parts
of Africa it was made up of the arts of
education of psychology of mythology of
cosmology those were the kind of six and
spirituality at the top those are the
six main components and each component
had like six hermetic schools of
knowledge and those schools would be
like the school of nature as a school of
the school of the soul and the creator
it was a really really really complex
system and I was quite mind blow
when I came across a system because I
was like in a way this is what I've been
looking for all of these years is a way
of an ontology a way of thinking a way
of mediating a way of seeing that has
grown of us and in a way that that
provides a way of understanding and
mediating the world like I said it's a
very very complex they said to me that
you know now that I've started studying
it's going to take me seven years to at
least begin to be able to explain it
properly so I've still got quite a while
to go but what I've started doing is we
had the Encyclopedia already the culture
encyclopedia online already but I start
I started to shift the categorization
because before already I was having some
problem with how do I categorize this
knowledge like I said you know do we do
it by country but that's the colonial
construct do we do it by you know how do
we start to categorize cultural
knowledge on the continent and so what
I've done now is I've taken the
historical knowledge system and defect
deep secularized it like desync realized
it so there's the knowledge system in
its essence is very very esoteric in a
way like many noise systems are and so
what I've done now is I've taken the
esoteric out to a certain extent and use
the categories to start to format the
culture encyclopedia yeah I think this
is kind of coming to the end this was um
yeah I think I kind of geared this this
talk more towards like the museum work
that I've been doing so this is just we
have this exhibition future Museum so
that's the director of the British
Museum he came this is just also showing
you know the work that we're doing in
terms of deconstructing the idea of the
museum this is an expression that I
created
this year in venice with david adjey as
architect and aqua and weathers
strategic advisor and in a way I think
this was kind of a template for thinking
about new structures because David took
some of the historical forms of
architecture that we have especially
still in the northern region and we've
started to think about what might have
featured museum and gonna look like and
this is a thing I'm project I'm working
on right now which is a castle from the
7th century that's being turned into a
museum
yeah I think I mean I focus I kind of
focused or tainted this talk more
towards the museum because I thought
this is an architectural school so maybe
you'll be interested more in the
structural elements of things but like
any was saying my practice is quite
multi-layered
I do the films as well and the fiction
and the art historical writing and the
reason I started with the iron was for
me it's such a great model of thinking
about how to process and also how to
create a new way of thinking because
that I answered my uncle my great uncle
no yeah my great grandfather and also my
uncle were both was a monk remember
which is divine drummers and so they
were the keepers of the history of our
kingdom and the interesting thing about
the divine drama is that he I would say
he was he but women aren't allowed to be
divine drummers you know they are these
keepers of this quite the keepers of
history they're the ones that transmit
the history they do in this very poetic
way they they are creators of these
poems but they're also the creators of
their context and so in a way I see
myself in that lineage of the kind of
divided drama even though I'm not
supposed to be because I'm a woman
but I remember who when my uncle has
passed away now but I remember when he
was still alive I asked him please let
me touch these drums you know he's like
no you're one you can't touch so-and-so
you know after a while as well like
after and the reason I actually I should
explain why this is it sounds like work
incredibly sexist society which we are
to some extent but not completely but
the reason this was is because the drums
got her word was that
so in our cosmology we in our kind of
historical cosmology we believe that
every single object element is imbued
with beingness so everything has a
spirit of some kind of river of stone
the earth a tree and so when you fell
the tree you know you pour libations and
use you know you need to talk to the
spirit of the tree and you say you know
I'm going to you ask it you know you ask
it permission I'm going to fail you do I
have permission et cetera and it's like
that ax falls out of your hand and comes
back and knocks you on the head that
means you don't have the permission I
guess but and then every time you start
drumming as well you you you you speak
first of all to the spirit of all the
elements that the drum is made up of one
of the other things that you do is that
you synchronize the drum we use a lot of
like so a lot of the ceremonies that
I've been to now that I'm trying to kind
of learn about the knowledge system I'm
vegetarian and the first time when I
went to then it's you like top the neck
of a chicken into you and it was like
flailing around you know blood squirting
out of its hair its body and I thank God
I don't know if I can me know do this
whole apprenticeship but it's gonna be
like you know animal barbarism and they
said okay we can do it with flowers
understand if you really want to so but
what we do with how we synchronize
objects normally is with blood so the
blood of an animal
and I don't know this is quite an
interesting area actually because I you
know ganas are highly Christian country
and when you go to churches in Ghana
they're always talking about the Bloods
you know I put this in the blood of
Jesus the blood of and I think that's
quite an interesting connection between
the two how blood is seen is as
purifying element but anyway so the
blood of the the blood is kind of put
onto the drum to synchronize it and and
and make it into something of this world
and also of the other and the reason
that women can't touch objects or go
like I remember fitting ones outside the
palace on it there was a stone and I was
about to sit next there and someone kind
of ran across the square saying don't
tell him that soon you'll be barren
forever there's all these and they take
it very very very very seriously and so
I kind of jumped up and said ok but the
reason I wasn't allowed to touch the
drum was because women bleed and our
blood is seeing as being more powerful
than the blood of the animal that's
being that's been used to circularized
done so when I touch the drum what I'm
doing in a way so it's not actually that
I'm seen as inferior and that's not why
I'm talking it allowed to touch the drum
itself I'm actually too powerful to
touch the drum so my power as a woman
who believes him once a month in a way
overrides with the blood of the drum
that he's been to being used to sacred
eyes it which is why I'm not allowed to
touch it there was once I was allowed to
play them but my my um uncle had to have
a sheep slaughtered because I was so
adamant that I wanted to play anyway we
can do it but we have to slaughter a
sheep and I said ok but yeah so that's
that's kind of why I'm not physically
allowed to be a divine drama in the kind
of whole kind of hierarchy of telling
stories
so yeah just to kind of conclude it I
think I think my practice in that as a
whole is really comes down to
storytelling and I think that if you
read that get the book and read it as
well there's a lot of questions about
and I have that a lot when I was living
here you know who gets to tell stories
who gets to be the the conveyor stories
who has a power to decide which stories
are allowed to tap allowed to be told
and I've asked myself this and my own
context in the Ghanaian context where I
as a woman I'm in a way not allowed to
be a storyteller historically in that in
this particular format and then also in
the Western context where the stories
that the stories of our stories and I'm
not quite sure who I mean by ours but
we're in a way seen as loud as not as
valid as a kind of dominant story or
narrative that was told so in a way I
think I'm trying to deconstruct this
idea of the dominance of narrative and
of the heads of hegemony of storytelling
by fragmenting it through different ways
of storytelling but also through
experimenting with finding something
that's new and that I'm not quite sure
what it is yet but I kind of kind of
like experimenting and grounding it in
some way in the Ghanaian historical
ontology and trying to create something
new out of that that's kind of a hybrid
of of what I found in the West as well
and it's quite an interesting journey
I'm quite interested in myself to see
what will come what will come out of it
and still very much a work in progress
so that's it I think
[Laughter]
do you have any questions or comments oh
yeah I have a question about the mobile
museums when so the way that I guess it
works is that they essentially
decentralizing the museum in sense that
they are moving from one place to
another and you're bringing the museum I
guess to specific communities rather
than the museum which I think
historically has been like and I guess
historically in accordance to the
Western model kind of a centralized
space usually in a city for a specific
group of people that can access it and I
guess I wanted to ask how if that's
something that you're doing consciously
like trying to sort of spread the
knowledge out spatially as well and not
just be in one contained space but to be
kind of everywhere at the same time or
yeah so thinking about that and like how
successful you found moving the museum
from space to space or do you feel like
it's a matter of having multiple smaller
kind of instances like this or or if
it's something that you want to continue
is like a short term and then it gets
taken down and taken somewhere else what
I mean I think physically it would be
impossible for me to do this in
perpetuity myself just because I have
finite energy in an ideal world it would
be great I think if if in some way it
could continue but we actually do have
regional museums
gaana it's just that they're not used
nobody goes to them they have no
connection to the people around them or
the communities they literally just try
to replicate the museum's that they've
seen in the West and people are not
interested I mean I really love this
process of going around and going into
communities because you learn so much
and I think if that's something that I
definitely want to keep this idea of
open knowledge and and you know I don't
really like the idea of for example that
curator as somebody that comes at with
an idea before the thing you know and
and knows all the thing then knows what
something is before they've even
explored it what I really like about the
mobile museum is that really it's quite
a humble space and because of that it's
quite an open space it can go into
communities and ask people of them
rather than impose on them and so I
don't know how we could keep that kind
of spirit of openness in a fixed space
I'm not really sure yeah I guess I don't
know this is a good question but a
follow-up because you were talking about
how there are like regional museums and
garner people doing goods them I think
it's the same pretty much in Nigeria and
maybe a cross
I don't know Africans I don't want to
like generalize but I was just wondering
like if they're what you think about
that like if what possible I guess I
don't know if the word is solutions but
like what are the steps do we take to
either engage with these museums that
exist but are not being engaged with or
do we disengage with them and completely
start creating new spaces - I guess
access this culture or knowledge or
things things of that nature because I
feel like I really like this project I
think it's like very successful but I'm
wondering again like because it's almost
like we evaluating the museum culture
for specifically for the context in
Ghana and maybe this could also work a
lot my staff Raqqah yeah but I'm
wondering if then do we come to be
completely I guess disregard the
museum's that are already exists right
now cuz they're not working I don't
think I mean that there would be a shame
in a way to disregard them completely um
I just think thing needs rethinking and
I think it's a real shame like I'm in
Ghana I'm on the Ghana Museum and
monuments board and it's such an archaic
it's like it's a horrible let me feed
the climatic yeah sorry I can't tell the
answer from that it's it's it's our God
okay that would be nothing it's a Conor
Museum and one events what is valuable
in his own way but it
it's it's it's it's so stuck in a way of
you know like oh the museum is what it
is in the West we're just gonna keep it
like this we're not going to think
outside of the box we're gonna keep this
one display that's been in our museum
since 1957 we're not gonna modernize it
it's just it's so static and I don't
really know I mean trust me I've tried
to kind of you know and I'm actually in
a position because I run the board I sit
there with them you know for hours and
hours and hours and there's almost
nothing that you can say or do so for me
that the kind of the only way to do it
is for example when I did the valance
and they saw you know that it had
resonance and success it was having like
oh maybe we should bring the fitness
show to the museum where as I've been
talking about doing things and nobody
kind of was always in that structure I
think it's also about showing them
what's possible and I think that's
partly what this mobile museum is about
is showing them if we do this you know
the loads of people common they're
interested and they want to see and they
want to engage and there's programs and
you know this is what can happen so I
think it's it's it's more a case of
doing and then hoping that people grow
towards you because I think if you go
into those structures and try and
modernize them you'll die trying
because they are so immutable but maybe
that's true of all institutions since
that makes them are you familiar with
the white cube the white cube oh you
should definitely read it it's amazing
it's like basically this - yeah the
right white pube so basically they're
just two girls that like critique how
our institutions are run and like do
alternative
art critics and they review like video
games and YouTube channels and stuff
like that you know but they they publish
out house I was tryna I was hoping you
knew it of it so I can get your thoughts
and few articles they've written
recently which was basically talking
about their kind of frustration so this
is the whole kind of art system in in
the UK and how it's like basically
constant tokenism of having people of
color being brought in for like small
events and like never but but in a way
what they point out and what you know
actually genuinely these are
institutions find them fretts me even
though they're like you know they write
and chat speak pretty much is that it's
really they really really reveal the
flaws in the system and why there needs
to be you know systemic change one
question I was wondering is that do you
view this as inventing a museum kind of
or artists you know like had to say like
yeah museums for Ghana specifically are
you kind of proposing an alternative
system or way of displaying art in
general that could be open to anyone
yeah I think in general for sure I mean
I'm starting with Ghana because that's
my context is what I know but I think
you know like all museums at the moment
are going through crises you know they
they can't any longer
oh you Tommy - speaks stand next here
they can't any longer you know kind of
use they can't any longer operate on the
Imperial models that they were built on
and so I think all museums and I like
when you say about the tokenism like I
keep getting invited to these workshops
on museums and talks on museums and this
on museums because everybody is in
crisis nobody knows what what the next
step is and I think that's actually a
really quite an exciting place to be in
in a place where you don't know what
comes next
and especially in a space where things
have been done so horribly wrong to
actually be like I don't know what
happens next and so I think this project
in particular is it's interesting
because it's an experimentation it's so
real it's it's in a way it's a kind of
listening exercise yeah and and also one
thing that they could see how how to say
conceptually I view this they could be
connected to like on a more urban scale
let's say because one thing I always
thought was really ironic and such a
massive shame about tourism in general
is that like these are spaces that are
kind of revered as culturally important
like significance the people that exist
within this space however when you live
in London no one really cares about
going anywhere close to big band
nobody cares about going to Tower of
London nobody cares about going to
spaces because they're completely
colonized by the visitors they've been
kind of in a way frozen and put into
like a victory in the same way that the
drum has been that you know the way that
in which we engage is not to how to say
engage with a part of our culture but to
visit the grave or the remnants of
culture as it was frozen in that period
of time and then when you kind of scale
up those two dynamics of that's you know
culture within vitrine where people in
urban life did not participate in
culturally or socially socially at all
but then when you look at these kind of
living history hubs when you kind of
connect that to where is culture being
practiced or lived in a way nothing is
the rest of it which is very inhabiting
that culture and in fact that operates
more as a document of a culture and an
embodiment of a culture more so than
this apparent like flagged culture in a
way yeah
so yeah that's just an observation I
guess I don't know yeah yeah I agree
I think yeah
um hi that was amazing
I guess this is more of a comment than a
question but I love like how he said
about how objects artifacts and features
of artifacts are put in museums and they
go there to die
yeah I'm really interested about how
[Music]
people yeah and how an object can be
taken from the past and then be brought
into the present and I thought was
really interesting how you I don't know
what it's caught but the attire that
your uncle was wearing and how maybe
artifact should be worn and lived and
not like housed in a museum and you're
talking about like the future of museums
and maybe it's not like objects being
like in a graveyard that is the museum
but actually being left and maybe that
becomes the museum like taking mobility
of of the museum to the next level and
having these events actually being the
museum lived like and maybe the museum
is just a place where you see like
recordings and pictures of the artifacts
that themselves being used I think
that's incredible and amazing and like I
think it's really interesting because
you know I was at as doing this talk
this weekend in Oxford and this guy you
know that that really irritating thing
that some people say in that in the
whole medium discourse when they say oh
you know but if we give the objects back
to you you know will you be able to look
after them and I'm just like you know I
really have to control myself when
somebody says something like this like
you know I just said to him you know I I
controlled myself and I said you know I
just I find it very very
[Music]
ironic when people say you know if
somebody basically has come into my
house stolen my money you know stolen my
goods and then says to me I don't know
if I want to give them I can give him
back to you because he won't know how to
look after your own objects or your own
things that were yours before I took
them how can that even be an argument I
just I don't even understand how that is
even an argument and yet people the
director of the VNA you know so-called
experts across the Western world use
this as a reason for not giving objects
bag one of the things that I think is
interesting is why is it so important to
keep objects in glass cases in
particular temperatures where they just
stay there static forever and ever
why is that so important who says it is
you know who who's not to say these
objects you know that were in you know
that that are in the storehouse in this
way which has so much history with it
and you know you go to some one of the
elders and they'll tell you you know
where this hole came from in the object
and you know if it falls apart it falls
apart you know you create something new
who's not to say that this kind of
ephemerality of being is is as valid as
the kind of glass case temperature
controlled way of dealing with things
and I think yeah I think this is part of
this new moment in a way where you know
some person who kind of has the gall to
say something like this I mean I
literally want to be in every single
room where that comment is made because
I you know it's almost like these and I
have like
picture of the old white man who sent
makes this kind of comment it's like
this old this generic bold white man
obviously not any old man is like this
but the one that I'm thinking of you
have a beard I've sat in his in his
chair for so long and he's so used to
hearing and funny I was speaking with
with at the thing in Oxford I was
speaking with a gentleman yeah I'll tell
you about this after you see it was
really interesting it's people came up
to me after the talk and apologized
yeah it was almost like a performance of
something but it's kind of like this man
I sat in this chair for so long he's so
used to hearing his own voice and of
having his voice be the right voice and
the oniy voice in the room and that's
why it's so important for me like that's
why do ended up going a lot of the time
to these workshops at the British Museum
because I want to be there at that table
and when that man says that kind of
comment of you know we can't give you
objects back I want to be the ones who
look him in the face and say well
actually you know you stole those
objects from us and and you know you
can't patronize us by saying we can't
give them back to you can you actually
hear what you'll say so yeah I
completely agree with you that there are
other ways of telling history of of you
know dealing with objects of exchanging
with them and some that are more organic
and I don't think they're necessarily
less valid than the way that's being
kind of held up by by by the dominant
voices of the West
I had a question which is I guess about
heritage so I guess a lot of these
objects or artifacts would be like
classified under things to do with
cultural heritage right and in your
presentation you talked about not using
or being cautious of the idea of nation
or country because it is a colonial
construct and I guess obviously in
Africa there was you know pre-colonial
like kingdoms and regions that were you
know that have now been separated and so
because of that there is a lot of I
guess heritage of these kingdoms and
that don't exist anymore in that context
so I know that I guess one of the
questions with in this the large debate
of on repatriation and restitution is on
you know if these countries or regions
kingdoms there longer exist who do we
give the works back to because they
don't exist and things like that but I
mean my question is not so much about
repatriation but more about I guess
knowledge sharing so you talked about
how you went from Senegal to Ethiopia on
the road like fire firewood and I guess
I'm kind of thinking about is also
knowledge sharing kind of like
throughout the continent so how do you
we interact with these kind of histories
or regional histories inflect between
nations in a way like how do you talk
about kingdoms and no longer exists like
and things like that how do you share
that kind of culture does that I don't
know if I'm making any sense and I don't
know I was just thinking like with your
mobile Museum and things like that I
thought it was interesting not just to
think about one specific country but
also to think continents Lee is how
could work sort of across the continent
because I think that's something that is
very much lacking at least from my
experience to understand the larger
context of the continent from within not
from like coming here and going to
university and like going to the has got
to understand that from like the actual
continent to understand these histories
that we don't really get that don't
really get spoken about I don't know if
it's not something that you also are
looking into with your encyclopedia and
things like that yeah yeah I think
that's yeah very much so I think that
was one of the big starting points of
the encyclopedia was was exactly that
you know I would go like I'd be invited
to something to speak at something in
Senegal and you know um with like my
Senegalese counterparts like you know
felon he's done this amazing report and
all these kind of great francophone
thinkers and we'd be like there's no
there's no real cross conversation
happened between us and Ghana and you
and Senegal even though we're only a few
countries away because of the colonial
divide of the francophone Anglophone
yeah and I think that's a that's a huge
problem and I think I mean in the way
that I'm trying to do I'm trying to do
it through the concept that's why I made
a pan-african cuts encyclopedia rather
than the gun in one because there's a
lot of even though there's a lot of
differences there's also a lot of you
know like common one thing that really
another thing that really irritates me
is when we refer to Africa as
pre-colonial colonial post-colonial when
we sent to the colonial as the most
important chapter of our entire
trajectory when you know we are I think
the oldest Blake play you know like when
we were when I history centuries and
centuries and centuries old and the
colonial chapter was a relatively brief
one and yet it itself as the most
important chapter in our history but do
you think that obviously it's become a
little
okay I don't know if this makes sense
it's a question but I guess the reason
why it gets centered around the colonial
narrative of colonial history is because
of the Western Way of documenting
history and so maybe I'm thinking what
least for me whenever like when I
started trying to find things out about
Nigeria Niger in history and
architectural history the documents that
I found were usually written by I don't
know white people essentially or like
missionaries and things like that like
father
my initial like the first things that I
found and in a way like all the sketches
and things like that were not done by
Nigerians like when they sketched the
village layouts and things like that so
I feel like me that plays a big part in
why you almost because it almost feels
like there's a point where like the
history runs out but that's only because
we're looking at just like the tradition
of writing and there's a lot of oral
history that we don't get to see when
you're looking at from this like western
way of documenting things so I feel like
but that's also something that I guess
will come with the cultural section we
need to understand that histories are
not only like kept in one way yeah
there's other ways to interact with your
with with yeah with history and lineage
because I think that's probably a big
part of why it almost feels like it
starts from the color in your narrative
because in terms of like if you're
looking for things you usually at least
initially and things to be looking for
books and things like that and it's very
hard to find
yeah book thrown all kind of sends it
around before after yeah yeah I
completely agree and and and you know
like even with this knowledge system and
even actually when I was talking to my
uncle and I was trying to document the
drum Holmes what's really interesting
about at least about my context is that
there's so many layers
of knowledge and you're not allowed into
the knowledge unless you've really shown
a commitment and a seriousness so you
know even with my own Bloods my own
family
it wasn't until I'd shown that quite a
few years of dedication that he started
opening up certain layers never done
even so he died without opening
everything up to me because I wasn't
ready
and so I think to keep in mind as well
that we have this idea of and I think
there's even a book by a woman called
the parent barber called something like
something about secrecy and knowledge
and power this idea like sometimes we
obfuscate knowledge you know a lot of
the time when you read these
anthropological books you know people
are saying oh they weren't
straightforward or there wasn't anything
there sometimes we don't want to share
that knowledge because you know there's
I think very much the feeling that
knowledge is power and if you're not
ready for that power you shouldn't have
that knowledge and so in a way there's a
kind of there's there's a completely
different value mediation going on at
least in the research that I've done
where you're not just it's not just like
you go into the library and you pick up
a book and then you find it it's like
you have to be really serious about it
and quite dedicate to that and be
willing to put the time and the energy
over the long period before different
layers of knowledge become accessible to
you and that's what I really like about
the drum poetry as well it's it's it's a
really good metaphor for that because
when you just hear the drum beating you
think arts just music you don't know
it's speaking a language and then you
learn
and you might know the kind of you know
the few of the poems and that but then
there's there's all these layers of
entry but then there's this whole kind
of other layer of meaning you don't get
until you become a divine drummer and
then you can really become a master
drummer because your drumming the
meaning the deeper meaning of the poems
to people and so I think again if
there's a difference in how we mediate
and has you know I can't think of a
better word than his size but like how
we meet yeah how we mediate knowledge
you know we've so used to this Western
way of going into library picking up a
book and there it is for us but it's not
the only way and I think this yeah I
think kind of cultivating an openness to
other ways of discovering because like
once I started going into this there's a
whole corpus of knowledge it's not that
we've lost knowledge it's that it's kind
of morphed in for other things and
there's I mean like I I'm gonna spend a
lifetime learning about this so it's not
that it's not there it's just that it's
differently accessible and I think you
know if we if you know you want or
somebody wants to look into it it's
about having perseverance and patience
and dedication and in a way kind of
circumventing knowing that you know the
Western Way of they're all the kind of
colonial documents and stuff are there
and they're valuable in their own way
but there's also something else
alongside er
yeah
hi I was thinking about the way that you
phrased the fact that objects coming to
museums to die and I look at it also
from the point of view that objects come
into the museum as they are dying and
that the museum collects somehow samples
of objects in order to pass on the
heritage and the cultural knowledge so
it's wondering about your take on this
as a constant
what do you mean that dying so from my
cultural experience from where I'm from
most of the objects I'm Romanian okay
most of the objects that are in
ethnographic museums let's say are taken
from places where the history of the
objects start to die
so people don't use them anymore okay
and they're placed in the museum as a
token to the Past but they also usually
raise interest again in the objects
themselves so it's a bit like a
recitation of the item which I find
interesting
that's really interesting that's really
interesting
I've actually haven't thought about it
like that I mean I've been into a lot of
stories which you know when I when I
said that objects are dead I've been
into storerooms like that the humboldt
museum in germany where you go in and
you actually like you get this kind of
weird feeling because they're all these
sacred objects you feel kind of this
energy emanating of them and you kind of
realize you know like I've been in
workshops with indeed so called
indigenous experts as well where you
know they which yeah where they say you
know you know these objects have a
spirit or you know they you know
especially with as everything at the pit
rivers a couple of months ago where
there was a Native American man who said
you know this object doesn't want to be
here it's it's my ancestor
and so to a certain extent
like I think objects go today but to
certainly sound also I don't know you
know like what what the nature of these
objects I you know if somebody says that
they're viewed with something in that
best that actually you know somebody was
saying that this is obviously not an
object it's it's a being it's imbued and
you're basically keeping this being and
Akkad's and that object is not dead it's
being it's been captured it was in some
way I think it's a really interesting
point the idea of and that's the point
that all the kind of restitution
apologists make as well that if he
didn't I was at I was at you know with
somebody and ended up having a kind of
quite an argument with that person where
he was saying oh you know but if we
hadn't preserved those objects for you
then you know nobody would have access
to them now nobody would see them you
know we did you a favor by taking them
you know but in our case it's at home so
right in our cases it's at home so it's
like everybody okay so that's that's a
different dynamic and you know it's a
tricky one I think because obviously
there's there's value and merit to some
extent of people being able to see
things that might have not be they might
not be able to see in their daily lives
because they've either become extent up
there from a culture many many places
away there's some value to that I think
it's just how you do it you know I think
if you do with honesty if you do it with
transparency if you do it you know like
right now the problem with museums in
the West that they're so patronizing and
they're so dishonest you know a lot of
the time they don't honestly say how
they've got those objects you know by
looting and murder etc like have
honestly you have transparency and then
you can start actually speaking about
how can we create structures that are
valuable to all of us because like you
say there is Beck
value and in in in museum spaces I guess
also there was a really interesting
thing when you were describing kind of
the cultural practices surrounding the
drum and like blood and etc because I
could feel there was a lot of parallels
with like how to say which one I kind of
like beliefs that we have
I'm from Brunei by the way beliefs that
we have there and I'm in a way like not
of a completely a product of colonialism
Chinese [ __ ] labor brought over blah
blah blah so when it comes to like when
you said focusing on colonialism it's
the kind of starting products that he's
like that's the focal point of history
like for my point of view I don't know
that is the genesis of where I began in
a way so I focus on it quite a lot but
but anyhow like ignoring that when
you're speaking with that stone and like
sitting in the stone I could feel there
with all parallels with kind of cultural
practices we have in Brunei where if you
want to like I don't know like and you
want to pee like by a bush or something
you're supposed to ask for permission as
well like it's supposed to but the
belief is basically well this is the way
my mom told me and I have no idea
whether this is actually but she says
that you need a sperm nation if the in
cases like spirits there so you don't
piss on their feet by accident that's
how she told me but then also we have
beliefs of like if you're in the in the
forest and you're walking in the forest
you're not allowed to if you want to
talk to talk to your friend or like like
yell at your friend to call them over or
something you're not supposed to say
their name you're just supposed to say
you and I point to them or like to
really try and get their attention
without using a name in the belief it's
that oh if you're calling their name
there might be a spirit in the forest
that has the same name that might
respond instead of that person so in a
way when it comes to kind of you and to
me like I don't view this as like some
sort of belief or whatever
it is I fully embody this I just treated
as a fact I practice all of this and
when you were saying that this is not
per se belief its knowledge and your de
sac realizing it that is exactly the way
that I've viewed it because actually
upon kind of further investigation these
are these beliefs that I talked about
and also this thing about not sitting
objects because you're a female and you
have periods and therefore your blood is
tainting something we have the same
thing as well when you're not allowed to
sit on certain odd notes but you know
how to sit on tables as a female as well
I or visit sacred spaces when it's the
time of the month or whatever but what I
found out was that these were remnants
of beliefs that were left over from the
more at an Iban tribe in Brunei which
unfortunately today has lost all of
these kind of cultural belief systems
and these are the last remnants that
remain in the culture that just happened
to be the facts of the land but then
everyone brought together on the
colonial conditions just agreed upon and
you know embodied together so this is
not something that's exclusive to even
immoral people this was then transmitted
to all the other kind of people who were
brought together through colonialism and
that became actual knowledge and not
just belief in a way yeah
yeah it's it's interesting because
actually I kind of looked at this in my
novel the girl he grows up here is
subject is kind of like you say you know
when your mother says these things here
if this was in West Contra might
somebody might be like oh that's so
superstitious but when you're told these
things it's reality it's like fact I'm a
spirit and the Russians and you might be
let's see it's told to you as if it's
just truth and I think that's what I've
tried to do in the novel as well as kind
of show this the notion of expanded
reality that you know we believe that
there's not just this visible world that
there's a kind of you know that our
ancestors live in the world alongside us
and those are not born are there to that
they kind of inhabit different planes
that we are were all here and actually
the godchild
it's home the godchild in Ghana is
somebody who has openness to the
different planes who who seems really
precocious as a child because they know
things that they're not meant to know
and yeah I kind of it's quite subtly not
in not in a way that was kind of magical
realism because I think for me that goes
a bit far because it's such a magical
worlds that it seems like it can't be
real but to going to explore that notion
of an expanded reality as a reality but
as if it's just straightforward as if
it's nothing extraordinary yeah I'm
gonna stop it there actually no no thank
you so much but this drinks and snacks
upstairs so we can continue the
conversation up there but I'd really
encourage you prefer see thank you so
much to Nana for coming tonight
