addition of that he's pushing himself
forward and as someone who understands
and identifies the conversation that we
should be having here directions is a
series of lectures sometimes given by an
artist I guess that would be a way of
reducing what what you are and I guess
that that's probably the title and the
label that society likes to give us but
also is going to be given by by us next
week in this very same room at this very
same time we are going to all come
together as student forum to discuss the
future of this school as a participatory
democracy dia has a very specific way of
understanding how we move forward and I
do hope that we are going to participate
in a configuration that will make of
this table a much larger forum I'm not
going to take any time we are all here
to hear them talk to actually hear them
speak I want to thank you all for
setting the direction of this place with
me at the helm of it or at the back of
it and without any further delay I just
want to thank Marco for bringing wolfing
into this room and to actually let us
understand how someone like wolfing who
is an artist who has understood the
power of immediacy of the temporality
act of putting an image next to a
political map next to a political
condition can really start to agitate to
transform and to move things definitely
forward so thank you everyone the word
is with you Marco
[Applause]
okay that will stay there for a while
hello everyone
do you remember the evening of the 22nd
of June 2016 now according to personal
account
Wolfgang Tillman's was crossing the
millenium bridge behind him Tate Modern
on his right yellow red sky after sunset
tears in his eyes he thought to himself
that this could be the final evening
before a new era two days later he
recalled this moment and promises of
openness of year 2000 the year
Millennium Bridge was built the Year
Tate Modern was established in the
former Bankside power station the year
he became the first non-british artist
to be awarded Turner Prize with the
brexit vote Volgin has yet again
witnessed fragility in life but
consciously or not in this account he
seems to offer a glimpse of hope in one
thing there remains more robust than
other fragilities in our society and
that is the building behind him the
bridge below his feet now I would also
argue that a glimpse of Hope is Vogons
work itself and it's sort of hyper
realistic humanity even at the most
abstract and walking if we start with
humanity I mean I feel I feel like we
should start with humanity and I thought
how and then I thought there is this one
kind of most humane question of all
which is also kind of the most inhumane
questionable because it kind of when we
ask the question we almost don't really
have the time or empathy to hear the
answer so just call it choice cube how
are you
I tend to say well that's a very English
I know I'm generally I'm good I'm in the
midst of a very long stretch of this
year of very exciting activity and and
it'd be really wrong to complain because
ins been like really amazing things
happening and I'm sort of on my last
stretch till the mid of November after
which I have a bit of a break so there
is so much going on all the time and
there is this often your work is
described as it's kind of entering into
your head and kind of seeing the world
through your eyes which I've always felt
like it doesn't a sell it need to be
this kind of Being John Malkovich
experience which people think it is you
know I feel it's more like you know you
go to bed at night I mean I relied to
say that you had a nap before we started
and then you saw close your eyes and if
there's this kind of images in front of
your eyes there's so much going on
what are those images aye aye very much
enjoy this off in between states between
being awake and falling asleep and I
feel like I can I'm I feel very grateful
that I can do that in daytime just for
20 minutes and or drift in and out and
it feels like re wiring of the brain
briefly and I mean and at night it's I
don't think much more sleep I think I I
don't run through the day or anything
because I feel I feel you have this very
strong sense you have this very
strongest
sense of the rest of the world kind of
the world around you and I'm wondering
what is it is it a kind of German thing
I mean there is a factor is a famous
there is there is a good German word
like a world pain [ __ ] mouths yeah do
you feel no I mean why should I feel the
pain of the world all the time it's now
veg nuts is is an interesting word
because it's kind of actually often used
for children
no and when they have just some sense of
the pain of being alive you know like
the burden of of carrying the fact that
you live on your shoulders you know
we're always told to love being alive
but my late partner boyfriend John Klein
he always said you know being at the
life is a scandal you know that like
that it's also yeah hard to bear I mean
I'm extremely possible optimistic about
you know being put into this world it's
also an imposition
yeah just like death is yeah and I mean
I started with this first image of your
kind of the tape that evening before
breaks it and the day after breaks it I
mean you kind of acclaimed and one of
your posters this was pre breaks it that
what what is lost is lost forever which
is quite a kind of pessimistic claim
where where is what has happened since
and what is the hope I mean it's just
this sentence came fraud came to my mind
whilst I was in a club in Brooklyn
called spectrum which was an illegal
queer night monthly in some firetrap in
and but it you know New York had become
so sanitized
nightlife has become so either
non-existent or sterile that this was
one little pocket of freedom and it was
a very fragile pocket and a thought you
know if this is gone
then there's not another one right
around the corner to replace it and and
the same so I had this protective sense
of or the sense of appreciation and and
that then also became a lion in a in a
song and and then it ended up on a one
of the brexit posters because the brexit
ears always talked about this as a minor
thing you know we're just exchanging
this organization we don't like the
Brussels machine this has nothing to do
with the people and the peoples of
Europe when in fact of course this
machine is not a faceless machine it is
actually the representation of those
five hundred million eight million
people and once you destroy that there's
not a replacement for it it took 70
years it took an incredible bloodshed to
bring the people of Europe together to
leave that past behind and and well so
where do you see hope in this particular
moment
I mean Briggs it has happened that was
your message before breaks it I mean
what is your message now what would be
the kind of one-sentence message now
I mean as we know it hasn't happened yet
and but you know what I what I I mean
the reason why I was so very much
opposed it and try to do everything I
could was that I knew that with a
characteristic with with a mentality of
the British press this would get ugly
the moment things turned out difficult
difficulty and and that of course then
suddenly it won't be that machine
anymore then there will be names called
and in good football tradition it will
be the Germans it will be the fringe
that are called
it won't be Slovenia or Finland and and
so and it any brought out a nationalism
that was was somehow we are not
definitely not as fierce before and it
was peculiar
a big pick the clearly peculiar
peculiarities in the European family but
there is something that well it's not as
nice and if all these voices are pitted
against each other there is little room
for compromise and and it was a room to
turn back as I mean I even though I said
it it hasn't happened yet
I also can't quite see how without
losing face this can be undone it can
probably only end in an endless
transition phase possibly so if I
rephrase my question is there is there
anything even this app it will sound
controversial but is there anything
positive that has happened to the
society I mean is it is it a kind of
matter of awakening I think it's a just
example Sartre said very controversially
that Paris was never freer than under
the kind of Nazi occupation you know
since that is there that kind of thing
country you know controversially that
you know you need you need to experience
something to kind of exercise something
drastic to exercise your freedom or to
kind of push the boundaries
well I really don't like that narrative
now that also that art is particularly
creative in hard times I really hate it
actually because what would be the logic
then should we have said times that the
art gets better I I think sorry I mean
it was it was a question of whether
there is any if you see any awakening
yes no exactly and and that has been a
little bit disappointing I must say you
know that that the British public or the
liberal public is not outraged I mean
they may be outraged privately but you
know on the 60th anniversary of the
Treaty of Rome in March last year 17
there was anti brexit demonstration in
Hyde Park and it was the last time I
mean they they asked me to to if I
wanted to adapt my posters I said I mean
I kind of its kind of after the event I
don't want to as a now foreign person
even though I've been 25 years London
speak out but anyway I thought this
could kind of be the last moment
a mass demonstration could maybe do
something and they were literally only
30,000 people I think and then this year
that was it the second anniversary of
brexit and you know this was a sizable
demonstration it was a hundred thousand
people in the West End but some of you
are too young but a lot of you I'm sure
have been on the streets in March 2003
you know there were 1 to 1.5 million
people on the streets of London you know
1 million class to demonstrate against
the Iraq war and when you think about
the gravity of what's happening right
now and that they were only 100,000
people on the street you know I is it's
a kind of symptom that's happening
across the world I mean is there is no
the women's march in in Washington the
day after Trump I mean was too huge what
about the rest of Europe Paris Berlin I
mean there is a there isn't a particular
event to demonstrate against like brexit
or in what Trump visit in in in in Paris
went fairly smoothly yeah but that's
also again that's a different thing you
know that wasn't the eve of of causing a
huge catastrophic war or of causing of
the you know the event of undoing 40
years of of treaties and collaboration
and so I think I mean certainly the
French are I mean and I don't like to
say the fringe but you know I mean they
obviously do demonstrate I mean they do
believe in our speaking out publicly in
2010 I think it was it was it was your
at the serpentine gallery and and and
you can't there was an interview prior
to that show where you kind of reflected
on the state of London is a city at that
particular moment and you kind of
suggested that that was the kind of end
of a golden era of London around maybe
2000 or maybe earlier than that where is
London today I mean I guess we all agree
that London is aching it's it's in pain
and and it's a difficult time like the
situation that 35 years old employees
well paid employees at Barclays Bank
cannot afford to live in their own
apartment we cannot afford to start a
family I mean that is a situation that
is you know it's known like that
property prices are known to be a
problem in many places in the world but
in London it is really debilitating
lives and and and it's it's depressing
people and I don't understand why there
isn't one party for example undoing
suggesting to undo the shorthold tenancy
lease that I for example all the yes
that I rented in London I only ever had
security for one year at the 11th month
the landlord could have said bye-bye and
that's just not the case in most
European countries and so there is a
certain acceptance in the UK population
for things that are just kind of I don't
know a hardship that I mean I can't say
that they like it but yes so I mean
that's a little excursion but so London
I mean obviously you know
a man who's tired of London is tired of
life we know it's not a smile beautiful
no I'm not tired of London
I'm not tired of life I love London and
and when I'm in Berlin where I'm now
spending more time than here and I feel
I don't miss anything and the moment I'm
in London I feel you know this is home
so obviously it's the home of seven
million people or so and so you you're
in Berlin since two thousand two
thousand ten eleven eleven eleven and
the reason is is it what's the reason
it was it was really the on the one hand
that my boyfriend unders had moved back
to Berlin
three years earlier and the sort of
long-term relation to get stole but also
the landlord of my studio in Bethnal
Green would not really do anything about
the state of the roof and and and you
know this sense Iraq the practical
reason the sense of the sense of this is
not really sustainable you know if even
I as a as a successful and wealthy
person cannot really feel protected in
my in my walls my four walls here and
and when keeping a Fred archive is not
really sustainable in within zone to you
know the option would have been to go to
ilford or something and and so I and I
thought you know what people always say
in people part here in Berlin and don't
work in Berlin I mean I found myself to
be working all the time in London and
and I found out that you can work really
well in Berlin and have a good time on
top and and so coming to London I also
like to enjoy the city more
so if we just briefly go back to brexit
and that kind of moment and how has
sohow impacted your life I'm interested
to know whether it's actually impacted
your work in any way is it well it has
impacted my life because I at the
beginning of 2016 felt a sense of of
emergency that if no one speaks out
positively for the EU then this thing
will go wrong you know even if they
remain people talk about it tentatively
only in favor because they didn't talk
about it in favor they only talked about
the risk and so nobody spoke positively
and I felt it's a personal emergency I
have to do something and I in that
moment found words for the first time
now I had I had often in previous years
had ideas for posters activists of anti
xenophobic messages also but I never
found language that could really work
with I mean and then there I suddenly it
became clear in in that moment language
appeared but is the language now staying
in the rearm of activism or is it yes
and so it has impacted me because
suddenly I found myself being an
activist which I had no direct intention
to no ambition to be that and as then
one I mean I then understood in March
2016 there were three regional state
elections in Germany and and the
alternativa for total and right-wing
party got 15% in the boat I thought I
mean I think
I will carry this on until September 17
when it's the federal elections in
Germany and so that emergency extended
and of course the Trump emergency
happened and there are many many more
and I feel so that this has directly
impacted my life in terms of time like I
I spend you know a lot of time thinking
about these things doing things and now
I I focus energy towards the European
parliamentary elections in May next year
which will face an organized well
orchestrated attack from anti European
parties and American and Russian
interests who wanted to try to undermine
the EU from inside using the low voter
turnout that is typical for the
elections and so I have a have a hope
that I mean I want to give as much as I
can for that cause to raise voter
turnout there and and in a way that
would be a three year cycle and I hope
that there's hope at the end in this
because of course you know the far-right
situation is that in Europe in
continental Europe you know 80 percent
to not vote far right now if they got
together and and wouldn't allow the
whole political discourse to be
constantly shifted to the right by the
15 percent by the 22 percent you know
even the Sweden Democrats they didn't
get 20 percent or how much did they get
18 I mean please the entire Swedish
political discussion everything is about
these people and their former neo-nazi
party the 82 percent they need to
understand the severity of the situation
we're in and so it looks like your
activism
brought you into the social media I mean
I was corrected to ask you where where
where are the battlegrounds for this
fight I mean I didn't make any notes
except this one is because it's so the
battlegrounds I think it becomes ever
more clear that what we are experiencing
in the last few years is really the
backlash of white males against 50 years
of success of emancipation and
emancipation be that women's rights or
gay lesbian LGBTI rights or of course
non like like more it could racial
equality progress and so there's been an
incredible success progressive success
in society in the last 50 years and only
because it's been so successful do we
see this backlash that's so I mean in
particular in America it unfortunately
can be called racism and that is
research has shown that is a key point
for the Trump revolution the other is
nationalism which sort of goes
hand-in-hand
meaning anti multilateralism and but the
important thing that is not discussed so
much is the ideology of deregulation
which is a capitalist interest that
there are you know full-on market
economy capitalists hate any kind of
regulation and Rupert Murdoch you know
the main driving force and American
behind brexit is for example one of the
American billionaires that hate the EU
for the regulations that it that it not
imposes it also didn't invent them if
the EU acts because the 28 governments
and heads of government asked them to
act and and for example things like the
like health and safety regulations etc
and health food standards all those are
called regulations and we are now to
believe that regulations are bad but
regulations are actually good in many
cases and reining in banks and and this
ideology of deregulation is extremely
powerful
I mean I'm quite interested in the fact
that you feel at times in your
interviews in your in your writing the
kind of feeling of powerlessness being
powerless in front of the kind of world
and the politics it kind of comes up and
I was wondering whether you do feel
powerless especially being a very
influential you know hence this room
full of people but you know I mean what
what's generating or is that is there
that feeling or what what's generating
yes I mean I don't feel powerless I also
don't feel that only winning is making a
cause worthwhile I think every vote
every mind that you change matters or
not not you cannot measure success
begins at 1,000 opinions you changed and
and
but I guess I mean powerless I mean I
find you know like it's this there's
this particular situation in the UK and
the u.s. that the majority of I mean
definitely in the UK at the majority of
the media are owned by three tax exile
billionaires and and they are exactly
following that ideology of deregulation
and any body that wants to try to
regulate how we live together through
multilateral agreements they fight and
fight and fight and and that there's no
Alliance here that is that is calling
that out even mmm-hmm
you know that this whole country is
dominated by by these three families is
of course making me feel powerless but I
mean this is one example in general of
course we have to believe in in a
democracy one man one vote and and it's
a slow process I'm really wondering how
do we now how do I take this
conversation now towards an image
because a photograph or an image I mean
is there is there a kind of role of an
image in in that context and then we can
then kind of go from that context in
other context which in which you use
image
I mean I I've always had a very strong
sense of of my time even as an 18 year
old a 15 year old 23 year old and I've
always had a sense of that the freedoms
that I am enjoying not to be taken for
granted and that other people have
fought for them before I was born or
before I was mature and and so I I
always had a sense of my work being very
aware of its time and describing the
time that I am in and at the same time I
didn't want to be a politician I didn't
want to be an activist as such and and
but thought the form of photography and
speaking through pictures that don't
have to be explained or they don't
explain themselves literally all the
time was the right way to speak for me
and and the way that I was always in
love with high art and and pop arts a
popular culture
I found that photography was a medium
that worked in both and in both areas
and I developed them simultaneously it's
not that one came before the other and I
guess it was a particularly lucky time
when I started that that was even
possible so when we talk about
photography is always are you still
looking for truth in a way because truth
is very important in a kind of political
context in a political conversation I
never looked for truth in
in the work as an absolute mm-hmm you
know the word is I mean on its it's
impossible to talk about it across the
entire spectrum because of course when
you're talking Flat Earth conspiracy
theory I would I would like to ask that
we please agree on an absolute truth
this earth is round but but then further
down the spectrum and I would never have
have set out to say like I am trying to
find truth like are there are there
aspects of your work which you think are
maybe more truthful than the others I
mean you know I think it's it's an art
it really means when it's true to its
intentions because art is always lying
about what it is what it is depicting
photography is always lying about what
is in front of the camera because it's
always an interpretation you know what
is on the paper is not the world but
what it photography never lies about is
the intentions behind the camera and and
that really goes for most art forms that
that art depicts describes or picks up
very carefully truthfully the intentions
behind the work so if I approach you in
a portrait or in a portrait sitting with
a sense of arrogance that arrogance will
show if I we're trying to say now
well it is not a portrait situation yes
sir
so and if I if I made an exact graphic
plan of how to take your picture and I
don't want to take any risks and I just
use you as a shape then me using you as
a shape will be the dominant feeling
that will come from that work and that
is what has done all my life is a
careful observation of cause and effect
so how I look into the world that is the
way the world looks in my picture and
and that is always deeply political so
are you ever afraid of misunderstanding
of your world being misunderstood well
it's it was understood and of course it
unavoidably is misunderstood also today
unlike you cannot be safe from that and
and and if you you know again sorry this
is an endless loop not so if I make work
trying not to be misunderstood then the
intention of not wanting to be
misunderstood
written all over the work yes okay do
you do a couch I'll try again do you
have a problem about your work becoming
iconic I mean that's of course different
from misunderstood yeah I its and sorry
I now don't want to become ridiculous
but of course if you the thing is you
cannot choose your work to become iconic
because the moment you want it to be
iconic its desire to be
iconic is written all over it so this
state can this come yeah this can only
be given to a work and and so I'm when I
was then described in the 90s 2000s as
this sort of chronicler for example of a
generation
and I you know something that I pushed
away in the 90s no like I said I'm not
this is not what I'm doing later with
hindsight I understood to embrace it
because you cannot choose to want to be
the sort of memory of a generation or
make of something that that people
connect to because that connection you
cannot manufacture and so that certain
pictures have become iconic is something
I can I can accept and literally yes I
can accept it and welcome so then you
accept it that I remember at the Tate's
some very conic images were very small
and they were kind of you know in the
corner so there is an attitude towards
that image maybe no no no no no I mean
the Tate show had as its premise of a
starting point the year 2003 there were
no works from before except in the
documentation room with the printed
matter in the books so it was a idea of
defining but now as something that
started 2003 and that we are sort of in
a continuous ongoing mode of
misunderstanding since that were sin of
the Iraq war and and now in every
exhibition I challenge notions of
importance and and the difference in
size of an in framing materiality of
work is not like a tease but it's it's
you know but it is it is an invitation
to trust your own eyes you know not to
think that the most important picture
must be the biggest one and
central perspective one is the most
important one I you know like when you
came into the Tate show the first
picture you saw was a three by four
meter size print of a of some weed in a
planter that that would the raft of
light so they were white
it was almost almost like a picture of
nothing
and so like playing with attributing
value and how we attribute value is
something that I like the exhibition
space for in particular it's something
that I cannot do in a book and he's
there I've always felt
I've always felt what I've seen your
work even in a book format it's a very
kind of for me at least from kind of
maybe architectural perspective it's a
very kind of urban experience I feel
like you know going through a city you
know some light passing in front of me
entering the park seeing summer autumn
you know vegetables crowd looking up at
the sky you know it's a very it's a it's
kind of this kind of fusion of emotions
and and I was wondering whether there is
a narrative to the show because each
show it it feels like a story of some
sort
um I mean there's certainly not a linear
narrative in my work and in an
exhibition there are there are
connections between works and and they
can be on different tiers like formal
like lines or color or narrative or you
know different types of similar types of
people or a sense of smell or touch that
I hope a picture evokes and
I mean for example I mean we are resting
here an aqua brought these two
installation views and that I because
maybe we can I mean we can slowly move
into architecture I think I guess the
question before we talk about that image
is the question that you've often been
almost told that you're an architect in
a way and it's precisely because of the
way your attribute value to image is
almost like you know the way an
architect would should be value to
windows views I think mark wheelie told
you that you're an architect in a
conversation ten years ago did you feel
you're an architect
well I always felt a closeness to
architecture to the to the meaning of of
spaces and and that everything that is
in a space means something and
everything that is in a space or
actually on a building or that makes a
building is there for a reason
because all of it is man-made no they
are all decisions that people have have
made and and yeah I have to come back
again to this cause and effect
observation more that that a building
expresses exactly what ideas went into
it and and because I I am a so if I
guess it sensitive being and I respond
to to the things around me and and I
pick up what what goes on in the space
and then or what buildings tell me and
and and so I've
very aware eye for architecture but
never felt that I should do it myself
outside of my exhibitions but I think as
early as I mean the late nineties did I
start to have opportunities to to build
exhibition architecture and and so for
example in 2006 the Museum of
Contemporary Art in Chicago and they
were like two vast empty spaces for the
entire architecture I made or the
Madonna must see it in Stockholm 2012 so
exhibition architecture is something
that I'm very familiar with and and then
I have in recent years also made more
direct architectural in interventions
for example and because I mean there was
one thing there is one thing which is an
empty space but then there is another
thing where you're kind of given a space
and you you respond to it presumably the
way you set your narrative yes I mean
how much how much of the exhibition
comes from this space when you're given
a space and how much of it is your
imposed a plan I mean it's it's very
much looking at outer space with without
prejudice you know it is just accepting
that I cannot always get the ideal place
and so not to look down on on the place
that
that and not not you know Nazi security
exits as like my enemy I was gonna ask
whether you see architecture in a kind
of confrontational way it's really
confronted so it's only the minds behind
architecture okay so that is that our
confrontation us and arise okay oh the
minds that are behind museum market you
mean the architects yes I mean I mean
there's there's one extreme example for
example in in the kunst museum wolf
spoke in Germany there and the architect
who I I don't know who was the architect
but at the at the end of each stud wall
like like he put like a metal bracket
like half a meter of metal covering
around it and like a u-shape so every
wall has this brace and and you look at
half a meter of a brushed metal surface
I mean what is what is I mean that is
just very much the architect wanting to
be present I don't want I don't mean the
architect should be not present at all
not like that yeah amazing buildings
where the architect is present and it's
a joy but but yeah
okay two buildings this summer there was
exhibitions and I thought maybe we may
be referred to those two this is named
in France a building by Norman Foster I
mean we can see that it's the doors are
beautifully concealed and the skirting
doesn't quite go across but it's okay
and then it stops there and then it
doesn't go and then and then there is of
course these these fire escape buttons
and swipe cards and and then there is
and then I think what's amazing there is
oh ok I can't really see those
photographs but then there is richard
oscar niemeyer
kind of overlooking this kind of
regulations and there are no regulations
in brazil so yeah anyway can you tell us
about that confrontation I mean it was
their confrontation
now it's a curious building the museum
is called corrida and and it's an
opposite a Roman temple called Mazzone
kahe and in the corrida is from the
outside a total postmodern early 90s
building of white covered plastic sorry
I mean steel and metal in this white
what is it actually is it PVC or coating
or what a lot of British buildings like
are from that era like the this no no
it's plastic I mean it's metal and and
which is covered in a thin layer it's
not painted powder coating no it's not
possibly you know it's not powerful and
anyway the whole entire building in a
white polyester and whole thing
it's a coating and and then and then on
the end it's huge huge stairwell and
atrium and and the glass the steps are
made of glass or brushed matte glass and
it's really a vertiginous and and and
sort of follows this ideology of space
and Oldman transparency
for it brings together library and ends
of the entire city's cultural activity
under one roof and then in the top two
floors is the the modern art museum of
this city of meme and and in these
galleries where I exhibited the
temporary exhibition spaces when you get
in there then you're suddenly in this
classical gallery filled with a marble
floor
you know this whole building is about
transparency and white and glass and and
then here you have this stone floor and
and but because it's not real you know
that all the tiles are lying on a metal
grid which aren't even and there are
lots and lots of them are cracked and
broken and and it is on the one hand it
has this grand feel of of a cool stone
gallery and and and actually that is the
dominant feel plus being inaugurated in
93 it makes you think probably was in
thought of conceptualized in 88 or
something like that so that was the time
of Julian Schnabel and gigantic gigantic
paintings art in those days looked very
different from even ten years after and
so the walls at the lowest ceiling I
think is five meter 50 and some were
like even eight meters
I believe tall and which is sort of
incompletely unuseful height for a lot a
lot of art and it's for example again
this this slightly much so supporting
wanting huge paintings gesture that this
was built for and for me I didn't
I was fortunate unfortunate that my type
of installation allows me to respond and
take may have benefits from height and
so I I went against it and I went with
it so a lot of rooms are hung in a very
linear fashion and which I'm not so
associated with but which I have done
from the beginning of my career I've
always hung either from floor to ceiling
in different arrangements but also
always to counter that hung in linear
ways and then and then at the same time
the exhibition in Johannesburg is
happening slightly different space yes
this is the third stop in a exhibition
tour of the African continent was in
January in Kinshasa in Nairobi in April
and and here in Johannesburg art gallery
in South Africa which is 120 years old
colonial building
another british architects actually
interesting it must be yes
Martin's Edwin ok which at his time he
was this who's the Norman Foster is the
kind of a Norman Foster of the early
20th century one which is are
interesting that we have a kind of both
British but in a different kind of way
yeah yes and approaching the outside
world so the early 20th century one
colonial power imposes its architecture
in johannesburg and then here we have a
much more so capital is driven power
again well in aid of a municipal very
more egalitarian
in European project a name I mean it was
like a citizen's I mean it wasn't
uncontroversial notice it's the some
citizens asked why should we have such a
massive Museum but anyway in in
Johannesburg there that gallery has a
particularity that that I first dealt
had to deal with in 2000 when I was in
the exhibition apocalypse at the Royal
Academy in Piccadilly which is something
you're not really aware of until you
notice it which is called the dado rail
you've got one there and and you've got
it here across all the walls and do you
want to tell us that you don't bash up
the walls with with a chair yes I mean I
suspected that it's a logical answer
that that has a reason but why me why is
it always in galleries you know in
galleries you don't you don't have that
many chairs yes and that's what I what I
noticed and in in the Royal Academy I
didn't find it so interesting to work
with whereas here in Johannesburg it um
it it really does something for the wall
it frames it in a very different way
that I mean it really was so you didn't
you didn't seem to confront it very much
a kind of accept it's the well you can't
really confront it unless you take a
circular saw and
yeah I mean I then also at times I also
hung pictures underneath the dado rail
and yes which I mean in a way it'd be
interesting to flick through moles I
think it's quite nice that you've had a
little lecture on architecture do you
want to give us a lecture
I thought your thoughts and some
architecture so do you want to show that
some of your observations yes yes I did
because I genuinely do care about
architecture and it has not gone
unnoticed on architects like for example
with or architectural critics and I had
my quickly at a dialogue with him in
2006 and he wrote an essay and we had a
discussion I also sat in on a couple of
crits entire crits at the Stadio Schuler
architecture class and and I always felt
a desire to be in dialogue with
architects and and around their time mid
2000s I for the first time wrote down
the words book for architects where I
had this feeling I want to share almost
be like a mirror not a teacher not a not
a critic but just so share how I see
architecture how I see it work and and
that comes from different aspects from
different perspectives of of awe or of
smell of admiration or beauty or study
and sometimes criticism usually not
mockery but and so I had brought 30
slides that were first shown as part of
this book for architects project which
never became a book but it was a digital
slideshow that lasts 40 minutes which
was first shown at the REM koolhaas
Venice architecture Biennale elements of
architecture in 2014 and and which since
has become kind of one of the first
works in the Metropolitan Museum newly
found architecture department collection
and and so just a few thoughts I this is
something I this the maritime hotel the
view out of the maritime Hotel in New
York and and I really like these round
windows which strangely feel quite
natural you know they're of course
extremely loud when you first see the
building and it's very unusual but
there's something I find very now
literally natural to and to live with
and it was built as a retirement home
for sea men for for maritime workers so
they could feel at home
at sea and I have a soft spot for solid
wood handrails and we don't judge
and in like a year ago on a research
trip to to Coventry where we were
visiting the Coventry Cathedral
- because I'm doing the stage design of
the English National Opera production of
War Requiem by Benjamin Britten which
opens mid-november and in Coventry
Station there's also this super solid
trunky handrail and it I always get a
sense of generosity from that there's a
value in it that doesn't get less
overage it's kind of better this is in
Santiago de Chile and having I mean
always travelling having travelled a lot
but then since 2008 roughly nine I went
on trips particularly to put myself
outside of my comfort zone outside of
areas that I knew culturally or
understood well and and when you do that
you realize that I don't know 90% of the
world's architecture is probably made
without architects and so this is in
Tunisia were buildings according I guess
to Islamic beliefs also people don't
take credit they build the money that
they have and then when they have more
money they they continue the floor above
this is in Lima Peru it's hard to
understand what exactly goes on that's
near daily in India
and that's in Haiti where you know a
popular way of building is you just take
a plastic barrel and pour concrete in it
and let it settle and in cutoff the
barrel yes one thing that I which
illustrates or gives you an idea how I
read architecture and how is how I am
always a well-liked everything looks the
way it looks for a reason and so this
look in st. Petersburg at the ballet in
the intermission looks this way for a
reason and the reason being that the
architects who built the toilets for men
and women gave them exactly the same
footprint in the floor plan and there's
nothing to do with st. Petersburg it's
everyone this is the scene here on the
Left it's the Vatican Museum on the
right is the Versailles Castle
everywhere were there's crowds you see
women stand in line was men like we can
see is here the guy walk in and don't
have to wait and I just don't understand
why here in a room of Architects like to
ask why on earth is that not changing I
have heard that the ROI the new Royal
Opera House refurbishment has addressed
that that's what I've heard
there's different speeds of going about
business I mean so so there's not many
accusatory pictures exhibited in a
toilet in a toilet yes the famous George
and Dragon pub in
in shortage and it's called the gallery
that Pablo león de la barra ran in the
for years and years was called the white
cubicle and the unisex toilet for that
night it was a temporary so for the
opening it became unisex and then it
stayed how nice the curates differently
for yeah this was unisex and that is
Gatwick Airport some years ago and when
you can when you look at the sign it
says rest of world passports there's so
this Eurocentric perspective let's see
where that what it says then and then
there's two kilometers of queuing yes I
mean that's another it's similar to the
toilet thing
Akilah inequality of queueing well yeah
the airport get the rest of the world
queueing for hours and yes true yes i
mean i q-- always because you're from
actually do it yes i do i do i do know
the feeling even I'm not a woman and I
mean exhibition architecture is of often
done in this really ramshackle way like
here in the National Art Gallery in
Warsaw and and this
where this picture I called I called
device control from 2005 and it's in
Moscow and I just thought it's an very
practical approach to architecture
instead of fixing the I mean you know
that something is gonna happen so you
put but put a catchment device for what
you know is gonna happen and so I yeah I
just also in the in 2001 I called an
exhibition view from above because it
was the title of a loose series of
cityscapes that I made from elevated
points of view on commercial planes or
towers of buildings and and I just got
off on this this like cities as
organisms that are beyond a masterplan
know that they are this is result of
million millions and millions of
decisions and that very soon also out of
the hand of the architect and and then
you know somebody else makes an addition
here and there and or I I have an acute
awareness or I for how things join that
interests me or how they're not joined
and how surfaces collide this is a joint
I love it salon and tube is it angel but
it's kind of so open about not like here
we are joining these two things it's not
hiding it
and and I mean this for example I mean I
am a bit of a modernist guy and like
English modernism I also like like this
way that the floor curves up and because
corners are I'm sure su architects no I
mean corners are always a problem and
and and how they are resolved if you
take it back to politics it's a sign of
wealth really being able to produce
these pieces that if you go to any if
you go to any kind of poorer country and
never see anything like hmm true yes
like joints like in Colombia and as part
of these these travels also went to
places that that were sort of famous and
so kind of too famous to be that one
should be interested in it oh I thought
you know like like why go to the Iguazu
waterfalls or you don't really need to
see the Sydney Opera House but then when
you see it you know why it's famous and
because sometimes famous things are good
because they're good and but what I
never had an idea of was was the texture
the texture of of that Sydney Opera
House here which is he closed up you
know you only ever know the shape but
but this incredible detailing was
amazing and and and that type of exposed
concrete building has almost entirely
disappears with the exception of the
radical new terminal not way you have
exposed concrete again here Sao Paulo
there's an exposed concrete a Canada
water station
mmm an entire city without advertising
you know the mayor municipality of sub
hollow decided ten years ago that there
should be no advertising anymore because
it had gotten so out of control and and
then this picture which is so
symptomatic for a world of architecture
we live and I I call this a cladding and
it's 2009 it could be any I mean any
continent any airport and and yeah
there's like the pervasiveness of
similarity of this style is really
shocking or impressive non like this is
Addis Abeba and this is Jade are in oh
there's a round window in sabi
and this one is called buildings
going up left right and center yeah this
is this is my former studio in the the
white building the first floor was my
studio from 2001 to 2011 10 happy years
and but well when I got out it was also
about time not like as you can see it
was like now the whole thing and
everything is surrounded by this type of
cladding buildings not like like it's
just an IKEA shelf really with things
hung and front and and this is something
that I don't know it can of course amuse
you but it can also pain you it's you
know what is this is this 50s or 60s
building built like in in London is done
and in a modern tradition and and then
in some renovation they put this Palace
Hotel there and and this is in Dublin so
when we give people the choice they then
put their country home country house
window or some other illusion of
palatial nests like here on Dwayne
Osiris on the right and Sao Paolo bottom
left and and San Petersburg top left and
one has to wonder really what is this
desire for palaces and and obvious
rejection of of modernism in
architecture in by many many people and
Sigma Sigma gobbler the social democrat
foreign minister last year's said what
we're experiencing right now is a unti
madonna that the entire populism right
wing it's kind of an anti Madonna an
anti modern movement and and we feel
this is of course slightly ugly and and
but it has more meaning than just being
a sort of variation in taste and I've I
love sort of built-in architectural
details which I feel are also
increasingly lost for example this
bathroom for a build in the 1960s in
Germany has this little alcove for the
toothbrush etc and and nowadays at least
in Germany every bathroom that is being
built has the water
what is a canister for the toilet set
set in front of the wall rather than
build it into the wall and so then you
clad that canister with a shelf but
across the entire bathroom wall and that
then is is this is then used for
toothbrush etcetera but it's somehow
it's so clear where it comes from mother
it's just this hollow box that takes up
space really and and rather than this
care for detailed to set it in I mean so
that's the sort of thing I look at when
I since you asked me what sort of images
go around in my head
or this one here is a view of my
apartment in my flat in London until
2001 this bought a born estate and
transfer Lane which was built in 1895 a
social housing complex and and it has
again like these beautiful details so is
inbuilt details alcoves for you know it
was social housing now it was built for
that and there is a generosity a care
for detail that that I mean I'm missing
in a lot of architecture today you know
which is of course all driven by money
but since I am here talking to future or
real-life architects I just you know
would like to encourage this generosity
that detail creates and that I I believe
these corners or well made in box and
details that are not just cleaned away
they are spaces where thoughts can catch
and and all this is I guess this is
polish Polish modernism and Warsaw you
know there's a sense of generosity
giving each person also the opportunity
to look out in the other direction and
and this is the dire reality of 90s late
nineties London architect
oh the updates of try to update building
with just a little wavy piece of metal
that starts to peel the paint peels off
after five years
and and a reminder to to all just water
I mean I'm I turned 50 this year and I
would not have thought of water in
buildings when I was 23 but but having
experienced water coming into places I
lived in about six I mean five times in
a billion apartment in 15 years and of
course in London in the studio all the
time and it's just fascinating when this
is a ceiling in in a hotel in New York
like a concrete building top floor and
and the latex paint sort of became this
bubble always take care to take good
care of water and buildings
okay can we I'm sure people would like
to ask you some questions thank you I
think there's there'll be a microphone
so we can be heard and the recording
there's a question there hi I wanted to
ask about the way that you juxtapose
imagery with words I mean you spoke
about it a little bit but especially on
social media England your Instagram
account with that kind of thing where
whether it started with the posters I
wanted to know how you chose the imagery
because to me there's something well
very obvious about the words they are
very straightforward whereas the imagery
because it's juxtaposed with the text
you're almost looking for the same
message in the image as you are in the
text or looking for some some kind of
literal meaning in the imagery that
often I don't think is actually there
perhaps yes no I I mean that in the in
the 70s there used to be a socialist
magazine in Germany called concrete and
and they put naked women on the cover
for a period and I think when we
combined half of the baader-meinhof was
the editor she they did that and so you
get attention for something else you
want to tell and talk about AIDS yeah
there's not one linear strategy that I
that I used for what I post how on
Instagram but in principle I would say
they are not works of mine it's kind of
it allows myself to be an amateur
photographer and I mean some I also I
mean I like them of course I don't try
to make bad pictures but it's a playful
outlet on one hand but I never started
to do started Instagram for that
like I I
started only with the pictures of words
and and then I guess got more playful
with it and and combined the pictures
with text but also not always kind of
not to be for people to expecting also
political commentary all the time no
sides it's really quite sparse no but it
does stand out because of it no when it
does happen and and yeah it's I had
really no social media strategy maybe
except for that I didn't do it you know
what like I only have a face like a name
holder Facebook I'd never done Facebook
and but there is something that I enjoy
about Instagram and that seems to really
communicate and with that like the the
text is almost very is is usually very
political but the images are rarely do
you have the same kind of or or a
similar kind of direct political
photography or is that is it just in the
text um I mean there is this picture
which I chose not to show but now I
chose choose to show because I'm sure
that you're all too aware of these this
particular most literal example of that
everything in architecture looks the way
it looks for a reason and and intentions
you can read truthfully and like for
example you know if this was
combined with I mean I could I could use
this for post about homelessness but I
again I was not campaigning I don't will
do my work as a campaigner and it's it's
just keeping things also yeah like like
like not being too preachy by the way
that this is one the other slide I
didn't show it don't know why this is
what do by the other side of Dubai looks
like this is the quarters where all the
workers live and this on the right is
one of the nondescript thousands and
thousands of buildings were guys live in
in rooms of aid shared beds and it is
literally one of these buildings in the
center of the photograph on the left
hi thank you I would just like to ask
you about how you feel about the art
market because it probably encapsulate
the epitome of you know capitalism and
and under regulation and you know
facilitates evasion laundering and
speculation so does it you feel like it
comes into conflict with your own
political beliefs it just yesterday
opened in London that frees it's not I
mean there's not a short answer and it's
I mean for example the money laundering
aspect and I
I have a very clear idea about that and
I noticed in the when I started to sell
works in the early like 93 95 part of
the nineties that I was asked by my
galleries you know this guy wanted to
pay in cash and say okay if I give you
cash and and in 96 I I basically told
all gallerists I don't take cash because
it's black money it's is its money from
tax evasion and and and I like to pay
taxes I'm happy to pay taxes because
they you know if that is what keeps it
keeps society together as a as a
functioning state now we can't have have
social security etc and paved streets
for nothing and so I'm I make sure that
all my work is on the books in and and
properly text and in the art market you
can't of course I mean when I know and
it's hard to know where money comes from
to make a long story short I been very
fortunate that my work for the longest
time has not been zuv one trademark
style that is just one type of pictures
that that is super iconic in a large
addition a repeated style to that my
work has become like a trophy and and I
feel like it has most people that have
bought my work did buy it because they
actually liked it and because they have
seen it no they haven't just
of ask an art advisor again to control
where you work is so is there any of
your work at the freezer tomorrow yes
so with that your yes you saw there's
three galleries they troll my work and
and I discuss exactly with them what is
shown and I make sure that they all show
different works but what people don't
know or not so aware of is that once the
artwork is sold it is a complete free
thing in its in the hands of the
collector again here the European Union
introduced the dois de sweet regulation
so that the artist could at least get
three percent I think of an auction
result from a resale of a work and and
but your question yeah I mean it is it
is art is something that all you only
start to own or to buy except you make
it yourself or your children make it or
you being given it once you have gone
across a certain level of wealth and so
it is connected to that and and at the
same time looking back at history of
course
art that I admire like a Caravaggio say
you know was also made from money for
money to people or a moneyed Church and
and I don't think one does to art
justice by completely sort of weighing
it into good and bad so if it's for
money it's evil or when what amount of
money does it become evil its money and
that's maybe the last part of the answer
a good aspect about an artwork being
expensive is that it protects the work
because it won't get thrown away by the
children of the collector and and it
might not even get thrown away by the
grand great children of the collector
and it's honestly I'm not joking and
that is you know it's taken care of well
the more expensive it is and and yeah hi
and I was wondering if if you could talk
about your I don't know if the right
word or your approach or lack of
approach or non approach towards
found-footage and found images
particularly in the context of things
that are found online like news media
CCTV cameras cell phone footage
I guess disseminated and downsized and
how if you use that sort of a long side
the the photographs that you take and
the reason why I'm asking is I feel that
you know she take like for example the
the Supreme Court hearings or you know
the the Syrian boy that was found in
Turkey on the beach that we somehow
inhabit kind of those images as well on
a daily basis they make up a large part
of how we relate to the rest of the
world now I was wondering if you sort of
engaged with that sort of media as well
in yours i I
so since childhood days have engaged
with news photography and and always had
a very tactile relation almost to
newsprint and and
and I have thought before I used a
camera before I owned the camera I
started to make photo mechanical
pictures with a very early digital
photocopier in the mid-1980s
photocopying also found images so that
was some and then in in 1990 I made a
exhibition project and a book called
soldiers the 90s which comprised of
almost 90% pictures from newspapers and
magazines of soldiers and which was
looking at the use of that particular
group of people in the media and as I as
I sort of realized that these are the
only non famous people that that get put
on the cover of a newspaper on a regular
basis
showing doing nothing you know in the
time of the of the Yugoslav wars you
know they you didn't see the atrocities
you're only saw soldiers as peacekeepers
sort of smoking a cigarette and anyway
I'm not and then in 2005 I started the
project truth study center which are
these collages tables that confronts Oh
news pictures and stories with my own so
I mean I'm yeah to this date I find news
photography incredibly resonant and it
was also of course what the pop artists
felt whoo you know when I started
looking at art in when I was 14 15 16
you know the war holds and ocean
barracks in the museum's in the
Rhineland you know they were printed
news photographs on canvas and that that
has very much informed my thinking about
painting and photography you know an
interesting spectator had recently is
like all of a sudden you are art police
racing in a very soft way as well I more
than once was sitting in a pub thinking
oh that's a nice image and only then
stepped up and so it was just a very
cheap photocopy
I stood put there for either on DFT
campaign or anti brexit campaigns and
things like so this kind of
proliferation off actually as well the
image because that's the first thing
standing out and how do you work with
that as well
or is this a discovery I mean because
literally all over universities you find
all of sudden your posters and in all
kinds of formats and small and big and
and they always draw first by the image
rather than the text or if it really was
a was a lucky coincidence that I'm
grateful for that that the the
exhibition on the verge of visibility at
the salvage museum in Porto and Portugal
ended in the spring 2016 literally as I
was formulating these different brexit
messages and had that show run two
months longer I would have never have
chosen these pictures of horizons and
fades and and clouds and skies for this
because I would not have dared to
sort of way down this work that was so
for the first time shown in this museum
in together in this grouping I would not
have even wanted to have done that to
the museum director like suddenly saw
hijack that work out of an exhibition
where there it stands for itself and
those works and at the opening of the
show in January I did speak about those
lions being borders and horizons being
borders what the sea being borders so
they had if a political under tone for
me but I was very aware not to wanting
to weigh them down and nail them down
but then this show had come to an end
and I realized suddenly the potential
that they and how well they work with
the text that I then so sacrificed them
for that purpose and and they have
fortunately they have survived because I
mean I can still look at them without
the text and but it's it's a you know
it's it's it's the sacrifice in a way
you know it's because you know it's not
that poster I don't see that as art is
it functions as a communication tool in
a different way
if anyone
allow me to ask a quite broad question
but now we have spoken a bit about the
role of generosity in architecture and
I'm really curious to hear about the
role of the university in your in your
photo and in your heart that's something
that I sense in in in your work somehow
so yeah the role of what of generosity
generosity I I mean it'sit's something
that I find it's one of the things that
I find hard to say yes to because the
moment you say yes it feels calculated
and not generous anymore
you know it like I would I can't say I'm
sayin a sensitive learner because you
know it's somebody who says
wholeheartedly I am sensitive that feels
I mean for me there's always has to be a
great deal of doubt in that
and so generosity is something that I
don't want to achieve it maybe comes
from something that it happens because
of things that I don't do and you know
that for example I've often found that
it's easy to make a work look
complicated difficult to make but it's
much harder to make something look
simple and easy and or to create a low
threshold for the viewer and and so I
try to to not erase my own hand but I
don't want to point it at me in my works
I want you to recognize yourself in you
know even if it is only five percent or
two percent
percent of my work if I feel I can make
it so low threshold and so little
barrier that points at me
that you get the opportunity to feel and
I know how that smells
I once remembered that touch and that is
a sense of connection and when that
happens I mean when that happens for me
when I look at art or I hear a song or I
read something and I get this resonance
you know that is a moment where I feel
less lonely that's a moment of
solidarity between people and and that
yeah that's when I feel my work works
best and that was probably yeah I mean I
think we could speak for another five
hours but thank you so much for coming
to dia and we hope we can continue this
conversation so many more questions
there's so many more questions thank you
thank you Marco
Thank You Marco Thank You vole gun their
books upfront I don't get any money for
sales from that book you already took
you
you
