hello good evening welcome to the
architectural Association it's my great
pleasure to introduce Vivek Karlin
architects tonight I've kind of been
sort of been at the jury just until now
so I didn't have much time to present to
prepare this talk but one thing that I
think is special about those two is that
both of them are students from the
school they both graduated from the AAA
and as far as I know none of them went
to work for any other big firm as a lot
of the graduates from the a do so
there's a there's a friend nowadays that
once you have your diploma that you go
and work for a large office in order to
learn the trade and maybe put something
on your CV and I think what's particular
about the MS that they started to do
something that's I think sort of firm
hmm maybe something one used to say
about the AAA students is that they're
not easily molded and not easily put
into some kind of conventional context
so in the past and a graduate would sort
of last two weeks in an office even if
it's very high-powered because they just
simply couldn't deal with the normality
of things so in a sense I think that's
really fantastic to see that they set
out on their own and but they have
actually quite a respectable repertoire
of things to show and without taking
anything away at this stage maybe one
more thing to say is I was just told
that I was on the interview of Chris and
which I totally forgot so I have a
little bit to do with that letting him
into the school and at the end I think
marks and Chris met each other at George
Georgia's famous dip five-unit I'm not
sure when you started to think of
working together and also because you
have quite a different background
which I'm not don't know too much about
but I think with any further delay
please welcome max and Chris David
Carlin architects thank you very much
yeah so Christopher hi max we graduated
actually 2008 here at the AAA we then
both worked for a year in different
practices
after that we started our own practice
together which is when January pretty
much five years from now the office is
called Vivek are architects as Valentin
mentioned and it's based on clock well
and in there we work together with
another architect that's Daniel joined
us this year in the same building
there's another friend and architect
goes to sprout who we consider part of
our working context as much as we
consider the AAA as part of our context
where we have conversations and and
that's been ongoing for the last six
years with Chris media study courses and
I've been teaching diploma in the
first-year studio basically our main aim
is to build buildings and we don't care
the type or type or the scale or the
budget and we designed everything from
umbrella stands to student housing
complexes and another thing that's been
important for us is that max is from
Germany I'm from Norway so we've been
able to
have quite a variety of contexts to work
within other than just here in the UK
and these are a selection of projects we
have been working on just to get get
give you a feeling of what we do and the
first top left is a office competition
we did in Leipzig the top center is
apartment building that we just sent in
for planning which is an oven in Germany
there's a exhibition design we're
working on at the Barbican which will
open in February and then on site the
bottom left is a rooftop extension we're
doing in Cologne which will finish
perhaps April April March and in the
center there's a exhibition design we
did together with SAC group which I had
in 2012 and finally there's a recent
refurbishment of the bookshop in
Whitechapel Gallery um
but today we're going to talk about six
other projects that we some have been
built some not which are obviously we're
quite fond of yeah we like lists we just
made there from different times I
thought that was important but they and
they all have some kind of idea that we
thought that we like or that we thought
we it might be nice to talk about and
but beside those six projects we thought
there were two two topics that might be
nice to talk about in also in relation
to the tide what's next
and they will they will be linked to the
project so they will come they will
appear and disappear so one is about
representation and there's two things
there's a representation of in the
design process the collage so we try one
thing we we try to do is to to link as
close as possible the collage with with
the design so you you see what you get
with there's no there's no transition
it's direct as possible that's one thing
but then on the other hand there's also
and once you do finish something it's
the question what what what do you do
you take photographs and how do you
represent the actual building or maybe
you want to represent the project of the
way that is the building so that's
something we are just about to tap into
it just felt really interesting and we
rather treated as an open question then
there's no solution and what is then
what is also really interesting insulin
this is it like a psycho you do you do
collages and then you you imagine the
space and then you ask a friend or
photographer to take photographs and
then you suddenly see the space from
through the eyes from someone else and
that starts to influence you the the way
you do the collages again so it's a bit
of a psycho which is quite interesting
to be aware of because the way you
represent the way you draw and the way
you make your models it it affects a lot
the way you think the space and the way
you develop idea so talk to your client
or to your to yourself and then the
other topic is twins
so yeah it's twins it's a bit awkward
but there is something about it which
does somehow consciously or
unconsciously run through quite a lot of
the projects actually in some cases is
an active discussion in some cases we
actually
find out afterwards and the what's
interesting with twins is that it's
repetition not written but not really
it's two things it's not three it's not
for so if you have if you repeat one
thing ten times there's always a
graduation or a tendency but if you have
to you never know who's you know who's
who
who's the real one who's there the wrong
one so it it does end up in a
conversation about the difference and
indifference between two things which
it's sometimes helpful in a kind of a
design conversation so then maybe as the
last comment before we jump into the
first project as Valentin mentioned we
we were in dip 5 back then which was
Joshua genre it was what was interesting
is the way he talked with us in the way
he wanted us to discuss the work which
was mainly based from drawing on models
is he wanted to talk just about the
thing not not to talk around the thing
so we try to be in that manner we try to
be as direct as possible in explaining
the projects we've been working on and
somehow the the ideas related to it to
this to the to the form into this space
should we start with the first yes okay
the kitchen table that's a site it's a
really beautiful long kitchen back
extension of it terrace house what's
special with this one is that it's you
know usually in english terrace houses
that the extension is flat and short or
wide and short but this one is actually
it's really long and narrow so the table
that there there's car there used to be
is it's too short so the brief was
fairly simple
long table and the only constraint is it
should be run what fun 4 to 5 meters
long you should get it through the door
and it would be nice to put a part of it
or the table out in the garden for you
don't have lunches during the name its
we pick two references together with the
client that she really liked and we
thought were very interesting which both
from Cobra Z and there's something
really nice about this one's whether
those two set of tables and benches with
you know the legs are slightly chubby
and this is bluish tone with like
elephant feet so there's something about
the proportion of miss proportion of
elements and then this one it's just the
table is a horizontal surface and it's
it's like it's slightly ad-hoc in that
situation but it it works so they're a
bit in the wrong order so I go bit back
and forth so yeah the idea was just to a
table four legs one surface and not so
much force around but the thing is had
to be a long one so the idea is to make
two tables and then it's obviously a
question you know do you do you just put
two tables next to each other it's
supposed to be one long table so the
main challenge was actually the legs and
you know how do they how do they sit
together then another thing was round we
wanted round legs and we pushed them s
like awkwardly close to the corner
usually you you know you leave a bit of
Tolerance Akins I don't know this it's a
bit safe but we thought it's nice to to
push it as far as we can to the edge so
you have the round versus the square and
then obviously they call it the question
what do we do with that with that middle
leg are you good you can either do
everywhere you do half legs
and then you can keep on repeating so if
the family grows you get 10 more tables
but but then it's you know that somehow
it's not the right thing so we thought
the middle leg is half and the other
legs are normal so it's slightly
asymmetric so that's the final that's a
table in the space red like it was the
other thing is we try to it's the
surfaces two layers of MDF is colored in
the end then varnish so you do expose
the layers of it and you you do expose
you see there's it's a thin thin table
so you need a bit of steel to spend it
to 1/2 meter per meter 40 so you read
you read the table bit like sediments
and then obviously when you pull them
apart they you you'll reveal the section
exactly through the leg so if they stand
alone
they you know that you know half of half
is missing if they say to stand together
it's it's it's the last image so we're
just a bit surprised that it's the
finished public product the Indian looks
almost like a collage Ian it looks the
same as we collage it it's something we
start to experience these days when you
actually produce buildings or objects
because it was the question you you
represent it and you have it in your
mind and then when it's finished you
want it to look exactly like you've
thought what do you want it to you know
be another surprise you've usually in a
better than a positive that's the first
one
the small house some people they call it
the smallest house in Britain it's a
tiny property that is in Islington it
was used at some point as a flower shop
and our client he bought it in I don't
know 2009 he it's a former a student who
moved to Holland and he's now a
developer and together with him we
developed the idea of transforming this
little sort of flower shop into like a
pied-à-terre in London um you can see
the white little dot is the the site is
sitting in between two terraced houses
that's the old facade and and it's
listed so we were not allowed to touch
it and we proposed to demolish
everything else but whatever we put in
we're not to be seen from the street
basically so we could excavate a bit to
gain a bit more space and we could go
slightly up with the pitch of the roof
but that's it but otherwise it had to
look the same and that's what we
introduced behind the existing facade
which is a prefabricated structure that
consists of basically entrance base
kitchen living room a bedroom and a
bathroom and the project in many ways
it's working with levels now it's
working in section and you have the
lower ground floor with the kitchen and
the entrance space then you have a
living room platform
then you walk on top of the kitchen
worktop to get up to the platform that
and eventually you can sit down on the
bed and hidden behind underneath the bed
to the rightest tiny bathroom and it was
very important that we the different
levels have to somehow perform different
functions because it's so small so
everything is on top of each other
that's the plan and you have there's a
little garden in front or we introduced
a new garden to create a bit of privacy
in it between the street and living room
so that the entrance the bathroom
kitchen and the living room and
obviously it feels it is very small but
at the same time it feels incredibly
spacious and generous because of the
height compared to the rest of the
buildings that's yeah the different
levels within the building and these
collages describe the 2-0 main spaces in
the house which is one is more public
living room that faces the street with a
big window to the right and then you
have the more private intimate sort of
secret bedroom upstairs underneath the
arch and this curved roof of the arched
roof really helped to make this place
feel much more spacious and continuous
in a way at that stage we still had them
it was like a long curtain which is you
won't find on the images later where
their staircase would kind of jump over
over the curtain
too complicated maybe maybe one thing
that we try it in this case you know
that the building is so small that you
when you take pictures on the inside you
you want to see a person inside because
we want to see how our person uses uses
the space and you know once they moved
in and then you go and try to take
pictures and you and you ask someone to
you know to walk today so the space it
feels really awkwardly staged you know
it's almost proposing a life stylist
that's how you should live so instead of
doing that we thought we we only present
to you the construction images not
because we are want to show you how to
build a house but what is really
interesting is the workers they inhabit
the space in a way as naturally as a
person later would use the space they
have tools they place the tools and the
steps and the place so in a way what is
what we thought we're gonna go quite
quickly through the images but we'll try
to talk about the space and not how it's
built so I thought that was heavy enough
to say just yeah we built the the house
prefabricated in Holland then the client
had his own workshop so he was closely
connected throughout the whole building
process and I was quite fascinating is
we were allowed to somehow build it in
one to one and then continuously changed
the proportion or the materials or the
scale of things while it was in the
workshop and it was quite a nice way of
designing almost on the girl
um here's the existing for Savin them
that the new building being lifted in
that's the back the neighboring gardens
but you never have access to this garden
you only look onto it it's almost my
favorite picture this one not because
it's a perfect it's not a perfect
picture but it kind of portrays quite
well the character of the space because
you have that extreme proximity between
the inside and the outside and
especially to the back because of
problems with overseeing each other's
gardens the windows had to be very small
so you get that plane you get this plane
walls with these small openings and then
the split-levels that show parts of legs
or parts of feet because you cannot live
very close to each other
so the second platform beside the steel
is the steel walkway it's it's a the bed
is a frame in itself and it's suspended
from this one little rod which also has
all the kind of little light fittings
and you see here the back garden which
is very typical London that garden
actually really nice the whole area is
nice so because it has a you know it's
so close to the street you and you have
the garden there is a park on the
opposite side which obviously makes it
if it wasn't a high street somewhere it
would be quite different but in this
particular case it worked it's quite
nice with the proximity from the bedroom
to downstairs and the outside and also
the per symmetry within the different
levels obviously from the bedroom down
to the kitchen and for instance back out
to the garden
that's the client who's involved in
building it together with us in their
carpenters and then we thought it would
be nice to sum up with the soft material
so we used leather so when you wake up
and you walk on the steel it would be
quite soft and warm yeah it's how you
imagine w-well give coffee to your
exactly your sleep above and your
boyfriend or girlfriend gives your
coffee through that and then also the we
wrapped the bed frame in felt to make it
soft and norm of the area like a cloud
and it also works really well to make it
much more domestic somehow soft in the
space
mr. carton
that's the dining room
and then we also sprayed the the
bathroom and this polyurethane because
the walls are so close to use you can't
really use tiles cause it's too cold so
we thought this would be a better way to
seal the bathroom
yeah the thing I think is a bit of a
coincidence so you have the you have the
chopping chopping board fits exactly
into the sink and then somehow the
handle is right at the point where the
you know the water drops in so you could
you can leave your because there's not
much space on the kitchen bench so you
can still use the water and then chop
tomatoes it's also like boats the more
storage you have the better so the whole
the whole living platform is is one
piece of storage with a with a bed
there's a guest bed in that storage
corners I am what's also quite nice is
that you constantly move up and down
right in between the different levels so
therefore you you always perceive the
space from different and also the
surroundings from different levels
and then on our ups when once you arrive
in the bed
you can't look out and no one can look
in and then it's quite private so you
hear you hear the street you hear the
people passing by but no you you can't
you know you you're you're not seeing
except you can look out there's one
little window above the bed see
Thanks is project so we're moving to
Germany Casa it's the fritter siano for
you that there was a collaboration with
with Gregory and sank from that group
and they are they have reworked the
identity of the museum and the museum
since I think 1955 is hosting the
Documenta and and since then been a
pivot point for contemporary art and
that's the ground floor and we were
looking in specifically in that for a so
part of the redesign of the identity for
the whole place was to to change the
foyer the brief was to to put a
reception bookshop a cafe what else and
also be able to use it as a event space
or as a lecture hall the nice thing is
that this you see here this is a
exhibition space this rotunda is another
exhibition space and this one is it's
called the Koons vine which is it's
partly connected from time to time so
this hole for a function is it's quite
nice as an empty room and as a hinge
between all those between that place and
that place and this is there's a really
big square right in front so in a way we
were trying to introduce all those
functions without necessarily
subdividing the space in very clear
zones so we we try to furnish it in a
way that it still feels like an empty
room you enter and you have enough space
to you know orientate yourself and then
and key for that was the decision to say
this is the main door this is the main
access to the exhibition that's the
other one and this two doors we don't
really need them so we filled them with
bookshop with bookshelves the same way
we try to we put benches into these two
doors and it became niches to sit so
because it's always slightly
uncomfortable if you have a big empty
space and then you sit on a chair that I
lost in the quarter so suddenly they
become anchors for to some some seating
arrangement so what happens is you still
have you under this two central axis is
thankss and then there's that's the
reception and this one is like a book
book table but what was important about
the reception is usually you enter
museum and then there's a one direction
there's a how do you say a direction to
the to the ticket counter there's a
front in the back and then in this case
we thought it's nice if there's no front
and back so it's it's it's a volume
along which you circulate and well the
good thing is there's not there's not
thousands of people coming every day so
it allows you to have a slightly surgery
you basically you buy your ticket over
the corner so it makes it slightly more
direct relationship or personal
relationship with the people that work
there and the guards they always walk
around so they come around and then it
becomes more like a kitchen island phew
that's arrangement this island you can
split into two parts and then move them
around in order to be more flexible
there you see the the arched doors
with filled with books and this is the
insertion it looks a bit like a tree
Christmas tree it's not the Christmas
tree it's it's a steel shelf that has
exactly the shape of the harsh and it it
just sits in the arch so it's not we're
not feeling it that way so it's a shelf
standing in an arch which is slightly
different this it's not touching it in
any way
that's the reception desk in the let's
say the reception mode with a cafe on
one side and that's for events they can
put them together as a long bar so it's
more functional as a with fridges and
all those things so we you see you enter
and actually reception and book shoppers
is on the parameter and the the first
thing you see is actually the exhibition
so that was one of the points that were
really important to us into to Zach and
Gregory's that somehow there's more
direct relationship between the foyer
and and the source or in spaces so if
you turn left now and we're jamming
people
but I think it's exactly the kind of
feeling we are looking for which is -
it's it's kind of an empty space which
gives you just enough time for all
school class to arrive and and you see
that's the reception desk that's the
other view which looks straight - to the
other exhibition you see on the corner
that's one of the sitting niches and
this is part of the new typography Zac
and that's the the other way around
you're in exhibition you're looking back
to the photo so somehow it's always the
relation between closed doors or blocked
doors and see-through toys now this is
the niche again and we've placed these
benches and next to the doors that lead
to the park outside which creates a more
like an intimate zone and we also design
tables and lights as you'll see the
trick with this was somehow to make it
we wanted to make the element feel solid
or have certain presence in the room and
we chose this pattern because it felt
more like almost like a stone texture
from afar and you have that solid
presence and then when you move close it
becomes more like a surprise it's more
like just a graphical thin pattern that
give this certain lightness this is the
book stance
that's the bookshelf again
some benches and tables here it's being
used for talk
that's the kind of proximity we're
talking about between the the people
working there and the clients that look
quite like that's an umbrella stand
that's a magazine holder and bar table
it's this shelf if you fill it with
books it's about one and a half tons so
it was somehow trying to to make it land
on the ground as if there's nothing
all right we're staying in Germany going
to happen it's a it's an unbuilt project
won quite early it's called well it's
called twin house you see here that's
very old
Arkham City fabric that's the site the
main road is here so it's about a
courtyard type un that's it's the street
typical street house then you have you
walk through to the to the gate and
we're talking about that space which is
you know you come in here it is a
typical like a not a warehouse but a
workshop workshop space so that's the
front facade and then this is the this
is like show the building we were
converting you see again the courtyards
and you if you go on this back it's this
type where you know you have a
ground-floor unit and then the external
staircase which goes up to the to the
top floor the whole setting was really
nice so we do we didn't want to do too
much to it and we work we knew we were
aware it is a it was more like a
feasibility study so we we could you
know we were not too concerned with
practical implications at this point say
it's if you go back to the plan the idea
was to you see that's a top floor you go
up the stair you have a little terrace
here we moved the door we closed that
door and you enter from here and the
idea was to keep that room intact as a
room because there's only windows to the
front and we the only thing we
introduced was a glass wall here
then kind of a toilet unit there so its
son and this kitchen kitchen element so
if you go on and slide forward
see that's the kitchen unit if you look
back this is the view to the bedroom
where you have two layers you have the
the glass and then you have the curtains
and you can close the curtains and still
hear what's going on
you could also close the glass leave the
curtain open or close everything behind
that mirror there is the the Wardrobe on
the one side and then on the other side
but somehow this that's all about that
project there's no more to it but
somehow is stuck we're still hoping to
find the right space to do something
like that but now I'm actually coming to
the twin which is here and what is
interesting you already walked through
through like one house you walked into
the courtyard and now you have to get
over to here so you're gonna walk
through here which is that gate and it
took us quite a quite a while to
convince the the council to because it's
all listed to actually build the door
that looks very natural to this space so
because there was nothing before so you
enter here you go into that courtyard
which and then we thought why not and
another courtyard so you whant should
use this one should go one more night
its elevation its
it's a difficult site so the problem is
if you go back
is this all firewall so the only way to
get light is to the front there's no
there's no other orientation plus the
firemen they they can't cut the corner
with a long letter so we'll have to have
two security acts fire exits and that's
the moment where you realize that these
guys on the left are actually not so
stupid
so we borrow the idea of the external
staircase and then introduced it as an
element unless in the new proposal but
we thought it's nice if this staircase
shouldn't be just you know fire exit so
we thought to give it a dialogue with
there's an outer staircase and inner
staircase and you see it here is that on
the back that's where it's dark that's
where all the functional rooms are to
the front and this is a series of rooms
and the rooms they always have two views
they have a view to the outside and then
never let's say a big door to that
circulation core which gets the light
from the top so there's a steel
staircase here in a steel strike is
there so that's why you you know it's
two houses so we always important to
have two entrances so if you once you
enter you have another layer which is
you know this this all facade is
south-facing and there's neighbors
looking at you from the other side it's
very close so we thought it's nice to at
least have the possibility to have
another skin that sits in front of your
ear facade so you could completely close
it off now we're we're on the first
floor so there's you see this these are
the bedrooms you could put the partition
wall and then you have two
dance but what was important is that you
have this the viewers through across the
whole building so there's never that
there's never a dead and so here in that
in that view you standing here looking
in through the hallway which is this one
and then into the other closet or
bathroom this was from a slightly
earlier iteration this is when you stand
outside on this steel staircase but what
you you feel you're in the room it's
always nice if the room has double
aspects if you know you can go that way
but you can also go the other way you
couldn't leave the house you come back
late you just go up here into your room
it's a the ground floor where in the
unfurnished stage with a staircase on
one side okay Christmas
so you tell us if it's we're going too
much into detail here the warehouse
apartment it's it's a conversion of us
artists warehouse in Kilburn and the
brief was to basically make rooms for
them there was a four bedrooms and a
studio space that we were to insert into
this existing open-plan living space and
it's quite a beautiful space with you we
have you 360 degrees and the challenge
was how to somehow keep the feeling of
this copán plant space while introducing
wall space or rooms yeah it's a bit sad
to to put five rooms on such and such a
floor so we we try to try the hybrid so
basically we decided what is the main
room and it's this one this whole square
which is the main living space the
kitchen and it's like an open plan what
is very special about that building is
that this access the entrance is from a
staircase that comes from the ground
floor up so you actually arrive and
Yaron you're right in the middle of this
really tall space and then storage and
kitchen wraps around this and you have
three bedrooms here then a fourth
bedroom on top of this as a mezzanine
and then a fifth office space on top of
this part so there's two a mezzanine
here an amazing in there so that's the
central element it's like an island
where you constantly circulate around it
and you you cook here you kind of look
all the way out so here's he but the one
really important thing that
it's that seems very characteristic to
the spaces this big windows and there's
a rhythm to the windows so we continued
the rhythm with those doors here and a
really big there's 280 by I think to 160
double doors so you can shut them all
off and then you have your private
bedrooms but you can also open them all
the way up and you still get this you
look all the way through your your your
apartment then there's these two
mezzanine Segen and they're looking at
each other if you go one floor up
they'll just have a glazed facade on
that side and on that side and this is
the office and we did the only way we
try to influence the space and the way
you kind of perceive the spaces one has
a hidden staircase which is hidden
behind one of the double doors and then
the other one has a like an external
staircase so the the way you approach
instantly affects the way you feel in
the space because you do feel much more
hidden here and then you do here even
though they have the same the same
facade section
so that's the the mezzanine looking to
the to the living site so the office is
up here that's the bathroom and the
larder before the bathtub was just in
the middle of the space and everyone was
using the bathtub there so there was no
so it was okay to have it fairly exposed
but we do here's like sliding to our
tracks that run all the way along the
thing so you have large sliding doors
that can you can totally open the
bathroom door can't close it
the other side has the this three doors
and when they open they reveal the
staircase that goes up and then the the
views into the other spaces
the ayah maybe once the dimension is
with the small house we showed you those
pictures during construction so in this
case we tried the other way around
antwuan the the photographer we work
with he's he came
actually a few weeks ago so it's very
fairly reason and we waited a couple of
months so the client started to live in
the space they furnished it so it's it's
the contrary to to the small house and
that's a view if you go back as a bit of
the hopper view then that you're on
outside the building you're looking
towards the back and there's a there's a
cemetery so we can you see the the
transparency of the building and the big
windows
you can see the big doors and yeah that
lead to the bedrooms on one side we
tried maybe one thing we try to dissolve
the kitchen a little bit because usually
the kitchen is this big thing where you
have cupboards and closets and so the
kitchen is a hybrid of it's partly part
of that island we looked at but then
partly it's it's made out of four pieces
of furniture that's to stand next to
each other so they are obviously fixed
to the ground and there's because that
thing wouldn't stand myself otherwise
but so that it works more with this idea
of the open plan that you have in that
space now you see that the green
staircase that leads ups upstairs to the
bedroom and the entrance below that's
more open living room underneath the
Ottoman in mr. case again
there was this deal with authority you
know how to insulate this whole place
and the idea was in order to leave the
bricks on the ground on the first floor
exposed was to insulate the roof as much
as we could this was a really cheap
project so we'll we did cut corners
where we could cut corners and the the
magic solution was to apply this spray
foam so the whole all the the whole
ceiling is sprayed so he got this really
soft texture so you do read the the
rhythm of the of the roof structure but
it's a bit like covered in one soft
material and then painted white
I think that's the last one
large studio and this is an art or it's
actually it's a studio for a stage
designer in just below Muswell Hill
where we're going on-site in January I
think hopefully it's a on a very very
low budget and which we enjoy quite a
lot it's a challenge to build the client
wants to build a new studio in one of
these arches
she's quite lucky because she lives just
behind this the arch so so you can see
that number eight there's the arch that
we're going to put on your building and
then behind us her apartment so she can
basically walk through her garden down
into the studio I bet the brief also she
also wanted to have the possibility of
renting it out to another artist or
designer or wherever and therefore it
needed to have two entrances a front
entrance in the back entrance so yeah
I'll go into that later but that's the
view from top of the arch so it's quite
a nice situation so you'll have a great
view from inside the studio even though
the studio is a bit lower it still you
have a similar view that's the arch
itself so we're going to demolish this
one and put in your building and that's
the collection of all the different
types
that exists at the moment with our new
proposal in this is this is actually
reality
collage that's the there's this issue
there's this thing everyone who lives
behind here they do enjoy looking
through the gap
so those units been lucky they filled it
quite early but so so we we can't go all
the way up to the to the arch which we
had to deal with somehow you kind of you
would want to but it would block the
whole view from the neighbors right also
we just started to design the unit next
door actually we're making a cupcake
factory on this one that went in for
planning last week so it's coming
another twin to this one yeah that's the
plan where you have basically what we
proposed this two spaces with each have
their own entrance but it gets this nice
interesting idea of how you could
circulate the space from they're both
the same spaces without two different
views so we're quite curious how it's
going to be yeah its received
yeah we have no interview but you have
to imagine she comes from here let's
let's say that's the back of the arch
that's the front so her colleague or the
person he's right she's renting this
studio to she approaches from here into
here and she has the window out to the
street while the client she comes from
the back and she has the window looking
back at her house which means that that
innovation is exactly the same as that
elevation is just mirrored so if you
were a kid running all the way around
you just keep on going it's like a deja
vu you go through the same again and
again
and we we have a model we we didn't
bring it but it sounds really but now
but it's actually it's really intriguing
this it's like something is wrong
because this I get I get say I am maybe
the trick was we couldn't fill it so we
we decided to put a rooftop on the top
so that this is the railing so can have
a you know barbecue on the roof and have
a nice view with our children top if you
go back once more I mean that the the
thing is it's super cheap I mean it's a
well we're having problems to find the
right builders but so all we're ended or
we end up with this it's not much choice
for material because you just go for the
cheapest so all we end up is the
decision where to place the window in
relation to the door so it becomes more
a composition so how do you you know
what's what's the size of the window
what's the relationship with the door to
the ground and that little step
I think that's the last citation thank
you thank you very much um I was just
curious as to I mean you mentioned in
the beginning about representation and
they say that maybe we're informed by
things that you did as students that
they a but I was just wondering as like
how did you decide to stop the practice
together but also what do you think from
your work while you were students
carried forward into your practice if at
all I think that well we started because
we have a commission to do a house in
Germany and that's somehow that's that
started the whole practice in terms of
work and how it relates to this what we
did hair there was quite the sudden
shift from going from school to working
and designing buildings um I think it's
I think we actually changed a lot yeah
and we also I think we did yeah because
the I think it's not the obvious things
that carry on it's actually the things
you probably maybe that the tutors gave
you on the way on the more unconscious
level so maybe that's why we've we that
was a little introduction
I think the way how I were to interact
then because we went to the same unit
for the final project I think the the
care with which he we discussed the work
I think that's something that carry on
it's not that I don't necessarily a
methodology or the way of drawing or the
way of making models it's somehow
surprisingly changes to do with suddenly
there's different timescales and you
also you keep on I don't know talking to
others then you change it changes so I
think it's it's more in between the
lines those those influences that carry
on or survive
I am I think okay I was going to ask you
about your choice of materials um and I
know you might say it's a lot to do with
economy and the budget of your project
but I don't think that's necessarily
true you could have made the smallest
house entirely out of plywood and you
know the choice of colors I think very
particular and very carefully chosen so
if you could maybe say something about
that also because you you seem to be you
are two authors working on one project
and I think you're also both very very
different I mean substantially different
so how do you how do you how do you come
up with these choices of materials and
how do you how do you kind of agree at
the end maybe we don't necessarily agree
I think that's that's for sure so it's a
lot of yeah it's a lot of conversation
well there's a very practical way of
working which is each of us is
responsible for one project so we don't
we usually there's one person and then
we show it to each other and then we
have a conversation but then when it
comes to material choices it's most of
the project we should do the small house
was actually fairly expensive
considering that that it's quite small
but so we could have chosen other things
maybe we do have a desire for just those
which are also quite nice if you don't
have to think too much about material in
a way it's important but at the same
time it's also you get used to certainly
two different kinds of materials and
then it's more a matter of how do you
arrange the space or are you
well thank you very much for showing
your work good night
