hello good afternoon from London in the
architecture Association Marina la Torre
and I'm the director of the Masters in
history critical thinking and today
myself and three of the students Nicolas
V and Stefan we are we are going to give
you some insights into the program and
we are going to answer if boss for your
questions
I would like to start by saying that the
MA in history critical thinking it's a
12-month program we start in September
and students present the final work in
September after and the course it's
called hot stuff from the name of the
course called history and critical
thinking so that means that it's not a
straightforward history course but we do
look at history we work with history but
for us this is more a means to
comprehend engage critically and
position ourselves more within the
contemporary that means that what we do
what we study what we examine we ground
it in the good sense and knowledge of
history but our aim our objective
academic objective it's to critically
engage with both the historical material
but also with the urgent questions of
our time of the present another thing
which makes that program rather unique
in the context of the AAA
but also in the context of other
universities is our emphasis on writing
we do right we don't design
and perhaps I can pass to the image we
we use of writing from more an
architectural point of view as a design
that's why we say here designed by words
and their students explore throughout
the year different forms of writing
essays short reviews commentaries
interviews and they tried to through the
writing to engage with design to engage
with architectural questions to engage
with buildings with the city with
history develop their analytical and
critical skills but also by the end of
the year developed their own voice the
the other thing I would like to do very
briefly before I also let the students
more talk about their experience and
their engagement with the different
components of the program it's to
outline very very briefly the structure
of the course how we move through the
year because the very intense course
it's only 12 months so the first term we
use to provide the students with a very
solid pace then so that everybody has a
shared common ground so we focus more on
various histories and the mainly the
question of the writing of history and
also on we try to clarify notions as
modern modernist modernity critique
criticism and give the students the
tools which are necessary in order to
move on to the next term which is which
focuses more on the contemporary and
there we asked the students to act more
as critical voices within the group and
within the school we invite a number of
speakers external or to the AIA external
to the program
to expose the students to a diversity of
perspectives to a diversity of voices
and also to somehow enforce the students
to engage with these voices and through
that engagement develop their own
identity and their owner refine their
own interest and that's something
perhaps I need to say at this point that
it's a small group it's very diverse but
it's a small group and this one of the
objectives of the course to keep the the
code the group small and intimate so
that we can have everything more in the
format of the seminar so we all sit
around the table like we do now and it
discuss debate share readings share
ideas thoughts and develop questions and
despite the rather way defined structure
of the course students are very
encouraged to explore and develop their
own interest in in the second term and
the third term in parallel to the
regular courses we also organized a
number of workshops workshops on writing
workshops on drawing because that's the
other aspect although we don't design
like in other parts of the school and we
use more writing and text one important
aspect for us is to engage with various
media and drawing a graphic material
photo photographs visual material and
use all these as part of our evidence as
part of our resource in order to engage
and develop architectural questions and
from primarily an architectural point of
view and in the third term along with
trips and
further workshops on writing the
students start focusing more on the main
component of the MA which is the final
thesis and it's something that they work
on during the last two terms during
spring during the summer but at this
point I would also like to let the
students give the insight from this year
Nicholas and Sophie and Stefan who was
in the main student three years ago and
he is like currently in the ph.d program
Nicholas I want to discuss a bit how I
got into the program where my
expectations were and where I feel I'm
at and the experience I've had this
first term I come from a design
background I studied architecture and
then I was in practice for five years
before deciding to do this master the
last two years I actually started my own
practice and through design and through
practice some questions started to
appear which I felt could not be
addressed with the design projects I was
developing at the time and these
questions were related more to theory
and history of architecture and I relate
to what you were saying Marina because
not history as history for itself but as
groundwork to explore these questions
and this is why I picked this program
and I would like to to dwell in a
particular structure which I found very
interesting for myself in this first
term and is the relationship between the
class that occurs mainly in seminars and
the tutorials the personal tutorials
which I think are at least for me where
a very important way to both create a
framework a a ground knowledge on which
to talk about we did this as a group in
the seminars and then we would have the
tutorials where we could address more of
our personal questions and perhaps
between both is where we found our
questions are more related to
contemporary situations and we found a
meeting point between the historical
things we were discussing in class in
the seminars and our own interests we
were bringing to the MA my name is
Zachary and I decided to do the HCT
course after the first part of the
architecture degree because I was
interested engaging with architecture in
a in a more critical way and learning
how to think and how to write about it
and in doing so make the work that I
would like to do have broader references
to a range of different histories as
well as different practices and one of
the most intriguing parts of the courses
the fact that we're able to go overseas
and do trips and most recently we went
to the south of France to rock a broom
cat Martin with Tim Benton who was
leading a fantastic course about the e
1027 house and you know having a expert
being able to take you there it's just
such a rich opportunity and something
that I think they is uniquely able to
provide particularly as the costs so
small and also you know doing the trip
down they're not over
like specifically interested in that but
it opens up a discussion for so many
different that shared experience opens
up a level discussion for so many
different interests which definitely
feature in the group which is extremely
diverse and brings many different things
to the table well thank you for that it
was a listening to you reminded me of my
own experience two years ago during
during the program just for for the
audience I graduated from the program in
2015 in autumn 2015 and embarked right
after that in the ph.d program it might
be interesting to signal that one of the
the possible outcomes after graduating
from from DMA historical thinking is the
opportunity to start a PhD and and
continuing the topic researched during
the last phase of of the program this
allow allowed me in any case to go a
little bit deeper with with with in
embarking in a more in-depth analysis of
the subject I have chosen for the
dissertation by the way these are a few
of the recent Asians here on the table
maybe we can zoom out to to get them in
the in the frame my topic relates maybe
to a very to one of a critical aspect of
contemporary practice which is I try to
engage with the notion of sustainable
development and I'm trying to extract it
from the let's say more technical realm
and insert in another historical context
by doing so I'm able to offer a
contemporary let's say discussion on
what what sustainable development might
mean and by framing and selecting and
number of case studies I hope I'm able
to to frame it differently in order to
get eventually to a number of
conclusions which are rather important
from architecture point of view and this
being said I would also learn like to
highlight the opportunity the program
offers to engage not only within the
program with with the interesting people
that take part in it but also engage
with other dimensions of the school by
that I could mention from my own
experience the opportunity to to sit in
juries for undergraduate programs some
of them resulting in a very intense
relation professional relationship with
after after radiation and also the other
aspect the fact that we can also open up
in maybe Marina we can hear discuss a
little bit and other possibilities other
outcomes that might our audience might
find interesting to to hear a lot first
of all I would like to go back to what
you said that during the program the
students have the opportunity to
interact with other parts of the school
either by participating in designer
juries or by commenting on very various
public events public lectures or
experience students have the image
students because they are the only ones
in the high school who whose main tool
is the Easter is the writing so and they
do produce a number of commentary so
reviews of the events which are then
published in the various AAA
publications a number of examples
on the table and then we have a number
of joint seminars also with the PhD
program a Stefan said some of our
students they used EMA as a first step
towards the beauty it's not a prescribed
career path for the ma students as we
said there's a diversity in terms of
background in terms of interest but once
they decide that they want to pursue a
PhD after then we can use the year and
we can help them we support them with
that to develop in one way they proposal
for the PhD so it in one way it becomes
part of the future studies also have to
say that we have many most of our
students are trained architects and some
of our students they go back to practice
but they used this year to take a break
and to dedicate to start to reading and
writing and try to develop to explore
and develop their own ideas and their
own thoughts and when they go back to
practice they find other ways to engage
with practice formula my students who
went after and collaborated with design
firms and they were the ones they were
in charge of the publication department
or of the competition department there
are many former ma students who are
involved actually in the a a in the
undergraduate school and they teach
other in history in theory studies in
the first three years or actually in
other programs even in grabbed other
graduate courses or they go back to the
home countries and they get involved in
teaching there and of course there are
other
I'm a graduates who follow a slightly
different path and they get more
involved in galleries or museums or are
they work with other institutions we
have to go out and make graduates who
are now working with collaborate with
the Barbican Centre and the VNA museum
so there is not that the group is
diverse but also the program is very
well structured but at the same time
open and flexible in effort to
accommodate the diversity and actually
support the diversity after after the
program and I think that something that
also is very valuable is that it is a
process where you also what you were
mentioning that you find your own voice
perhaps you don't come to the MA program
knowing what you will do or what is
specifically your your interest that you
were exposed to so many different voices
Sophie was saying we also engage with
buildings we went to this trip and we
got to enter this house and that in a
way changes your your ideas and you
incorporate them to your own interest
and to your own thoughts right now for
example that we are about to present our
essay for me that trip was a changing
point in my own work it became a case
study that could become the pretext to
explore many of the interest I already
had perhaps more in an intuitive level
but then something in the program allows
you to develop further I think that like
although the program is extremely
intense there's a lot of help along the
way like we're working through hard
ideas but you're supported and the
structure of the course allows you to
explore those ideas in the way that you
want so for instance
I mean I was just saying the diversity
of applications that the information you
learn has is so great and coming to the
course I wanted to be able to apply I
wanted to engage with the design but not
necessarily only engage with
architecture in the strict sense of
building and going through the
traditional method of the architectural
education and this allowed such a
breadth of knowledge which can apply to
potential art practice writing practice
and you know journalism in and I think
it's just so valid in today's society
which values like modules Northy Skilton
multidisciplinary people and at the same
time it's also very grounded in history
and I think that's important because it
might come through when we when we speak
there there is a little bit of
everything and it's true it allows for
that flexibility but at the same time we
go in depth really in depth in the study
and we we do not approach history
superficially but we really go in depth
in text going through text who then talk
about contemporary issues and this is
this is maybe Marina has briefly
mentioned this in the opening
intervention that it's not only engaging
with texts and history it's also talking
about drawings and looking at drawings
as other forms of design when we when we
can even go as far as saying we are
reading drawing and we are in a constant
quest search for clues that may shed a
new light on the topic that we are
debating of course the source is that
intervening in a piece of research are
multiple we have
history text we have our oral sources
then we have drawings and and designs so
this ability to shift in between these
various sources is is something you
acquire through an ear long practice I
believe and it's something that that has
helped me in my in my research after the
program thank you because that too again
to emphasize that because I think it's
very important for that particular
program big writing they do learn how to
write in an academic manner because
especially some of the students that we
need that for the future and as Nicholas
said and everything we are is very much
grounded in a good sense in knowledge of
history and we asked them to be also
extremely precise with the use of
language in the use of terms and
actually work through terms and work
through the implications of terms and
the various uses of them in history but
at the same time writing for us it's
also a another kind of project it's an
ongoing project by means of which we try
and we want the students to try to
explore and engage with design with
architectural issues and pause not even
if they don't look at buildings but post
architectural questions and with two
distinct things now perhaps coming to
the end of our little presentation I
would like to show
from our recent trips here we it's we
are in the alto building in Helsinki
where we went last May the Insurance
Building by Alberto and we are in the
library of the building and then we had
the chance actually to talk and have a
little seminar with scholars from the
University of Helsinki and actually with
a number of architects from the city and
the next one is from the recent trip to
South France and the basic to the e10 27
house and perhaps because I didn't have
a chance to go there but perhaps the
Nicholas himself again there is
something I think that is is most
telling and we could have also added
maybe a picture from the school itself
but I think what is most telling is that
we in conversation in a very intimate
way like the scale of the the amount of
students in the program allows there to
be a conversation that is ongoing the
takes place in the classroom takes place
in other parts of the of the school and
it also takes place in this trip and I
think it builds up a community between
us where we can continuously explore
this this so the library itself is a
very beautiful space to work in but
aside from that the bar which is just
adjacent to it is a place where you can
meet your tutor or meet your colleague
many friends and your peers and the
dialog doesn't really end which is a
fantastic you're always furthering ideas
in both a formal setting of the
classroom but also a more casual setting
so it allows for a real breath and of
information to come to you
and that's the intimate nature of the
class is something which is reflected
throughout the whole school
it's like relatively petite in size
which means that you do have a sense
that's your ideas and what you're
interested in is being addressed
directly which is just quite fulfilling
from from the imagery and have not
joined the trip but from that imagery I
see you are handling a number of slides
right maybe you can the the trip we have
already talked a little bit about the
trip we did the trip with Tim Benton
which is a large part of the in charge
of the institution that is
reconstructing the house or preserving
the house and we were able to engage
with that really architectural situation
which is how to preserve architecture
and it was very interesting to be there
and to actually go through their process
so there were and we have some slides
that are pictures from the house that
appeared in a journal when the house was
built in the 20s and we were asked to
relate those images to the new
reconstructed spaces inside the house so
in that way engage through
reconstruction with the questions of
architecture and modernism in the house
really this is very interesting and
telling about the way we in the program
engaged with image not as a way of
representing an idea but a way of what
total working through the questions
through image now before we conclude
perhaps we can and
a few questions and if there are no
questions from the audience
perhaps I can say that in order to apply
to this MA you need to write a statement
so we don't ask for portfolio we we
welcome writing samples but they are not
they're optional and I very much
recommend a visit to the school if you
are seriously considering to apply for
the program and it was very nice to talk
to you and very I would like to thank
first of all Stephan Sophie and Nicholas
and the audience for joining us and we
are very very much looking forward to
receiving any questions any carry some
you can contact me directly by email or
go to the AAA website or to our web site
and looking forward perhaps to seeing
you in receiving your applications thank
you very much thank you thank you
