thank you thank you very very much
really good evening thank you all for
coming tonight thank you very much
ever sorry I'm like as you can see I
have certain forces but not on thank you
thank you so much so thank you ever and
manager for inviting me it's really a
pleasure to speak especially in this new
canonical lecture series Thank You Liam
also for organizing my trip here to
London it's really an enormous pleasure
to give a talk here at the architecture
Association but also in London one of
the capitals of European empires
especially thrilled to be speaking in
this very series since canonical
histories old and new must be
continuously questioned and challenged I
would like to start to auto begin by
reminding reminding us that while I'm
speaking here in this very privileged
space that I am obviously part of there
are people fighting for their own rights
and for the rights of future generations
this is in Algiers where Algerians are
claiming their fundamental rights since
February 2019 Julian's called their
peaceful weekly protests and we should
also call this protests also in the same
way el Iraq which means movement
physical and political in October alone
there were protests in Algeria Bolivia
Cameroon Chile Ecuador rhenium Hongkong
Iraq Lebanon France Spain and the UK
so these people remind us that
colonization has different forms of
existence
it exists through the physical invasion
and occupation of lands and people it
exists through both military operations
and civil measures it exists through the
material and psychological subjugation
and Exposition or exploitation of human
and natural resources it exists through
men made environmental transformation
and ecological transformations it exists
through technological threats and
digital strategies of businesses and
civilians it exists through global
mechanisms of accumulation by
dispossession and civilians it exists
through global mechanisms of
accumulation by dispossession and
profound social economic and gender
inequities it exists through the
implicit or explicit alienation and
maintenance of power domination and war
it exists through forced traditional
religious and cultural erasers it exists
at the very heart of destructed
projected and built environment it
exists through the construction labor
forces and material extractions and
industries it exists through the
uncritical imposition of a language or
of a specific language literature and
knowledge the frame of reference of the
vast majorities of has architectural
histories and theories is central Europe
and northern America which often
excludes the dynamic histories of
colonialism extraction imperialist
migration slavery and Wars in spite of
the fact that architects decision makers
and populations have always been
involved in these activities what is
often called peripheries global South
developing countries non-western world
and the other exists in reference or in
opposition to the so called centers
global north developed countries Western
world or the self this set of
measurements derives from and
in a world order that has colonial
futures the assessment of the validity
of architecture and his histories and
theories is based on certain notions
paradigms figures forms texts buildings
and styles this mechanism of evaluation
regulates the understanding and
interpretation of architecture as well
as the inclusion and exclusion of its
histories and theories of architecture
it also promotes and privileges certain
cultural and intellectual aspects over
others consequently these criteria play
a crucial role in institutionalizing
architectural histories and theories and
practices the process of history sizing
built environment from around the world
are contingent to the sources that
scholars draw upon and on the languages
that they speak to dismantle the
colonial syndrome is to question the
nature of the materials employed to
construct architectural histories and
theories as well as the linguistic
skills and cultural values of the
interpreter of these documents the
interrogation of the interpreter the why
how and what is being interpreted is
essential to the examination of the
construction of histories and theories
of architecture their meanings
implications and impacts the written and
unwritten protocols of the practice of
architectural historian Theory shape
description transcription production and
consumption of these histories and
theories moreover
certain chapters of these histories and
theories may be seen or used as
instruments encouraging and reinforcing
an intellectual domination and supremacy
the point here is not to undermine the
discipline not to ignore the canonical
texts and methodologies but rather to
underline possible conscious or
unconscious colonial ramifications of
writing the histories and theories of
the development of the built environment
and the dissemination of the screen
for instance in history sizing
architectural production knowledge is in
the aftermath of the Second World War
and during the Cold War the existence of
European colonial discourses
architecture and planning in the large
and abundant overseas colonies colonized
territories departments and
protectorates of the European empires
has often been overlooked and isolated
the role that the colonies and colonized
people played in reconstructing European
cities and the consequences of the
formal end of European empires have
often been disregarded in spite of the
immense if effect and huge scale of this
colonial ruptures and legacies some of
the most transformative events of the
20th 20th century occurred in Europe and
in the African continent where various
pro colonial activities anti-colonial
struggles and war for independence we
are taking place the maps of these
populations territories and environments
changed within only a few years the
social special and political economic
consequences of which were colossal on
both sides of the Mediterranean
including the force displacement and
migration of population the presence of
foreign military bases in newly
independent countries the rapid
urbanisation of cities and their suburbs
the reorganization of agricultural
production and natural resources
extractions the resolution of building
construction markets the establishment
of new political solidarity's and
alliances similarly
naming certain historical periods and
thereby their corresponding built
environment is dependent on a European
frame of reference this red reference is
partial inappropriate and sometimes
outright in erroneous the pre-colombian
or the pre-columbian era refers to the
history of the Americas before the
arrival of Italian navigator and
colonist Christopher Columbus in the
Americas as if this history of this
territory did not exist before
reappeared European men saw it for the
first time the Appalachian American
Indian architecture refers to the built
environment of the people that Columbus
mistakenly named India's Indians as he
believed that he reached the shores of
East Indies during his search for a
Western passage to the Indies European
colonizers have also invented the
appellations negro village village negra
village in agree- [ __ ] dolefully it's a
ditch in order to name the settlements
that were inhabited by brown and black
population in colonized African
territories here we have a picture of a
negro village in Nigeria or a postcard
it was the Portuguese who introduced the
term negro literally meaning black in
the 15th century to designate Bantu
people's that the Portuguese had
encountered when they arrived in
southern Africa since then the term has
been used in various languages and form
and it epitomizes a myriad of violent
histories of and racist connotations
which continues or continue to this day
the re-examination of the cartography of
architectural histories and theories
demands a renegotiation of
methodological boundaries and bias a
reconsideration of theoretical
assumptions and conventions and the
recognition of geographical absences and
presences to be effective and infective
this expansion cannot count on adding on
what it already exists or what is or
because this will mimic the binary
opposition between north and south
between West and East strengthen the
domination of colonial narratives and
maintaining its frame of reference
rather this examine reexamination should
rethink the very pissed a me that
architectural history has generated and
circulated that is to theorize the very
architectural histories that are taught
today around some parts of the world and
that sometimes seem to be homogeneous
and hegemony if this seems to be a huge
effort or an impossible mission then
there is something problematic about
architectural knowledge education
pedagogy and practice these are some of
the issues that I have been thinking
about and questioning in the last years
through my teaching at the eth zurich
geneva Princeton and Cornell but also as
Eva mentioned through my published work
and exhibition and talks and panels I
have been trying to really understand
how to read our discipline along and
against the grain to paraphrase
anthropologist and Laura's daughter I
questioned these issues in architecture
of counter-revolution the French army
knows and Algeria which was published by
the get after lag in Zurich in 2017 and
has just came out in French in the
French translation by the addition of a
calendar in Paris translated by Marx and
super II which is very important as this
is really about French colonial history
so these are my interlocutors as well I
also question these issues in the
exhibition discrete violence
architecture and the French foreign
Egeria that was displayed at the eth
zurich in 2017 and in the last two years
it travelled to the new institute in
rotterdam the archive cabinets in berlin
the graduate school of architecture in
harrisburg led by one of the speakers of
this very series leslie local la colonia
Paris vipir gallery in Prague Cornell
University and twelve gates gallery in
Philadelphia I also try to address this
question in this recently published
volume war zones that I edited which is
the second issue of the new journal the
guitar papers that the Goethe Institute
attached the writ large
to celebrate its 50th anniversary in
2017 but this work is trying it by a
French law that was decreed on February
23rd 2005 on that very day the French
fifth republic under the presidency of
Russia had decreed a law on I quote the
recognition of the nation and the
national contribution of repatriated
French article four mandated that
teachers must teach students about I
quote the positive role of French
colonialism particularly in North Africa
and that is to say French département of
Algeria the French departments of the
Algerian Sahara and the French
protectorate
of Morocco and Tunisia the second
sentence of article 4 read school
programs recognized in particular this
the positive role of the French presence
overseas notably in North Africa and
concede to history I repeat concede to
history and to the sacrifices of the
competent the of the French army in this
territories the eminent position to
which they have the right and of Court
with article for the French authorities
dictated the contents of history lessons
brain woods peoples studying in French
schools obligated teacher the Shroud in
silence a number of infamous colonial
massacres compelled teachers and pupils
alike to prize French colonies and
imperialism rejected the violence of
colonialism undermined the work of
historians and their ongoing debates
offended all those who have lived or
still live under colonial regime
overlooked the accountability and
responsibility of the French colonial
authorities and celebrated the crimes
that the French civil and military
authorities committed including the
crimes that I will mention later of the
French paramilitary terrorist group
known as the organization of the secret
Army in the wake of the swift avalanche
of national international reaction
protests and debates and condemnation
which were particularly centered
on the Algerian revolution or at the
Algerian war of independence the French
Authority removed with some difficulty
the the aforementioned sentence a year
later so it existed for one year however
France intention to Illidan's
colonialism existed then and still
exists today in contrast to this imposed
amnesia of article 4 architecture of
counter-revolution the French Ramanathan
Algeria examines a fragment of what the
French authorities sought to circumvent
it illuminates a handful of the myriad
of non positive to paraphrase the French
legislators characters and effects of
French colonialism including the key
role of the French army please open the
territory and people of Algeria Algeria
was one where was friend France longest
colonial let's say territory of colonial
presence in North Africa that began in
1830 so we are talking about hundred and
thirty-two years of presence so the term
war was formally recognized thirty seven
years after the ceasefire in 1962 indeed
it was not until October 1999 also under
the presidency of Jacques Chirac
that the French authorities approved the
use of the official appellation like a
de jure
the Algerian war at French schools and
in official terminology before 1999 the
Algerian war was called less even mo de
jure the events of Algeria and please
operación de mentioned along the
enforced the enforcement of law and
order I will return to the use of
language in a minute
so the book engages with the built
environment they were designed and
constructed during this very contested
war which borne various names they are
generate revenue ssin for the Algerian
people they are doing question for the
United Nations General Assembly the
events of Algeria as mentioned earlier
the Algeria or the Algerian War of
Independence for the French governments
from 1999 to today colonial warfare for
military historians the dirty war for a
number of French left-wing intellectuals
in the 60s modern warfare irregular
warfare subversive warfare psychological
war and counter-revolution for some
French army officers total warfare for
other French army officers and
counterinsurgency operations for the US
Army waged against the tumultuous
background of a backdrop of the Cold War
this armed conflict begin in November
1954 and ended in July 1962 it was not
the first war in Algeria Stalin in
history but it was certainly the one
that ended hundred and thirty two years
of French colonization it was not only a
war between French officers and the
Algerian our National Liberation Army
but it was also a conflict between the
French civil and military authorities
among French army officers between the
French left and right between the French
communists and leftists between the
French golet's and right-wing parties
between the East and Western bloc and
among and jennyline's among the
undeclared motivations of the French war
to keep Algeria and the French colonial
rule was the protection of France
economic interests in the Julian Sahara
which consisted not only in exploiting
natural resources oil and gas but also
in conducting nuclear tests in the
Algerian Sahara the French colonial
regime detonated its first atomic bomb
called blue turbo named after a tiny
jumping desert rodent in the Algerian
Sahara On February 3rd 1960 others
continued even after Adelia independence
in 1962 and continued until 1966 or four
years of
the independence of Algeria
counter-revolution that's what the title
says architecture of counter-revolution
counter-revolution is widely regarded as
the predecessor of counterinsurgency
operation and thereby of the global war
on terror counterinsurgency or
counter-revolution is defined as
comprehensive civil and military efforts
taken to simultaneously defeat and
contain insurgency and therefore it is
not a war between two or more armies in
a defined battlefield but rather a war
that invades the spaces of civil lives
and activities the practices and
theories of counterinsurgency were
developed by French officers in Algeria
who gained their practical experiences
during the Second World War
and during the first Indochina war this
officers secretly transferred these
methods to north and south america
notably argentina chile and to the
united states of america during the
1960's however since the invasion of
iraq in 2003 the United States and other
Western powers have already expressed
their interest in French military
practices in Algeria notably in the
famous Battle of Algiers and in the way
with which the French army created
learned integrated and enforced
counterinsurgency measures to grasp the
extent of counter-revolution I would
like to quote the definition of total
warfare that French Coronel nashua head
of the services of psychological action
and intelligence in the French Ministry
of National Defense stated in July 1957
during the Battle of Algiers total
because not only does it mobilize in
this effort all the industrial
commercial and agricultural powers of a
country but it also takes up in the war
efforts all women and children and
elderly men all who think all who live
all who breathe with all the forces of
love all the forces of enthusiasm all
the forces of hate and
it throws them into war this is the new
reality
total war because it takes the souls as
well as the bodies and it heals them to
the obedience of war efforts architect
of contribution dis meant ins the
effects of these measures on the
transformation of the algerian territory
and reveal the political socio-economic
meanings of laws map structures
infrastructure shelters and other
buildings the book is structured in ten
episodes each one seeks to identify
figures protocol and times involving a
convergence of architecture and
political military operations the
episodes are guided and framed by a
number of protagonists and antagonists
who represented the French institutions
and government both military and civil
each chapter examine one aspect of
French colonial counter-revolutionary
architecture and suggest a reading of
the psychology of French colonialism
what do I mean with the convergence of
architecture and political military
operations I will give you two very
brief examples chapter four and nine and
then I will try to elaborate very
quickly on chapter on three chapters one
of the most silenced parts of this
period so the first chapter or the
chapter the first example is chapter 4
on General de Gaulle's colonial project
this chapter discusses the intersection
of the return of jacques de Gato power
in May 1958 following the first general
put in Algiers with the policies
proposed by Paul de lluvia who appointed
who was appointed by the goal as
delegate general of the French
government Algeria as a footnote after
his experience in Algeria the VI became
the father of the new towns in France
especially in Paris he became the
general director of the district of
Paris
region from 1961 to 1969 and the leader
of the Institute of urban planning of
the Paris region so we see here also
this relationship between the colony and
the so-called Metropole so this chapter
investigates the premises on which
general Shan de Gaulle launched the
colossal socio-economic development plan
called the plunder consumption named
after the eastern Nigerian city where he
launched this plan this plan included
the construction of housing unit for 1
million people during the war this
chapter examines the topologies of
housing programs that the French
technocrat received and planned for
Algeria and Algerians as well as these
programs association with post Second
World War housing programs that were
built in France by the French Ministry
of Reconstruction it discusses the
similarities differences and objectives
of this mass housing policies and
projects here we see a propaganda
video this episode also chronicles
general she undergoes attempt to partly
divert the scope of the armed conflict
and discusses deliveries assignments to
transform the Algerian population and
territory the goal rot in his
communication to delivery a that I quote
the will of the French government is
that Algeria through the troubles and
despite delays reveals gradually it's in
its deep reality sorry released
gradually itself in its deep reality
thanks to the action conducted by France
to this end you need to pacify and
administer but at the same time
transform we go come back to the term
pacifier or pacification another example
of this of the convergence of
architecture and political military
operation can be found in chapter 9
titled erecting fortress Russian one
this episode highlights the events
around 1961 and the last months of the
Algerian revolution including the second
French general put in Algiers and the
creation of the French paramilitary
terrorist group known as the secret army
organization the US was composed of
French civilians and military officers
and what supports supported by French
and European people who feel me
disapproved of the policies of the Fifth
Republic and its leader General de
Gaulle the u.s. carried out acts of
lethal violence against civilians in
order to prevent Algeria's independence
and fiercely defended French colonial
sovereignty over Algeria
this chapter illustrate how general
DeGaulle attempted to protect the French
government in Nigeria its French civil
servants and the families from the
bloody terrorism of the US by designing
and building a new city called the
Blackrock ocean wha-ho Xinhua was
located about 50 kilometers east of
Algiers near the Mediterranean Sea the
French Air Force Base at raha and the
International Airport as at Maison
Blanche this episode examines the
unprecedented rapidity with which the
French bureaucrats or bureaucratic
machine was suddenly able to design and
build a new town in less than eight
months from February to September 1916
one designed by French both are
architects we Gabrielle the om de Maria
winner of the first video home in 1951
he's very well known in France today for
his co.design of the - of the Madonna's
in Paris - wha-what of the most
protected construction sites in colonize
Algeria
after its partial completion it became
one of the most surveilled settlements
in colonized Algeria with an area
covering 300 hectares the fortified
administrative city was expected to
contain offices and 700 heck and 7,000
housing units for a population of 30 to
35 thousand inhabitants the majority of
this ambitious project was realigns
Swiss porn architect Jean Jacques de
Leeuw who was in Algiers at the time of
the decision-making criticism debates
and construction of ocean WA provided
his interpretation of this project
he brought by 1961 all credits were
channeled to this false city all
operations were frozen to its advantage
Lemuria Architects architect Eden was
appointed
they chose the site in East Algiers
accessible from the app from the airport
but without contact with Algiers Warren
WA lived the a night in the fever of
delirious construction sites which was
effectively completed within the
allotted deadlines then the city became
that which it was planned to be a ghost
town abandoned in a grandiose landscape
but without poetry without architecture
without history however one of the most
suppressed episodes in the history of
the French war in Algeria that they
tried to voice in this book through
three different chapters and that I
would try to summarize and it's also the
theme the topic of the exhibition
discrete violence that I will also
introduce very briefly this taboo
history is what the French army had
countless own development regrouping
centers or what I rather called
regrouping camps the Comte de Ocampo a
massive forced relocation of Algerian
proper civilians this is also a moment
when architecture and political military
operation converged this massive force
resettlements was launched a few days
after the outbreak of the Algerian
revolution on November 1st 1954 when the
French army designated a number of rural
areas as forbidden zones the forbidden
zones consisted of free-fire zones for
both air and ground French military
forces that needed to be cleared of any
living being including animals the
prohibited regions were frequently
isolated flat places they comprised not
only immense woodlands and Highlands but
also vast inhabited rural areas from
which Algerian civilians were relocated
in masse to ensure a security zone for
the French army although these camps
were intensively created since 1954 it
was not until 1957
and the military comment of renovation
on France most decorated officer that
official military policy stamped secret
secret confidential a top-secret began
to regulate the creation of the
forbidden zones and to normalize the
forestry settlements of the civilian
population this was particularly the
case with the construction completion of
the defensive as you can see here
perimeter defensive perimeter known as
the maurice line that sealed off
Algeria's eastern and western borders
with neighboring Tunisia Libya and
Morocco because aim was to prevent human
circulation and material exchanges
historians civilians civilian and
military have never agreed on the exact
numbers of the involuntarily displaced
population that devastated villages and
the newly built settlements one can only
cite a few estimates one instamate for
1960 evaluated two million one hundred
and fifty seven thousand persons have
been evacuated from their homes and
arable land whereas another estimate for
1961 consisted that considered that at
least two million three hundred and
fifty thousand people were concentrated
into camps and that additional 1 million
hundred and fifty six hundred and
seventy five thousand persons were
forced to leave their original homes due
to constant and violent military
operations that is to say to say three
million five hundred five hundred
thousand persons were forcibly displaced
in Algeria here you can see that every
dot represents a camp
another figure for February 1962 just
few weeks before Algeria's gained
intimate independence reported at 3740
camps so it's massive we're effectively
built in Algeria and the French colonial
or since the outbreak of the Algerian
revolution on November 1st 1954 but who
built these camps central to this French
military policy were the so called
specialized administrative sessions the
SIS these extraordinary
army units were deployed in rural areas
in order to complete both military and
civilian assignments on the one hand the
military missions of the such officers
entailed the gathering of intelligence
diffusion of propagandistic information
the insuring of law and order and the
direct control of the civilian
population on the other hand their civic
functions were to provide social
economic education and sanitary medical
facilities as well as to organize and
build military control camps by the end
of 1961 there were more than 700 SAS in
the great areas of Algeria in an attempt
to supervise the majority of the
population every SAS extended its
various operations over a maximum of 10
to 15 thousand persons which was
considered to recall respond to the
population of approximately 2 to 3
Algerian villages the chief of the SAS
was expected to have the ability or was
directly trained to speak the local
language of the geographic area in which
he was appointed either Arabic or Berber
languages in October 2005 so few
years ago and fifty years after the
establishment of the firsts ask the
French military army center for force
employment doctrine and the French
Ministry of Defence released the fixed
study called the specialized
administrative sessions in Algeria and
instrument for stabilisation
the military survey was based on a
number of interviews with former SAS
officers for surveillance area the
survey intended to divulge French
experiences in Algeria and particularly
to provide a guide for the so called
stabilization of local population claims
and enforce by French troops I quote in
charge of similar assignments in Bosnia
Afghanistan and soon in Kosovo as
asserted in these 2005 military
guidelines the SAS where the direct
successors of the 19 century Arab
bureaus in the French Department of
Interior and of the 92019 of the 20th
century indigenous affair in the French
protectorates of Morocco as well as of
the famous military colonial officers
visual Thomas Perot who was the marshal
of France and former Governor General of
Algeria and Ebert a French army general
and former resident general of in
Morocco so here the point is really to
study the continuity and circulation of
colonial protocols from the 19th century
to the 20th century and among French
colonists and protectorates the 2005
manual however made no mention to the
camps nor did it refer to the peculiar
roles played by cell sis officers in the
policy of mass resettlement of the
civilian population instead it dedicated
less than a page to the so called or the
so labeled village the hokum no
pretending to be part of the economic
activities of the sis within the social
economic development plan launched by
General de Gaulle in October 1958 that I
mentioned earlier
contrary to this assessment French
military life covered document that I
showed in the exhibition this kid
violent give evidence to or off the fact
that as I as officers were responsible
not only for evacuating existing
villages for military purposes but also
for supervising the construction of the
camp's furthermore in April 1959 French
newspaper newspapers leaked the
existence of the camps and provided an
unprecedented media coverage the scandal
urged the French authorities to
reconsider the policy of the forced
Mastry settlements of the algerian
population as a result the french
colonial regime launched another plan
another national plan called 1,000
villages and created a military
instruction known or institution known
as the general inspection of the
regrouping of the population whose
mandate was to inspect the grouping of
civilian population in which he argued
or they argued that I quote the creation
of the recruitment is the most effective
means for subtracting the population
from the influence of the rebel
I don't think that these images need
further description but we can clearly
see the planning principles behind them
whereas the key word for arginine
revolutionaries was dispersion for the
French counter-revolutionary it was
concentration very grouping camps were
part of the French colonial architecture
of counter-revolution so this book seeks
to demonstrate that during this war
Algerians territory served not only as a
warfare theater but also as a breeding
ground for new buildings and
infrastructure that had been designed to
oversee administer transform assimilate
Algerians to French colonial rule as
well as to protect French civil servants
from the Terrorism of the opponents of
Rinaldo gone in contrast to
architectural research that is conducted
in peace zones research conducted in war
zones and zones of conflict
predominantly implies inquiries into the
politics and psychologists of such
designed species territories mechanism
and their architects in the sense of
creators but also designers it is not
surprising that the fragmented
declassified military archives do not
provide access to the maps or plans that
may have served for this destruction
construction or defense of a given area
not do these orchestrated sources offer
any visual record that might represent
the nature and persecutions of military
special counterinsurgency operation
instead the majority of the surveys
photographs and films were commissioned
to produce meticulous propaganda images
or propaganda images and were put in
place to ease the escalating national
and international criticism against the
French civil and military policies in
Algeria
therefore this research has also dead
into the vast collection of French
military aerial photographs that
resulted from various recurrent
reconnaissance missions during the war
the controversy of this audio-visual
document so these propaganda images
concerned and inspired me while I was
what writing the book to organize an
exhibition and tell the story of the
camps to a wider audience
the exhibition discrete violence
architecture and the French army in
Algeria features how and why the French
army forcibly displayed millions of
Algerians in colonized Algeria during
the original revolution it juxtaposes
the evacuation of the Algerian rural
population the building processes of the
camps and the living conditions in the
camps over four years I gathered a
variety variety of sources civil and
military public and private films
photographs and uncover textual
documents some of these sources come
from the service cinematography des army
the SCA cinematographic services of the
army the French military institution
created in 1915 during the First World
War in order to produce and orchestrate
the circulation of audio-visual war
information during today the SCA is
called the CP 80 Auto visual
communication and production
organization of Defence and is still
active in war zones where the French
Army is involved such as in Mali one of
the aims of the exhibition is to attempt
to deep propagandize these records and
create tensions and relations among
different voices tourists and fragments
discrete violence and false intrinsic
relationship between architecture and
military measures colonial practices and
the planned production and distribution
of visual and textual records it is an
inhibition that asks the visitor to
engage to study to listen to the silence
of the video propaganda the sound was
intentionally removed
to read the military directives and
orders that were secretly released
during the French war to keep Algeria
under colonial rule I have highlighted
in pink some of the most controversial
aspects that contradict the images to
pay attention to the language and
terminology used by the French army and
by French journalists writing for left
and right wing newspaper artists papers
to look very closely to the photographs
that documents in the make the making of
this propaganda audio-visual documents
the street violence challenges visitors
and incites them to engage with the
order or disorder of things it does not
show violence but rather it portrays it
it does not reproduce propaganda but it
makes use of it against itself it does
not create effects but in incites
effects along with this first iteration
of this exhibition the most of the
photograph that you saw here are from
the first iteration so when it was
presented at the guitar exhibitions at
the ETH Zurich so along with this first
iteration I tried to situate this
emblematic case among many others around
the world by conveying an international
conference and architecture and Wars
forms and forms of construction and
destruction in war zones in 2017 at the
Goethe Institute it was a two-day
conference that gathered not only
architects Urbanists historians PhD
students philosopher but also a military
officer who was dictating the behavior
of humans or dictating the behaviors of
humans and built environment on the
ground some presentations became
articles and were included in this
volume war zones that they have edited
and that came out a couple of months ago
published by the Goethe affair lamp
the approaches and backgrounds of the
authors were really diverse here you can
see for example John mica when designing
within and for war zones or civil
felicities caught haunted by war I will
mention maybe three let me just look at
the time maybe three very brief cases
because they are also very important in
this convert larger conversation about
the intersection of architecture
planning colonial policies or practices
and military operation for example
Sylvia Berger Co Dean she's a historian
based in there Switzerland and she
discussed here how since the early 1916
the Swiss authorities built 300 sorry
360 thousand private nuclear shelters
the majority of them in the basements of
family homes and invested to this day 12
billion US dollars in constructing high
standardized nuclear shelters for the
population by 2006 the protection ratio
reached 114 percent meaning that
Switzerland currently has more
protective spaces than inhabitants
another example I shall suffer us and
the slant traffic to architects based in
Lahore Pakistan who analyzed in the
essay barricade urbanism the keys of
contemporary fortification in Lahore the
urban transportation in the age of a
Semitic warfare and contemporary
conflict and they always how it is
amplified when considered in the light
of its history as the imperial capital
of various rulers here you can see one
of their visualization that they really
tried to map with what they called
barricade urbanism
another example is the article by Isaiah
Mandic an art historian based in
Sarajevo
who investigated how to survive in the
besieged Sarajevo city of Sarajevo from
1992 to 1996 during the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and discusses the
production and use of Sarajevo survival
map and guide that was written during
the first two years of the siege when
military officer forces of Bosnian Serbs
assisted by the heavily armed Yugoslav
People's Army and surveillant
Montenegrin paramilitary troops took
control of the mountains and hills
surrounded surrounding Saraiva
another outdoor is my chef Hassan a
Palestinian urbanist Bay Inn based in
Lebanon analyzed the 2007 destruction
and reconstruction on our Albert the
Palestinian refugee camps camp in
Lebanon he deflected on the rolls
potential and limits of what he called
design activism in extraordinary
conditions such as camps Wars and civil
crisis both Mahabharat activists and lib
lebanon lebanese state institution used
architecture and urban design as a tool
for envisioning and advocating a new
reality in the earth in the aftermath of
the war I would like to conclude with
the introduction to war zones in which I
traced the links between colonial wars
and counterinsurgency between 19th
century colonization and 20th century
declared and undeclared war zones
between French and US and other Western
schools of the so-called winning minds
and hearts
in his chapter African grammar published
in his 1957 book mythologies printed
during the Battle of Algiers
Oliver had argued the official
terminology used by the French
representatives of colonial African
affairs is purely axiomatic a mask
designed to divert attention from the
nature of the war and cover the real
facts with the noise of language so
according to but this grammar which is
still in vogue today is both
ideologically burdened and politically
loaded he defined war as what the goal
is to deny the thing for this to means
are available either to name it as
little as possible more frequent
procedure or else to give it the meaning
of its contrary cunning procedure which
is at the basis for almost all the
mystifications of bourgeois discourse
war is then used in the sense of peace
and pacification in the sense of war
thank you very much for your attention
[Applause]
[Applause]
it's really powerful and important
lecture I think there are just so many
things that I could ask you about but
maybe to kick-start the kind of question
portion of the evening throughout the
lecture is really interesting how you
talked about language and even the way
you end it just now and I was just
curious as to like what are the tools of
the decolonizing or expanding and reject
undoing the kind of colonial forces that
are embedded in language the terminology
we use the languages that we discuss or
write about architecture and we is kind
of launching this architecture and
translation project and so it really
ties in to that as well and I was just
curious because it came up so many times
from the beginning to the end of your
lecture yes thank you very much yeah I
mean language is highly important of
course we use language and it depends
also which language now we are speaking
in English so let's talk about English
language yeah so when you write and this
is what I try also to do at the very
beginning of the lecture it's just to
situate really the the major questions
that I'm really concerned with one of
them is really the language so when you
read for example primary sources in this
case when you work on colonial context
with the military let's say situation
the language that is being used is a
language that is addressed to various
let's say audiences so when I read army
or military directives some of them are
directed to officers let's say junior
officers there is a whole hierarchy as
well in that institution so in for each
audience the language is very very
different so when I started really this
research when I read the way that a
general was speaking to his officers and
then how the generals among themselves
were speaking they were really talking
about a revolution and
counter-revolution but never
about war with the officers it was just
an insert of insurrection it's temporary
we are going to get rid of it don't
worry just keep going I mean this is
really about understanding how to unpack
and how to retake recontextualize that
language that you are also interpreting
because I am reporting I am writing
about that so how do I keep that part
and not change it for me this was very
very important as well so it really
depends on the context but as Bart said
we really have to make sure to not mimic
this cosmetic writing and cosmetic
language as well so that's for me very
important Thanks are there any questions
from the audience
I have so much to say and probably not
in this Q&A section because it would
take too long because I know I can
guarantee you it take too long because I
did and I'm going to do it more
four more years I don't know how many
more years probably infinite amount of
years about the Malayan emergency which
is you mention hearts and minds briefly
and that is the genesis of the british
paradigm of counterinsurgency it was
interesting because I had gone through
the National Archives like and I'm gonna
do it more I just don't have time right
now to read these primary sources and
they were like constantly insisting that
the people who were forcefully resettled
were doing this volunteer now it wasn't
voluntary voluntarily and that there's
like these terrorists were just bandits
that were threatening these people and
then like my point of questioning within
that was also hearing stories from my
own family because I had families that
want both sides of the fence in regards
to the the kampung baru which is the
force settlements where I had family
members that were designated as
terrorists and I had family members that
were interned in these camps and that's
how I managed to penetrate that military
document but I have still not yet found
something where I can conveniently
highlight be like oh yeah I can you
question but it's interesting cuz like I
I've seen that the French one is way
more like sophisticated like not
sophisticated but tidier and like neater
than the British one because like when
you were showing this kind of urban
plans they were like way easier to
understand and noticed and the Malaysian
was because the way that the Malaysian
ones were planned was basically they
forced these people to resettle they
just drew out the road saying this is
the main road that's the road for the
school that's the road for the community
center
and then like ask the villagers to
construct their own buildings and there
was a specific type ology a building
that was constructed by the urban plan
as such is less visible and
understandable and it's a superficial
level like that and it's interesting
because I had been to many of these
camps and not known the history because
it was specifically erased by the
government and it continues to be erased
in fact the Prime Minister recently
announced like on the 21st of August I
realized that's the day before my mum's
birthday to an urban master plan to
erase all these camps permanently
because they're saying that this is like
shameful in the country or what not
shameful actually they're not saying
actually for this thing that it's not
modern into unhygenic but actually there
is a heritage they specifically want to
erase and I don't know this is that so
like I said this too much to say I think
I'm gonna write the same book but like
for the British paradigm but I'm not
very good at writing so maybe I don't
know please do it please do it I mean
that's really the idea this is not
that's why the conference that's why
like the editing of that that the war
zone says well I think it's really
important to trace all these parallels I
think like the BRICS plan was hatched on
1950 by Howard Sprague which was the guy
who made it but you're saying that the
kind of counterparts with energy rates
1954 said when they started the years 54
but he started in a very chaotic way and
then 50 57 57 like more normalized which
is very problematic of course 59 then it
was like some of them the permanent came
to a transforming there was no
communication between Britain and France
coughing each other I have to say there
is there's a book I can give you data
that makes the two perilous reading the
Aegean the French in Algeria and then
the British and is
can ya hey Sammy I thank you so much for
this and I've seen your work and
multiple forms and I'm really intrigued
on a kind of let's say a question that
yeah I'm kind of interested in
personally let's say the way you begin
right you have the image of the the
current kind of IOT and revolution and I
wonder if you can just maybe speak at
there someone who practices an
architectural historian and how far to
kind of particular like you know you
structure and you think through your
mode of analysis through particular
historical moments right and so how far
can for example the most recent events
begin to condition or be considered
within the histories and the narratives
that you are writing I mean on one level
obviously concerted instances I mean in
the case for example of Libya the new
archives were open second very explicit
understanding of how a particular
historical narrative can begin to shift
and how a kind of buzz through the
practice of like history or as historian
but I wonder if you can maybe reflect I
mean maybe it's too early but how do you
some events begin to condition and kind
of your analysis are the operates in a
kind of contemporary moment right yeah I
mean for me it's very important first of
all to remind us all that yes we are in
a very privileged space I mean there are
really people on the ground this is
extremely important to always remember
and I always acknowledge this so I am
what why it's not with that image there
was a moment very recently when
Algerians started to ask their
independence we want independence it's
the same term that they were also using
during the Algerian revolution the
agenda evolution against the French
colonial regime so this is very I think
for me as an Algerian not as an
historian very important let's say
moment to understand the struggle of
civilians of people of sham as it is
called so freely civilians and really
understand
again the use of language and the use of
terms like independence what does it
mean when they actually are asking we
want our independence now so this is
something it's like really have to think
about it and I am NOT going to write
about it but it's really something that
we have to keep in mind so that the
struggles against imposed powers against
regimes of oppressions are continuing
are really part of our daily life and
the daily life of millions of people
around the world today that's why this
parallel
hi I was wondering if when you mentioned
the French kind of publishing this
knowledge disguised as like other things
have you see any of these sort of like
spatial topologies like now and yeah yes
what do you think any specific things I
mean again I always like to be very
specific and not generalize I I have
problems with like saying okay this is
you know everywhere so what I want to
really highlight is the fact that why
this struggle was taking place so
especially during the Battle of Algiers
in 1957 this exchange this exportation
of military knowledge was taking place
at that time so there was this
conference inter-american conference so
in Buenos Aires where all these military
guys met and discuss how to prevent how
to abstract how to detect and fight
insurgencies or revolutions so this is
really something that it's quite you
know important to know after the
independence and especially the last
years of the independence of Algeria
some of these French officers went to
the US so one in particular David
gorilla he worked at Harvard and he
brought his two books in English first
you know not in French not so he is
teaching so he is theorizing the
practices and this is also when we know
how the military operates the first test
so the first practice and then theorize
so these theories were circulating at
the time in the US and in this
introduction I really you know from
colonial wars to counterinsurgency I try
to map that that that Phil Roush that
read threat to understand how these
colonial practices in the 19th century
circulated in
the colonies there is a moment as well
when we have Vichy so fascist French
officers who are we are working so they
brought their own knowledge from fascism
in Algeria and then they went back to
France after the independence so these
practices are also happening in the
democracies we know republics and all
that so in France for example but also
how they were exported to the world to
North and South America and they were
also used in Afghanistan as I said
before in Kosovo in Iraq and again other
people should really take one example
and see how these special measures can
be read in Malaysia and Kenya and you
know with the mum I mean with Vietnam I
have a very long list but but very
specific always extremely yes they have
yeah yeah so in that long list or let's
go the other way around so how do you
see the situation the Sahel in which
terrorism is a much more clear threat
somehow how do you see the presence of
European countries in there specifically
France
you know it's really difficult to
respond to this question I would invent
we know very very little you know and it
again is say PR do you know that the
institution that I mentioned before they
are the ones who are producing images
they are the ones who are dictating or
like deciding what we should know we
should not know I mean it's really very
I am reading as much as I can but these
are all very orchestrated news III I
can't like publicly now say yes this is
what I think we can definitely discuss
privately about it
hello so I have a very personal question
I'm Algerian on my mother's side and
when I tried telling my mother about it
she responded very violently and was
quite she had a lot of difficulty
especially in the chapters about to Gold
and going and kind of narrative that's
kind of so I was just wondering I mean
it's quite basic as a question but about
the reception especially from the
Algerian community specifically through
this type of I mean did she read the
French version of the book no I'm just
antsy because then I was in Paris three
weeks ago the book came out in the 8th
of November yeah so two or three weeks
ago and we presented it in two venues
and in December we are going also to
presented in other venues I was
interviewed by a radio host country on a
radio French radio and I will be part of
a conversation in the media path it's
French
yeah independent so the reaction we will
see because it's just it's really just
has been published there are now a
number of articles some I mean yeah it's
really really the beginning it is when I
presented it it was somehow a space
where many people didn't know about this
history I mean we know but of course we
are genuine revolution about the war we
know about many things torture we know
I'm not saying this but the this
intersection of planning architecture
colonialism fascism and war it's a
little bit difficult to swallow I can
imagine but this is really our history I
mean its history that it's not invented
this all there and it's there is really
a juxtaposition of different voices is
not only the official archival that's
really one we have we cannot do this
it's a propaganda again so so somehow
there are lots of questions and answered
questions as well especially in the case
of the gold I mean if you say it's a
colonial project of the god this is my
own point of view
I'm as an outer of course I he or he or
whoever can say I completely disagree
but this colonial project is also is
really specific about the plan to
Constantine about this five-year
socio-economic development plan that was
launched during a very violent war with
the resources of the south of Algeria
with this oil and gas so you invest in
this own country you build the pipes you
feed Europe okay at the same time you
also built very poor as we saw in terms
of quality housing units for home for
Algerians what happened in 1962 this
company's state so it's very it's for me
it's another way of keeping or of
extending colonialism of keeping all
these companies in Algeria after the
independence how do you want to call it
I call it colonialism the French call it
cooperation then you know there are many
other there are many other lists all the
possible interpretation again to come
back to the term translation and
interpretation there are many many other
things on that so I mean I'm very open
also to those who can say look this is
not I disagree and we should discuss it
around around the table I'm open about
it
I guess that links to something you
mentioned in the beginning about
education and like you've had the
article for of like how history should
be taught and and kind of how the French
the role of France should be represented
I'm just curious as to I think
linked to your comment like I think
colonialism is so layered into how
people understand a culture or a country
history and how do you even start to
undo that like how do you actually at
what level do you pitch change like how
do you change the way people are
educated about a certain history or how
do you get like your book on to the
reading list of various curriculum I
mean I'm just curious if that's
something you I mean I don't know how to
get I mean I don't know about the last
sentence I am NOT like you know
systematic I have to do that but in in
as an educator and teaching so this is
really a an issue that I'm dealing with
every day and for me it's really
important not only in my courses I think
when we talk about decolonizing
knowledge we can't just have you know
diverse group of students and diverse
and diverse you know in the u.s. it's we
have to also have a roundtable so so so
somehow it's really about about
rethinking the curriculum rethinking our
syllabi rethinking the way that
especially in architecture schools not
only the histories and theories but also
this design studio so the unity I
thought what are the references that we
use you know what when I talked about
this homogenization
it's true when when I'm invited to
reviews and then I I look at the syllabi
I mean most of them use the same people
this is like very problematic how come
that we have the same people everywhere
wherever people go I mean there are many
people and there are many also articles
and books translated into English I mean
at the beginning of that okay maybe it's
a language problem no and at the at the
end it's a mentality problem it's in
mind that we have to change so this is I
think something that we have to do at
all levels and the students at least in
the u.s. I don't know here are very
ready for it they are asking that and
sometimes the faculty are not ready so
this is I think something that we have
to work on but definitely is about the
interlocutors and the aim of the studios
and the seminars that we are offering I
think this is very important and
something else I think we do use the
term decolonizing very much everywhere
in almost now each discipline you know
decolonizing this accountant it's very
very important but this also as call
says how and how do we do it but
systematically and seriously and not
just in the title and then at the end
you had the same usual suspects yeah
following what manager said this is
based on my own experience researching
this topic and I chose my family it's
like primary sources essentially today I
interviewed them about their experience
but like basically most of their
reaction was every time they told me
something they had experienced or had
seen or life felt then they followed it
back but I don't know you should read
the book written by a historian because
like I saw this stuff but I didn't I
don't know what this is and like they
were constantly like devaluing their own
lived experience and overvaluing someone
who is credible in a way so like I think
part of that is also an empowerment
process and actually it took me so long
to convince them to like come out a bit
more about this yeah I mean it's a very
long process also don't push too much no
I don't know what I'm what I want to say
I don't know in your case but in my case
it was a really very very long process
of discussing you know with the people
who were displaced but also the people
who used this as French generals for
example I did interview them I did do a
lot of interviews but it takes really
years not
weeks you know video yes and some and
most of the time at the very beginning
people don't come in don't trust me of
course so I'm not you know and and it
really takes time to to try to
understand or to to build that's trust
and that relationship with the people
and it is true you really need to not
read books but to juxtapose as many
voices and test as many information and
knowledge is and positions as possible
because sometimes it's not so easy and
for me this is also part of the stories
that we write in the in the case of HO
Xinhua I spend I don't know how many
like times going back back back to the
archives of this architect but it was
the classic sorry classified all not
really classify it was I knew where it
was but it was not open to the public
because there wasn't really an inventory
so somehow I insisted in systems like
this cannot be written without the
architects of contribution want to show
that counter-revolution it's not only
against the eternal people but also
against the French paper because the OS
for the goal were also insurgent we were
terrorists you know so I really wanted
to have that that part also of this like
a larger reflection and they were like
no we can't we can't open you know it so
I insisted I mean again like long time
and a lot of you know the French
bureaucratic machine is also very heavy
at the very end eventually we managed
and what was very interesting to see is
that the architect did not keep most of
these documents and and most of these
plans because maybe again I don't know I
also said I don't know why but let's
speculate let's also think why I mean
this was the most like the the fee that
he got for this project was so high I
mean it was so important this is a huge
city and he was very own so it was a
very important Commission how come the
so instead of just getting rid of it I
made it part of the update of the text
you know like this is a question that
I'm asking really well are so I am right
but I do need to write this chapter
although the archives are not there so
it's really part of the story that you
tell as well so it becomes like more
yeah part that something that you can
share with others although you don't
have enough sources I think that's I
mean just expanding on that question I
mean you know what the limits what's
absent from the cinematic footage for
one but also is there alternative I mean
are there documentation from Algeria
itself you you came across or
alternative voices you know of course
yes so like good good girl exhibition is
you know putting everything there and
making you know like pacifying as the
French would say okay that was exactly
what I didn't want to do is to say okay
let's try to understand the psychology
of colonialism I mean there were like
many resistance and not today of course
Judea was independent 1962 it's not that
we have to say that there were like many
resistance I said it's not the aim of
this really book to talk about the
panjiri resistance but they were and you
know but in the exhibition for me what
was really important is to show the many
levels of French voices not one not only
the military so we have civilian we have
military voices but also different
institutions and they will contradicting
each other you know some this is really
interesting because normally we think of
okay the French Republic and
you know but I really wanted to show all
these levels of contradictions and also
what I said at the very beginning that
it wasn't only of the war between France
and Algeria in French Aryans fighters
against the French army knew it was also
a war among the French and this is very
important because in France we do not
read for example on May 1958 was this
put the fourth republic collapsed is it
part of like the official history of
France I mean I really wrote a couple of
pages about the difference between May
58 and May 68 we all know it's May 16
but who knows may 58 and that put
collapsed the whole fort Republic so
it's so important that even the history
of France told in a way that we are not
so familiar with for me was very very
important so I also try to find sources
or materials from young officers who
were there these are only private
archives where they're filming as well
so this is not really something that you
see normally it's publishing the book
but also in the exhibition so all these
local propaganda videos were somehow
dismantled or well deconstructed so you
see that everything that we see here is
a theater it's part of this machine of
making producing this video the visual
documents and and this is really I was
taught that I wasn't really you know
like systematically playing this way I
was told that this is fascinating that
you see all these layers and and somehow
you are you really yeah you are
surprised by the complexity of these
contradictions and there was a wall
internal wall somehow
yeah anyway this isn't the end but I
think it's a nice moment to pause and
thank you for such an amazing let you
know I think you but I'm sure I think as
Tom put it there but all of us have lots
to to talk to you about so I invite you
all to come upstairs and join us for a
drink and get to chat to some involved
but for now please join me in thanking
our great thank you
