don't leave me now hello my name is
michael Weinstock and everyone calls me
Mike and I'm here to talk to you about
mtax
it's an MSc and impart program and you
can see here the images in front of you
that's me looking very relaxed in the
buff it's a structured program there
really has to you be able to see these
in more detail in a little while and we
have stopped very quickly with boot camp
in in the first few days where you're
dealing with material systems it's as
you can see in these next few images and
little videos you're learning both the
geometries and how to make things and
understand how to small physical
components can interact to make larger
and more complex organizations of
material and those that have actions
which you can open and close which is
for performative skins and so forth we
do all kinds of physical experiments all
of our computation is calibrated from
physical experimentation we were also
exploring in these mesh relaxations
and some of the physical stuff is really
fun it doesn't always work
but we also learn how to fail better so
it's important that all of our failures
are teaching us logics and processes for
the assembly and performance of material
systems as you go through the program in
the first term in phase one and phase
two you're exploring both geometries and
fabrication technologies various ways of
producing surfaces and materials through
digital fabrication and you learn by
hands-on we have a new program the last
two years that we've added to that which
is robotics belief as our studio master
is a robotics guru we've had two or
three of their mark dissertations
exploring this web
people design the end-effector we're
able to simulate and teach you how to
simulate two paths to explore continuous
line processing and this particular one
came from a very nice mr khan using salt
with a polymer to stabilize it and the
issue they're exploring is of course you
have to heat it to make it have a
structural consistency so these are kind
of experiments in dissertation phase
that you might be taking on and doing in
your dissertation
it's a principal topic for us we have
two or three others which I'm going to
show you a little bit about robotics
starts in the first term we did some
experiments again led by a leaf in the
summer last year and these are a series
of stills this is the end effector that
was designed by the students and
fabricated by them in this particular
station they're looking at both fast and
slow prototyping in a second course that
we have this embedded in the studio is
biomimicry and we work from that
analysis of natural systems we
particularly interested in how we
develop algorithms from the social
behavior of insects jellyfish and
various other kinds of social
organizations that have appear in the
natural world these are kind of
amazingly good sources for algorithmic
processes and we abstract knowledge from
them behaviors and then we learn how to
encode them and we apply them to
architectural surfaces and we explore
them as kind of growth models stigma G
which is a really kind of nice
biological word it kind of fancy one you
can look up but it leads us to a series
of repetitive actions which are
extremely powerful simple logics from
which we can grow very complex things in
a series of very simple steps we have
another way of imitating knowledge that
we take from nature which is my
particular area of interest
which is from genetics and working on
evolutionary computation this is looking
at graphing functions and we're looking
for different kinds of conflicting
criteria that this design is evolving
towards and we can run up to a thousand
generations and keep track of every
single individual in those generations
you learn that in a second term it's a
two and a half to three week course we
start with a primitive this is kind of
example from previous year so every
student before they get to the end of
phase one is has knowledge and expertise
in writing their own genetic algorithms
the major part of the second term is on
design project which is to do
we're located mainly in the marshes and
wetlands for the next two years you're
part of a three-year exploratory program
on ecological urbanism and by now you
have kind of full set of skills and that
you're able to apply to developing these
more complex urban patterns all of which
have a behavior and we're very
interested in surface analysis risk
analysis of various kinds in here you
can see five different criteria again
running simultaneously on this these are
taken from the dissertation phase people
determine make up their own decisions on
what their topic is what their team is
we usually work in teams of two
and you write Europe without help write
your own program and pursue your own
interests for the dissertation we also
have been looking at the dynamics of
urban systems in ecological situations
and these are more complex and we're
looking also at how we can make these
productive so city is not an isolated
artifact with everything occurring
outside it but within the city itself or
the smaller cities we're producing
landscapes which are growing foods and
things
we've been looking for a couple of years
of AR which we like sending into BR the
first phases and the first dissertations
the principal use of a our explorations
has been for assisting in the assembly
and fabrication sequences of complex
geometry architectures it's kind of one
of the big issues in new kinds of
architecture is the position in space of
complex objects and by using a are
keeping track of the positioning we they
suppose they'll have developed by two
students which is now both in working in
high-end offices that are using these
techniques for real sites and you can
see a little bit from their dissertation
now the assembly sequence
we like to build every year we make
something pretty big projects mostly we
get them sponsored we raise them the
money for the materials and it's part of
our culture and mtech that every year we
build some sort of provisional canopy
this is one of my favorites some time
ago and we start in studio again with
fairly simple experiments everybody
participates everybody finds a role our
job is just to keep you more or less on
track where we're not telling the group
themselves evolve who does what and we
have developed I think some very
significant and large scales timber
structures this year and the coming year
we're working with sheet metal and
robotics it's part of the Leafs
innovation for us which I showed you at
the beginning and we're working on sheet
metal formation with robotics but these
are the kinds of scales that we will be
dealing with we did kind of slightly
primitive try a couple of years ago
this is fingers cross which was in Eric
for a for over a month this is at the
National Building Centre in Birmingham
the exhibition and you can see part of
the computational logic and close into
making it this is the air just completed
and the Maria is sitting near me will
maybe talk a little bit at the end about
this they helped to make this but they
also made a virtual reality app that
people could see it in the exhibition
this is the exhibition one corner it and
we this is the other corner and you can
just about see thinking there are people
behind them
so and now I'm going to introduce you to
two people who are currently an mtech
and the first is Neal hi everyone I'm
Neal
excited and honored to be here today and
to be talking to you guys just a little
bit about me I grew up in a small town
outside of New York and my background is
in chemistry and architecture which is
actually one of the reasons why I
decided to come here to M Tech because
it really was able to sort of merge sort
of the science methodology and sort of
its architectural background that I had
I just wanted to show you a little bit
about my work today yeah okay that
that's named in the middle everybody's
surrounding the over pointing at it so
this is one of our first projects here
at M Tech I worked with a dear friend
Tim foo and basically our aim was to
take a base try grid surface and
manipulate it and control it in a way to
create a doubly curved surface so we
started out with folding techniques and
eventually we created a locking key
mechanisms that were derived from
mathematical functions and so we're
really interested in how we can combine
these functions to create these doubly
curved surfaces and as you can see in
Adam tech it's really about the
iterative process we were really
impressed with the fact that we were
just able to manipulate just for certain
certain keys and just put them together
and you know we were able to create so
many different types of surfaces out of
them the Weaver and yes this is my
favorite this is part of the natural
systems and by loonatics
here we specifically studied the African
Weaver and and sort of other youth
socials insects as well and we
abstracted their behavior we we noticed
that there was like an innate algorithm
that these youth social communities sort
of operated on and so we looked at Neff
construction and we looked at food
recruitment strategies and the goal of
our project was to create a shell
structure and we did this by using an
agent-based system where we first
constructed an environment so in this
case just a surface we performed a
structural analysis on that surface and
then abstracted a certain amount of
attractors and repellers in the
environment also sort of these the these
stress notes essentially that we were
able to get from the structural analysis
itself and we found how the agents would
sort of move between these these paths
and then we synthesized those paths and
then we're able to create a shell
structure out of it our big goal though
was to take those structures that we
created and perform a structural
analysis on that once again so that we
could actually see the physical
properties of it and if it would
withhold in you know in the general
context of the environment we don't
always work here we we loved we loved to
have fun too so this is actually a
really fun project that we worked in
conjunction with the digital prototyping
lab it's open to all AAA students here
and we were able to program robots and
essentially dance with them and create
these light images in three-dimensional
space which is a lot of fun and it's in
here at M Tech it's really about the
family we have a lot of bonds we love
working in the studio together we work
very long hours but it's so much fun and
it's just a great a great place to be
with so many international people from
all over the place
we're always eating you food and talking
about everything so it's it's great it's
really really great and yeah I mean I'd
like to serve on and this is my good
friend here she's wandering ahead of me
she's faced - I'm Maria and I'm an
architect who graduated in Seville years
ago and came to London started working
and pursuing my my ain't my mic also be
more learning learning more about a
computational design and making I
decided to join them tick and as Neil
has mentioned in M Tech you will meet a
lot of people from all over the world
and with these people you will share
apart from background common interests
interns interests that will be reflected
in your in your groups they look at the
group that you are gonna form in the
studio so here I'm gonna talk about the
group that I am immersed now which is my
dissertation team and with these four
girls Liana Maria Cristina Karolina we
developed our dissertation language okay
so our common interest
it was participatory design which is a
design method where users of a place of
a neighborhood for example get involved
in the design process so what we
proposed was a different approach of
participatory design using immersive
technologies immersive technologies I
refer to butyl reality and gaming so
here you can see a video of one of our
experiments in a public workshop that we
did on site and basically people got
very involved in the process and help us
help us develop the work
so one of the first challenges that we
face in our dissertation it was to build
the application that we were proposing
as a design tool and given that we are
proposing a virtual environment we
wanted it to be totally immersive that
people could really really live it so
the first challenge was to transform
this into this we see which is it's an
image of our game again that you are
able to play using tubes so we propose
using 3d scanning a interesting part of
it is that we use photogrammetric 3d
scanning basically we gather up to 500
photos inside it was quite a good work
from our side we developed then the mesh
with these photos using a specific
software and eventually you were able to
see the the mesh totally formed with
these maps and shapes of course I have
to say that it needed a lot of
refinement but it's it's a good outcome
so Anam take one of the most important
aspects is that you do a lot of
experimentation and for example here you
can see us in the class testing the
virtual reality headset and for example
for the final experiments of our
dissertation this public worship we
carried out up to 13 mini experiments
before jumping into the big one and this
indeed this last experiment so we we are
we achieved a high number of
participation and the results were all
combining this a computer application
that late that we analyzed and
obstructed the data that was gonna given
that was going to be given to architects
and
that we invited via social media to
participate in designing their own
proposals so like that we wanted to
really narrow the space between
architect and user to obtain final
design that better adapt to their
preferences and I will I would like to
finish by saying that in the
dissertation we are going to spend most
of the time and mtech and it's vital the
work the hard working group but also
tutorials in class are very important
and specifically in this project we did
a lot of research and self learning
about gaping and it was very productive
in order to achieve good work at the end
thank you ok we have some questions to
answer but just say a few more words in
context science by studio we we have a
lot of fun and we kind of really want
people to come you love their work and
we enjoy it and I think yeah you same
from these guys yeah we can do great
work and enjoy yourselves
and we enjoyed the building as well
Neil's being with us 10 weeks and you've
been with us a little more than one year
yes and that's the kind of trajectory
from great excitement at the beginning
to my round about April or May is that
get your serious questions and then you
spend as you have been the second half
of your time several months working very
intensely so it's a research design
projects so the people you can't see the
lovely image and then Kirsty who you
probably know digitally if you apply
because they would be handling all the
things are gonna feed me with some
questions and so we the last thing maybe
to emphasize as we're collecting
is the culture of the book we still have
we do intense computational work and
science and data and numbers are very
important for us that we produce at the
end what we think are of as the
beautiful book nothing this is very
architectural synthesis where you can
bring science to these things so we will
show a little bit of those maybe more at
the end and someone who's about to cost
me some questions thank you okay
okay so the first question is what's the
difference between the MSC in the M hock
and maybe I'll answer that because you
are both here well first of all this
difference in time there's a little
difference in money and one terms
difference which can be significant so
sometimes people who are architects do
choose to do the MSC because they they
can't quite afford on the earmark but
you sit next to each other in the studio
there's no difference in the work you do
and the team some of their projects in
your case the projects that you showed
were - anything - and - - remarks and -
MSC's so we do have work that continues
right through at simultaneous you if you
have a Bachelor of Science you can do an
MSC if you have a Bachelor of
architecture you do in M hark and there
are people like me who have Bachelor of
Science in architecture there's no such
thing as a Bachelor of architecture in
science maybe there's a big so we can
week and we have people from all kinds
of backgrounds I think yours is
chemistry we we have people before I've
been marina and designers and builders
and we have we've had jewelers the
majority are architects but I like to
far as I can make it very mix to do and
I came here on in a long time you know
35 years ago and I've stayed because
everybody is from somewhere else and
we're always bringing new topics new
subjects new
second question the career path which
professional career paths do most credit
contour work you know maybe you'd like
to say way where you would like to go
and maybe you afterwards would say kind
of what you would like to be doing about
to start my portfolio
well I think in given the I did all that
you learn in M Tech and all the
qualifications that you gain there are
very different paths to follow in my
case I would like to dedicate part of my
future working in research very related
to what I'm really doing now because I
really liked it I will twelve reality
field and new technologies and of course
the working in a big company it would be
ideal I would like to work in a
multidisciplinary team that from which I
can learn more I mean I I would love to
teach one day I mean that would be the
most amazing thing to be no Ivy this is
just something about the academia
environment but it's just so free and
motivating and inspiring and especially
in architecture because it really gives
us it gives us like a leeway to just
talk about anything and everything
really and this like compared to other
you know realms and it just I just would
love to be in school forever well I have
been I think and I'm not finished yet so
relief and I just put them together I
kind of research grant application which
if we get it will be pursuing robotics
and artificial intelligence for the next
five years so that's the delight of
academia yeah it's got its downsides
we have any more questions
they're saying now and somebody's
thinking about how we could kind of
finish up this because we only have a
couple of minutes left
when you come to M Tech if you if you're
considering applying to us you can write
to me you can email me directly or
relief it's aa studio master we'll be
able to answer some of your questions
about content topics how to prepare and
support the school Imogen and Kirstie an
admissions office will help you with
procedural questions of qualifications
how to fill in the forms kind of online
applications we know most people who
come come from far away and it's not
practical for you to come all of you to
come to London to douglas all that
needed but we can we can do Skype and we
can have other ways of having
conversations with you to explore if
you'd like to know more things we have a
lot of online beta we also have our own
Facebook and I have a personal one and
you can find those online and we have a
school microsite which has some of our
built projects and some details of
teaching and has the student guide
handbook and somebody's waiting to say
that maybe we should all be thinking
about waving goodbye so I really really
hope we can see you in school in in tech
so thank you
