welcome to the a public program my name
is Johnny Z non-shooter here we are
gonna have this evening a presentation
by four recently graduated or about to
graduate students of the school and it's
a part of series called both of them
from history and in a threatening way
what is next and today we are going to
listen to reason students and actual
current students of the school
presenting their recent works and their
recent ideas on what it means to make
work and what it means to work at an age
where work is no longer labor it's just
collecting a portfolio in order to
acquire a credit to enter a neoliberal
age this is a set of source a set of
inquisitions in what it means to be
hospitable in this neoliberal age and
what the home and the national
hospitality means and so I I hear I'm
not supposed to say that it is an
enquiring to new practices even though I
actually do think that what we're here
today is presentation what it means to
practice what it means to act and please
join me in welcoming Luis Avila
Alessandra bhava of temporal and
habitual to this presentation of their
work not as a collective not as
individuals but as a very soul very
strange
attempt to exit those two forms of work
and practice that was set out in the
tenth century they are gonna present us
tonight not with a lecture or even with
the presentation of intense but really
with
for you like you do in financial age
thank you John for your introduction and
thanks everyone for for coming so I need
to start with making a disclaimer as
John can already kind of did that we're
done
I mean contrary to what the talk was
kind of advertisers tonight we don't
call ourselves a collective or we're not
go there be a collective but we are kind
of you know in the process of defining
kind of the format of our collaboration
as individuals in doing so so we're
gonna talk about tonight about the
Airbnb pavilion which is a project that
we started working on sometimes in
spring 2014
so as the Venice Biennale was
approaching when we kind of heard the
first presentation or the first
introduction of what the banana was
gonna be Byram coulis we kind of felt
kind of the urgency of in some way
participating to this event because we
felt that it was gonna be a kind of an
important moment and as we kind of all
either graduated recently or about to
graduate Lewis 50s we kind of felt that
we you know we were interested in kind
of seeing if there was what was the
possibility for young actors who kind of
construct their own agency in a way that
was kind of parallel and kind of
different from what the kind of
traditional way of establishing your
practice as a young actor that was so
you know so the project started really
from a name because we obviously wanted
to have in Venice but we obviously had
like an extreme kind of lack of
resources but paired with that we had an
interest in kind of contemporary
phenomenon I could have a phenomenon
which is seeing economy
in particular Airbnb which is in a way a
company that in a way it's a biggest
kind of online company really effects
architecture so we really started with
this you know the fact that we didn't
have we didn't have any resources to an
exhibition or any kind of event in
Venice and the fact that we were
interested in differing economy in
Airbnb so we we kind of started from the
name in the sense that we were we we
said like how do we do a show in Venice
not having any money to kind of do it so
we kind of decided to just rent I mean
the thing starters I go we can rent our
B&B flats in Venice and yeah so it's
really started with the name because you
know traditionally in Venice you have
like nation you know setting up
pavilions so we kind of had Airbnb and
Avilan very simple very basic but you
know the idea kind of grew from that and
so in a kind of interesting way we the
projects are very kind of innocently as
kind of how we wanna do some in Venice
and we wanna do something about like a
contemporary phenomenon that invests
architecture also because if the Analia
was really about fundamentals and it's
kind of like you know beyond
history kind of aspects of architectures
that was not really tackling any
anything contemporary so much or that
was kind of our understanding of it so
so in a way like yeah so it started as a
very innocent thing but then quite soon
kind of the project you know kind of no
we saw that more and more people were
interested in this project and so even
you know it's not a an official thing
but then actually we quite soon we
started having that kind of
correspondence with Airbnb the company
and these kind of prompt us to kind of
reformulate our agency as young
architects visibly kind of big Silicon
Valley corporation and that was a very
very kind of driving aspect of the
beginning of this project I think Lou is
kind of explain what the project in
Venice was so the kind of initial or how
the project started was actually through
Airbnb we kind of needed to find a space
to actually inhabit and also how this
exhibition set up so it started through
the website we chose this space that
kind of would permit us to kind of
exhibit this collection or we did appear
to a project which we kind of
commissioned 25 architects that were
showing we were only showing a lot line
drawings from them and 25 contemporary
artists and there were placed inside the
kind of home but it was a kind of
collision between art architecture and
interior decoration it was all the
curatorial approach was basically an
idea that is kind of an installation or
an intervention that does not interfere
with a with the space that's in it
already so what was kind of very
relevant for us was the fact that the
kind of the exhibition was only gonna
happen in the first three days of the
opening weekend of the Biennale
but we knew that this kind of the the
idea of permanence to this exhibition we
wanted the conversation to kind of go
outside of it so we very early on kind
of jumped onto the idea that the the
online presence of the project was going
to be as relevant as the
as a kind of physical that's a
representation of the project itself so
we started using kind of our media
strategy was very much based on the fact
that we needed to create a conversation
about contemporary users domesticity
and the only way to kind of have an
audience nowadays in that respect was
through kind of social media in a way so
our kind of Instagram account and our
let's say
Twitter account start becoming like a
research led practice in a way so we
started introducing the themes of the
things that we were working with slowly
to the audience that we were kind of
trying to approach and this this kind of
online presence gave this unofficial
pavilion or what serve as an official
pavilion are very much official audience
around it it's interesting to point out
that the kind of the kind of let's say
confusion around the project between the
visitor vmb is it like an independent
thing or is it like a video supported by
the video game of the alley itself
generated more conversations around to
the actual let's say pavilion itself
given so to the point that the kind of
the only kind of the New York Times the
only thing that they kind of commented
on about the Biennale was dear B&B
pavilion suddenly this unofficial kind
of start up let's say exhibition became
the kind of face of the of what people
were tweeting about online in a sense so
I wanna kind of say couple of words
about Airbnb because I mean I assume
that everyone is already using it and is
already aware of it but maybe that's not
the case so Airbnb is defined as an
online community marketplace for people
to list book short term accommodation
around the world anyways the biggest
with uber and other companies is the
biggest phenomenon in the so-called
sharing economy which kind of in a way
it's also referred to as one of the
biggest company in the so-called
Internet 2.0 which is basically the kind
of new wave of companies they really
connect the internet with with let's say
IRL phenomenons in the sense that like
in a way though
web 1.0 would be the one of Google and
all the company the kind of companies
are only purely based online and then an
impact online but things like uber and
airbnb have really any but in real life
because obviously you went to your home
or you should you know entering
someone's car so in a way there is it
was interesting for us because we found
that we found interesting kind of
speculating on relationship between
architecture and the Internet and that
is because we found that by relationship
that relationship had been explored has
been explored for the past 20 years but
in a way that was always either too
metaphorical or to in a way factual and
the fact that the company like Airbnb
was actually connecting the the real
spaces real architectural spaces with
kind of an online design community we
found we found that very stimulating for
for a project as you know as young a kid
is trying to kind of have a voice inside
this kind of you know one of the Debian
Alex kind of the biggest moment for the
debate cultural debate in architecture
and hello yeah I mean reso know
suggested the Airbnb Pavilion was also
which address like a much wider
condition of what's going on today on
and how like these companies appearing
in our everyday life how they are
becoming mediators for many things from
experience memories social interactions
like they become really like the
infrastructure for much of the everyday
life really but also I mean the start
also like using European be providing as
a title in the context of the Biennale
as opposed to using the name of a nation
was also questioning the whole of the
state as let's say like let's say in the
modern state as do
infrastructure for identity also as a as
infrastructure for surveillance or this
kind of dynamics and and yeah so I mean
our B&B was a so like it was really a
way to see how these companies become
interested like start to invade the role
of the state as in terms of managing but
also in producing space and on the way
they start to mediate like the
experience of architecture as well on
the city so uh so yes ah no set as well
in the introduction Airbnb as like the
main all a baby the only and the company
internet company from the sharing
economy which is dealing with
architecture as its main content I just
made a main matter but also we were
interested it in it as because he was
dealing with the home the domestic space
and the domestic space as a typology
which embodies I mean it's always the
incarnation of customs of practices of
like our habits even and and I mean the
there is also I mean that's the thing
that I uh B&B was a window case to do
part of a point of entry into addressing
this very wide questions that the
neoliberal condition of bringing which
is new forms of labor's financialization
commodification of everything the shift
of a subject as the household or like
the individual to like this kind of
entrepreneurial subject mobility
migrants see all these things that are
like very big topics that are very
difficult to kind of address as a whole
because we're like we don't even know
what proof we were dealing with anymore
as who were designing for all of a
sudden this was just now I'm down to one
specific case and now I would let's say
and so like I mean I could keep listing
this like so the the blurriness between
what is life what is work
the general condition of tenancy tenants
rather than being property owners but
also like so you have different types of
labor so the Shang Shang economy has a
form of I'm in labor I guess but as a
form of economy but I think the home as
I've been busy
also addressing things like reproductive
labor the labor the labor happening at
home gender roles I mean it's all of a
sudden we could like throw a B&B through
the home we could tap into all these
topics in almost lights away in an
accessible way rather than always coming
from top down on this and all this as
well through one of the main aspect was
connect like in the internet and
connectivity on this kind of practice so
I guess one of the main question that we
that came up at the beginning was how
Airbnb had this strange quality of not
building anything new but just
repurposing architecture so it was so
that was a very strong spatial quality
to there to this the effect of Airbnb
and and then it both I mean I guess the
first question we're asking is that okay
well I mean we supposedly about the home
but where they are really saying is that
a room or any one of these space can
become something between a house unless
we can sleep there but you can also host
people so it has the quality of a hotel
it also has the quality of a half an
office because you'll say they say it's
good for business I mean you can always
working online but also has this kind of
public quality of like almost this
street you know it gets like this
becomes this place that's like open
online you show your house this won't
display so I mean I mean it was just we
started asking ourselves the question of
how do we design for this what kind of
space would it with this be and yes I
guess I just about to show embarrassed
because I think all these questions are
you you know obviously
pointed out it was it was quite the
reason why I thought it was quiet our
food the show even though was very small
so was the fact that actually all these
questions were addressed in a very
direct way even even if simply because
we kind of this what happened in one of
this high and it made a series of flats
rented through Airbnb and also another
thing that I felt was kind of making all
these questions very apparent and not
just very abstract was the fact that we
appeared a number of contemporary
artists a really deal actually in their
practice which set up questions of you
know the Internet or like you know the
the home online and all these kind of
questions and we found that actually I
mean there was a subtle kind of coconut
oil gesture was to kind of pair
architects I really didn't have in their
practice or in their work the work that
was short like it was not really talking
about those issues that we were
interested in so in a way we we kind of
matched we were interested in the
proximity between the practice of
artists they really were more we related
to more and we're at concerns most
similar to ours and the architects in a
way and I think that was actually an
interesting thing also for us as I said
before as we said before as you know
young practitioners the fact that like
it was very you know in a way it's it's
kind of interesting that we we couldn't
find within the realm of architecture
you know I kind of contemporary novel
domesticity exactly but also the fact
that the art practice perhaps they have
more the ability to be satisfied with an
open question saying okay that is this
happening and we produce they just put a
question if one of you only just leave
it there rather than the I think they're
architects I mean architecture projects
often have this tendency to offer a
solution and and I think putting the two
together we're actually creating an
interesting dialogue in that regard so
in a sense it's for the project that we
define kind of our agents use your
market tricks because we also like as
far
exhibition we also kind of produced the
text described all these paradigms that
we're trying to attain or through the
exhibition itself and also have this
online presence so somehow we kind of
set up this kind of way of working in a
sense so okay I should say a few words
from basically from Venice on we kind of
discovered we kind of found out that
this paradigm we took ever being be
allowed us to explore many different
issues which were actually not satisfied
that's in the show we did in Venice many
of them have already been mentioned some
of them we will address later for
example what does it mean if you that
you can monitor monetize extra space in
a moment of crisis for example such as
this is so we started in a sense seeking
for opportunities actually - let's say -
to search for further initiatives where
we could expand that on the only issues
which we are already taught touched upon
in Venice some of which happened and are
ongoing at the moment others which
probably stopped halfway halfway but I
guess what the interesting point is is
what before the Sun was mentioning that
this we actually find out found out that
if this initiative had an audience and
that this audience was not only let's
say how do you say not only paid
attention what we were doing but was
also inspired yeah and there was a
direct in a sense how do you say
feedback which we would get and which
would prove in a sense how are our own
ideas would slowly permeate into the
market so one of the first initiatives
we kind of took immediately onboard was
a panel discussion we organized at the
Swiss Institute in New York in a sense
the subject of this panel is this very
interesting anecdote of the foundational
myth a very and B as a company I don't
know if you're all aware of it but the
company was founded by three young
graduates from design school who in San
Francisco at some point when there was a
large
design Congress in a sense had this
tremendously innovative idea of doing in
a bed-and-breakfast in their living room
by just throwing some air mattresses on
the floor yeah at a moment in which
there was a shortage in town of hotel
and accommodation in a sense this
disruptive moment in what was the lobby
of hotels in San Francisco became
escalated into something much larger
which in New York at the moment is a
subject which is highly debated so in a
sense we found we found it appropriate
to especially because this top was in
New York to go back to that foundational
myth and reconstruct let's say what we
thought was a latent somehow connection
between certain conversations which were
occurring in the Silicon Valley and with
these let's say techno hippies the tech
hippies in San Francisco and certain
conversations instead which were already
part of the architectural discourse
since at least the 60s two projects in
particular we found particularly
inspiring both of them somehow came from
vanam home is not a house for example or
more generally the use of inflatables
and somehow this idea of the house being
something like a kids which you can
carry with you you know or this idea of
nomadic life and another essay which
banham published for a 1986
Treena in Milan which which the title
was chic nomadism which we found
particularly appropriate also to
question that's the value of this
connection in contemporary times so we
organized this panel in New York at the
Swiss Institute's where we in a sense
try to bring these two realities
together we invited on the one hand two
directors from Airbnb San Francisco and
I don't say that this was the first time
let's say directors from Airbnb in a
sense manifested themselves or presented
themselves in a public event yeah in a
public cultural event and on the other
hand we had bronzy as a contribute as a
contributor and I
assuming that you all know who brands is
of course the talk was introduced by
Alessandro which was our let's say our
presence at the Swiss Institute's which
gave an introduction in a sense dealing
with the question of the monetization of
the home and the home let's say as a
marketable assets and the implication is
as had let's say in how we how we have
conceived the domesticity pretty much in
the last 70 80 years maybe you want to
spend a few words on that yeah so
basically I mean New York was very
important moment because I mean first of
all services said was the first time the
Airbnb has publicly participated into
into a cultural event so not branded
event or something that control over and
that turned out to be quite interesting
and also it was quite I mean it was
interesting you are called so because
the community of the people that kind of
came to see the talk with the community
of artists and in that way there was an
interesting exchange because obviously
most of these people that came to the
talk had a kind of personal investment
in this conversation because they all
use Airbnb to kind of subsidize
subsidize their life and their life
stuff so there was actually a very
engaged participation from the audience
and yeah well my presentation was the
event was structurally very simply I did
representation and the to IBM be
representatives representation then we
had under under appearances video
playing and the overlap of this night is
requiring quite interesting kind of
revealed itself for Sweden when we
opened up the questions but my
presentation was about our presentation
was about the kind of the trying to
trace a history of how the house has
become a commodity so like before how we
got where BMI base here so it's kind of
starting from from the
depression-era era America and now the
home was made into a currency all the
way down to in a way to to like sixties
kind of hematology and and kind of
radical design all the way down to our
B&B I mean this so yeah then I mean
another thing we did for that for that
talk that is quite interesting so we
used we partnered with genius which is I
mean maybe you know rap genius so it's a
it's a website and a company that kind
of used to let you uh notate only rap
songs or like people could annotate rap
songs but now it's kind of transitioning
into this much more ambitious project
which is basically like I'm not eat the
internet that's their kind of flame so
we been asked by them to kind of and
they're trying to expand of course
beyond rap so you know they won't have
more current kind of cultural content
and we were quite scary the beginning
because we thought like only like rap
fans would like I'm not eight this text
about a BMB which was kind of
interesting in a way but also kind of
weird so but then we actually found out
that there is a very active you know
community on this website and it really
allows a lot of sous-vide expand I mean
what the panel really was like really
you know engage in you know the response
for the value is really strong but also
kind of being able to expand this online
just to say they see how you know how we
tried to structure a kind of optical so
these kind of paths to this strategy in
which like we really try to kind of make
this the content and the kind of ideas
that were interested in engaging for for
people so the conversation doesn't
become insular between us and kind of
Hope himself to everyone else kind of
wants to take part in it at the same
time as this project was kind of
evolving we were also working at the
same time in a commissioned by AG for a
group show in Paris which we kind of it
was the first time I were commissioned
to make an object which is another thing
that we're interested in kind of
developing more so in a sense it becomes
uh in the sense that kind of our
coming together suddenly has a output
that certainly becomes so somehow art
based in a sense the exhibition was
happening at the same time I'll be
looking at the notion of the kind of
genesis or the myth the myth of the
genesis of the everyday as a company but
at the same time us we kind of are
writing this text on the image of the
home online so in a way this kind of
object or intervention was seen as a
kind of way to explore these two areas
of interest or research that we were
doing and have a direct kind of a direct
output or kind of a direct kind of
installation that could go alongside it
so the the object that we made is an
Airbnb survival kit and it basically
consists in a kind of air mattress with
slippers a guest book and a towels the
exhibition happened in front of the
Picasso Museum in Paris so we kind of
used that references to kind of evolved
this towel design in a way so we've also
kind of now going into e-commerce where
we're kind of selling this Picasso
embroidered towel with the economy these
are also commented because this was
around the time when the rebranding of
Airbnb happened there was a lot of I
mean it was kind of like a lot of
traveling online on the fact that the
the logo looks like a vagina so we kind
of very I mean we we interested in the
way like things get communicated online
and now like you know I mean it seems to
sing basically like how the company
handles its image online we thought so
we kind of the hips the main focus was
the image we're gonna get out of this
huh object in a way because the way we
wanted to frame the next conversation
which is a commissioned by rice um to
kind of talk about the image of the home
online was through this kind of how is
Airbnb changing the kind of the way that
the home is represented in the oh yeah
perhaps we can start actually addressing
that very image of the kitchen now which
as real as it seems is a CGI rendering
so as we as we see many for example in
IKEA catechol catalogs online and as
much as we were interested in this
obviously there was a there was a
conversation going on in Venice about
let's say Airbnb about being one of the
largest possibly repositories of
interior photography on the
planet and we have to realize that we're
talking about a company which has
800,000 listings in 33,000 cities yeah
in 192 countries across the world so
we're talking about more than a million
photographs of interiors yeah and this
alone is a fact which in a sense sets up
a space which for architects I think is
very interesting to question even more
so since 2010 when the company founded a
branch of of Airbnb called Airbnb
photography and the way in which this
branch was was was founded was the
following at the time they had only
around 40 listings in San Francisco
which were going relatively bad and the
the founders themselves had the idea of
going to New York and and photographing
these apartments themselves because they
realized that the picture was were quite
bad that was the only kind of recurrent
pattern going on so in fact this is
spontaneous aspect of Airbnb no of users
having the possibility not only to
upload their space and therefore
monetize that but also to in a sense
upload pictures of their space to
represent themselves somehow was
immediately in a sense how do you say
tackled by the company as something
which had to be fixed
yeah and obviously what the company
realized is that in order to make these
apartments more productive they needed
to refer to a certain way of
photographing space yeah
so after this brief tour to New York the
within a week the productivity of the
company increased by 2.5 so meaning that
if they were making let's say $200 a
week in one week the week after they
were making more than double the amount
of money so this quite quickly became
let's say an overarching strategy which
the which the company applied to almost
all his listings Airbnb photography is a
free service you can apply for if you
would say put your house on Airbnb and
Airbnb hires around 3,000 photographers
all around the world to in a sense
entering within your homes and take the
very same pictures
from the very same points of view
focusing on the very same things this is
this is an interesting factor which in a
in our text sunrise and we also tried to
show with an image which was made
actually by a current student the second
year where 30 listings of Airbnb of
superimposed one on top of each other
and in a sense what emerges from this
image is it's quite directly how the
company curates its portfolio of images
photographers are hired they submit a
portfolio of images these images are
curated selected and in a sense are
selected by the affinity they have one
to another so this this issue of
photography somehow started for us to
become extremely important largely also
because of this notion of the repository
and this this huge somehow archive of
interiors which has a user you can
browse through this browsing is the new
in a sense is the new way you navigate
through through websites such as Airbnb
nowaday you don't search for something
you need you browse through in a sense a
series of experiences and that is why
the company now places infants emphasis
even more so on this idea of the
experience
yeah rather than the necessity of being
somewhere so I think what is interesting
about these photography is that somehow
it shows how in fact this space that
they are creating around the world which
is self-similar in a sense with minor
alterations in style is a highly
pampered space to borrow terms from
slaughtered I yeah it's it's it's it's
really a large interior where we can
feel comfortable which is morally decent
which is curated and where there is no
space for obscenity reason why we in the
essay we try to tackle also perhaps
other ways of seeing the home online for
example on amateur porn or even just the
casual Skype Skype tour on the house or
not snapchat for example taking it kind
of seriously as a phenomenon as it is so
in a sense rhizome is part of let's say
a larger let's say body of work which we
keep on doing which is writing text the
the first text we wrote was for forums
which was in a sense a text which went
in parallel to the exhibition in Venice
that's something but the image of the
Holman line on this article is there I
think there's an interesting thing that
happened we had to do in order to be
able to monetize a space that wasn't
monetizable before which is with the
house was to create a common language
through photography in order to create a
currency so therefore you can compare
everything in Italy in equivalent a bit
like money basically allowed to compare
things that were incomparable and create
a language that allowed to make them to
value them basically on to sell them but
at the same time while doing that they
also create they emphasize the special
places like the exotic the weird the
quirky and all this this yeah this type
of places as the thing that one is
looking for lay experience and I think
that's very I mean I think it's very
interesting to see how it might affect
you know we can see two types of listing
already happening in our B&B the very
standard one white abstract just like
offering a service you can sleep there
on that set and then there's the other
one which is more like you go there for
very specific reason to get an
experience yeah I mean and in terms of I
mean we've been talking about three four
four projects so there's a vision which
was an exhibition that was talking with
over the text for folk home with the
with the pavilion we did a panel
discussion in a in New York and I was
this like kind of like thing in Paris
these objects we produced and this text
provides oh man really I think what
we're trying to find out is that we with
whatever format to output with that
comes to us so we find or we want to
explore we just like try to go for it
and then we try to look into how we can
address that with with like a B&B so
we've been like making text producing
images but we also produced images for
artists for example for the exhibition
we showed our own work as well as
artists and architects in the exhibition
and um and all this is used also to kind
of furnish our social media present I
like presents that we always kind of try
to bring reference unlike from past
historical what kind of article
architects see and also stuff we find in
you know everyday life in our streets in
your apartment or just like spending
time together or like whatever so I
think it's been quite interesting
because we there's never been any format
in terms of how we would think oh how to
express what we were interested in and
we're trying to tap into whatever is
available and yeah I think that's
interesting in the next step you're
considering this call it's called what's
next happens tomorrow actually
we're Alexander and I are flying to body
in south of Italy where we have been
invited by a gallery to do a performance
and the subject of that performance will
be the idea of community it's
interesting because at the same time we
were working with this this notion of
community which Airbnb recently places
so much emphasis on perhaps to protect
itself from let's say the threat the
threatens of the threats of municipal
bureaucracy is that at the same time we
were developing this this project
actually just two or three days ago the
first large community meeting occurred
in San Francisco where Airbnb in a sense
founders open the doors to the entire
community of Airbnb in a sort of guru
like fashion they they gathered within
construct reconstructed listings and
somehow exchanged notes and experiences
they have as users or hosts and this is
part of let's say a wider objective or a
wider let's say image the company is
trying to give of itself with slogans
like belong anywhere or which really in
a sense push globalization in a sense
the the cliches of globalization to the
limit and so in a as much as we do we
try to intervene in these in these
themes not by writing about them only or
not by reflecting on them but actually
of
on the ground and testing themselves
testing them ourselves in Venice the
exhibition was not let's say an essay
about the possibility of doing an
exhibition in someone's house without
him knowing or her knowing we actually
did it
and I thought and we thought that embody
we would adopt the same scheme so at the
moment we are basically in contact with
over a hundred Airbnb hosts embody
unofficially so we're using Airbnb s
website actually as a way of contacting
people which is something which is
rather difficult because because you
cannot talk to Airbnb users if you don't
actually make an inquiry to hosts to to
get the room yeah so it this is actually
something which points out how the
relationships which occur within this
community are really reliant on
financial transactions and much of these
let's say this this quirkiness is is
evident in the kind of conversations
we're having now with them because
obviously we are not interested in
booking 100 flats embody and many
there's a lot of misunderstanding in
terms of why we are contacting people so
the event will take place in in a former
fascist building in a large meeting room
where Alexander and I will in a sense
continue to dwell along this uncertain
uncertainty as to whether we are
officials from Airbnb or not so please
don't spoil the secret and livestream by
the way and it's going to be live
streamed by the way along with along
with along with the event embody there's
going to be which curated an online
exhibition which is visible on the
website of the gallery we are working
with which is 63 277 steps and this is a
known exhibition where four artists show
videos of their work which tackles
directly with the question of the home
and yeah from from basically from
Thursday onwards you can visit more
maybe about like the community aspect of
this project in a way I feel like in
every project we really approach every
project as really in a way as I mean
also because it's the only choice we
have really
but you know I mean it's a delight to
like in addressing questions of the home
which is obviously kind of the core
business of Architects in a way or as
being historically communities another
one and of course like much of the
twentieth century has been kind of about
conversation about participation and how
like architecture kind of involves or
like as a stake in kind of creating
communities or you know as agency not
and how this is kind of now anywhere
being maybe inadvertently it's kind of
tackling a kind of like on all these
grounds that traditionally are the
grounds of architects so in a way the
commute community the community aspects
with another one of these things that
really we approaches architects and I
think so just to conclude I think on
what we what's the direction that we had
in towards now I think right now we're
really interested in kind of thinking of
ourselves as like we're interested in
tier design I think to the core as a
kind of the discipline that has been
very marginal in the world of
architecture and and and kind of that
has never been a kind of group or
interior designer that has had a kind of
critical practice or kind of a practice
of any kind of intellectual relevance so
we find we found PC like another you
know I think we will like interested in
basically like finding you know anyway
we're very kind of startup P about this
because we I mean it's interesting to
find areas that are kind of you know in
the shadow or whether it's you know
wherever that we can claim basically so
so you know wanna operate between like
cross oh yeah exactly we want to operate
between kind of interior design and art
anyway also yeah also because of out of
the frustration with with kind of
architecture in a way or like
architecture practice in a way so
and and we are and so like to do that
we're kind of looking at similar and I'm
not similar but like we had other
practices that we find inspiring in
terms of the format and this would be
groups or collectives of people that
kind of operate in between different
disciplines and this would be people
like so associated or at least whenever
cooperation met I have an K home builder
design group which are all groups they
kind of operate either between graphic
design and art or typography design art
or I mean chaos and forecast like
branding and art and V Design Group also
does design or not so I think we I mean
we're looking at these kind of practices
to kind of find a now to go on with like
our projects we kind of find a format
that is viable to do to do project in
the few projects in the future I think
we conclude here
we can open up for questions if there's
any question we were happy to answer
yeah yes myself Jack please Jack yeah
thank you very much for your
presentation of course I have
appreciated your work for a long time
and it was great to see you
present what I've seen previously is
this projects underneath a single kind
of driving ideology I wanted to pick up
on something the OP tab mentioned which
is really it has to do it you know you
you very much insist on the fact that
you're operating in this as architects
and one of the questions which has
always been present for me is I mean in
a condition in which we have the decline
of the nation-state we have the decline
of the Civic realm and therefore we
really I mean I think it's increasingly
the case that we need to have truly
public space and what your let's say
focus shows which is the often neglected
flip side of that which is the end of
private space as well once which leads
this kind of smooth neoliberal space and
so I guess my question is what the role
of the architect can be and what types
of space I mean is this for example the
future of the architect as a kind of
designer of urban infrastructure or you
know what what your sort of ideas about
that type of space might be yeah I don't
know if I could claim that what we kind
of look at is a smooth in the olive oil
space I think it's a bit of always
always struggle with that description of
like contemporary space I think it's
still like a very uneven and contrary
his face on maybe in the case of air B&B
one of the examples would be that okay
you have millions of rooms that are
documented online but it's not all rooms
and perhaps it kind of widens the gap of
what is referenced and what is not and
so that's like something that's I mean I
don't know how it would influence design
but I think it's already changes back
you know space is not that uniform I
think two rooms of like different
qualities in that's that sense I mean I
don't know if for example is another
aspect in the way every night you just
mentioned infrastructure architectural
infrastructure if we were like
architects in the sense we designed that
I think there is a fun I mean it's
something I'm fascinated with and I
don't even know how to address it yet
but how for example I you know since
since modernism the way our space has
been produced has been very much you
define the subject you define a function
that the subject does on you produces
space like in a very cause old kind of
manner and you see the space as this
function itself this thing even thank
you for emancipatory reason or something
like this you know like from like the
most practical to the most like utopian
let's say and all of a sudden now we see
that you know we just is for this
platform like a B&B you can away like
giving you function not actually you
design a space and it has nothing to do
[Music]
you know you can just I don't you can
repurpose something without changing it
and I think it's like questions and it
brings like the production of space of
architecture into and brings in your
light on it in the sense that actually
you maybe what would come would be just
this production of space and you
produces kind of anonymous or like
abstract spaces or maybe not so abstract
spaces that are very specific qualities
on their reference online it is for
certain reasons for perhaps like
architect inequalities such as light
ceiling height so I don't know
accessibility or something like this all
of a sudden you
go there just whenever you need it
instead of having like one of these kind
of typical open you know like the
promise the promise of the open plan was
that you can have any use within one
space on all of a sudden now you might
have a bunch of very specific spaces
spread across the city and you just use
the space whenever you need it for
example this is something I don't know
why it goes in terms of design or you
can like you know we can I think it's
very problems as well but I think that's
like that's how I think an architectural
I think that's what it would interest me
but this is also something super
problematic for example when we hear
people like czesc you know one of the
founders of Airbnb talking about
property today being a burden we have to
kind of emphasize the fact that this is
a highly in a sense a latarian way of
tackling the question which deals with
cliches which are almost not even worth
mentioning somehow so in a sense I think
the question now is whether we talk
about let's say architecture literally
so in terms of bricks and mortar and
space or other which we address
questions like which which deal with
with policies and polity in general and
how as communities for example we want
to we want to deal with these questions
and how we want to deal with for example
questions such as a corporation such as
Airbnb which is ubiquitous but at the
same time brings taxes only in the US
and how this is somehow in a sense
disruptive in let's say making us
requestion ever existing lobbies such as
that of the hotel industry or of the
or in the case of uber for example of
taxi driving and licenses in general so
I guess there are two levels in the in
that respect when it comes to the home
as those used to say you're always right
when it comes to the home what we are
trying to develop now is something which
has less to do with innocence as a an
infrastructural I would say aspect and
and much more to do with a certain
tactile and and soft and much more rapid
let's say aspect to control this has to
do with agency again because
architecture as a practice has become
increasingly slow I think and in a sense
the only way to to try to find some sort
of moment I mean what we do and not get
depressed is to in a sense try to tackle
or try to address niches where actually
we do have opportunities and where let's
say the market let's say allows us to
operate at a certain speed for instance
I think I mean just being a babe on our
way I think the thing about agencies
artists blah blah
I think we'd ever meet was the fact that
I think we are interested in really
trying to understand what like this
piece of the home is today like very
simply like the fact that we find is
important because I think like as
accuracy we need to know or like need to
understand what like what are the
contemporary changes so that space are
and I think that we don't see that there
is so much I mean this doesn't seem to
be a huge shock you patient you know in
general so like we cannot feel the
the urgency in kind of trying to
understand map I think and with that I'd
like to add just a very quick comment
before I pass it on to someone else
which is that I think to draw together
what all three of you have just said now
you're absolutely right that in a sense
you know capitalism creates
subjectivities precisely in order to
mobilize a particular popular population
into the capitalist process and what is
so interesting about the work that
you're doing and what is really unique
amongst architects today is that you're
looking for moments of rupture of
possible rupture within subjectivity and
you've you found a very specific and
very interesting moment at which you
it's through very simple means you can
have very big impacts on the individuals
relationship to space on their autonomy
sound the other question no way I mean
it's fine that you say that because they
they see it they also think the same way
as you do well initially the project was
developed to be working with them in
partnership so the kind of initial idea
was first to have a pavilion but they
were gonna be fully invested like their
eyes their eyes have been funding it
yeah but busy I mean then in a way that
I don't think I mean I don't think we
were ever interested in kind of working
for them absolutely not
we were interested in kind of working
with them just to kind of foster the
project like anyway kind of see what the
you know the interaction with that was
important the closer to the topic is to
those because I think that this course
on the way they formulate what they are
doing is so I mean that the rhetoric of
the Silicon Valley unlike all the what
you're proposing is actually I mean I
don't know is because yeah I mean is
very hard for like um I mean
terms two kind of a where are all this
kind of I mean for example Silicon
Valley companies they're such a big
impact on everyone's life but it's kind
of hard to have them participate in a
culture discussions like these things we
try to kind of engage them directly in
that sense to bring them on to our plane
okay well we also have to say that I
completely the quite unaware of what
they are doing they are really evolved
in the very inner sphere which is like
the West Coast American privilege tag
tranquila tech guys drinking a lattice
type of I've you know I and I don't know
because we and we invited them to the
New York talked to the Swiss pavilion
and to Swiss Institute and and really
the I mean the most interesting thing
that the port was actually the fact that
they didn't is really the couldn't
really create a debate you know was the
fact that the answers were completely
missing the point where we were trying
to frame Airbnb within an historical
political frame you know even like a an
attempt at doing something like that
they were just like completely unable to
relate to and do things like super
studio like when they are supposed to be
architects so it's just like okay when I
think I mean in generally it's
interesting that in the discussion about
how come this private companies now I
hold the mean to our life or to such a
great extent but at the same time they
do they're not able to formulate that
impact kind of actually or you know in
any way I think that's interesting but
in terms of the US doing their marketing
I did like the format that we use is
always kind of playing with that a
little bit just because we find it's
kind of
interesting way of operating but we're
not trying to tell me we try to kind of
like you know I also use iron in a way
like to kind of uncover certain dynamics
that they use but it's true I mean they
also told us that we were doing a
marketing better than them and also they
also told us what is I had at the Getty
the felt questioned by a severe of
leaders of followers choose another one
of these kind of exchange kind of like a
company conversation exact like before
decide who comes basically one that
wanted to kind of give us financial
support one that didn't and in a sense
two cops were like this the basic fact
that we're not funding this is the kind
of proofs are culturally relevant but
the interesting thing about let's say
the company itself is that even there
there there are tools scales which it
operates and two scales with at which
we've had a relationship there is the
guys in San Francisco of course which we
can quite easily say that they were
quite cool with what we were doing as
long as it didn't select say disrupt
their own activities or cross over their
third party but I know other guys in
Italy of Airbnb Italy which is an office
of six seven people which were very
concerned instead of what we were doing
and there is where you can test actually
what what let's say a company like
Airbnb does to certain let's say
contexts for instance they it was not
accidental that they were particularly
concerned of what we were doing because
we were in Venice if you imagine that
Venice being an island has a highly
controlled or used to have a highly
controlled way of managing the amount of
let's say guests which could come on the
island by means of how many places they
were available in hotels at that time
and now if you imagine a scenario where
every second let's say or every third
apartment in Venice can be rented
obviously we are dealing with issues
which can be extremely with which with
which let's say the company has to be
extremely careful
they can be extremely disruptive at
saying and creating very high let's say
imbalances within within the management
of the city right yeah thanks for
greater because I mean I was wondering
if you could sort of two things first
sort of how you think in terms of a
physical manifestation is for nearly
requirement for one to be stupid and
authentic like in terms of a use of
Airbnb so I use over heaven be wanting
to bring in as much income through the
apartment like is there a trend so what
you see that like Drive of that is like
a apartment which is flexible and ankle
ease of so that it's any desire or also
both antic stove space in a location
first of all there are instructions on
the website on how to on how to better
market your home and and it's a quite
interesting document you can consult
okay I don't if you if you're asking out
of curiosity or let's say or after if
you're after practical advice but that's
definitely let's say something to to
have a look at on the other hand even
within Airbnb it's it's hard to
generalize as everything because
obviously there are many different types
of users as there are also many
different types of hosts I think in
terms of if we talk about let's say an
average user which is middle to low
class let's say city dweller
there are obviously recurrent patterns
which come about again and again and
those are though we kind of touch on
those patterns both in fulcrum and in
the rhizome si more probably more
extensively there was also this thing
that we talked about New York the fact
that like the home even if for the home
to become more commoditized and kind of
become a farmer currency I kind of also
needs to become more of itself like more
you know the home needs to look more
homey in a way so I think that was an
interesting thing that we found out like
the fact that you know contrary to to
kind of the real estate market for
example where you have pictures of like
the home is always present the house
house is always present this kind of
empty so that people can project their
own life in this case it's really about
like you know for example they really
suggest we were to put a cut in the
house to kind of look more kind of I
mean domestic way hate them cats I don't
know how that works but you know like a
cat kind of blanket so kind of all kind
of surface like soft surfaces and kind
of graphic as you're buying into the
space but the personas was you notice
too that kind of interior decorations
yeah yeah and in terms of the users
maybe I mean it's hard to generalize on
I also feel bit like different different
way so regarding that because some
people just use it to make money or to
you know we have five apartments and
they just ran it some others you know
they just use it to travel on it
whatever but yourself I think it can be
interesting for example the single mom
50 we just want to you know have people
around because she's like constantly
alone I think that they're always
suddenly a likely possibility to have
something happening and I don't know I
think it's I mean in that respect for
example it's also interesting when you
when you browse let's say through how
users let's say
market their home and what they can
offer no and you have many different
ways of tackling the question one
recently for example I have seen
yesterday is a man that refused to put
any photograph of his house and actually
put only photographs of the city and of
let's say cultural issues which he found
interesting in which he would let's say
show within the city which is again one
of the big topics Airbnb is going now
and in fact it's quite it's quite
interesting to question for example or
to see with every other services which
are or HR emerging as a website called
viable where for instance anyone can
offer let's say tours or experiences and
operate let's say as guides within a
city and put their experience of market
their experience online so as much as
for example at Airbnb there are there is
this website where for example you could
say I'm Fabrizio I am an architect I
have a certain kind of interest in the
city and if you give me 70 pounds I will
dedicate three hours of my life in
showing you let's say Hawksmoor or other
kinds of things in the city and it's all
obviously it all it all is part of this
it's a overarching community which
Airbnb refers to but at the same time
it's highly problematic when we think of
hospitality for example as a subject
because everything is dependent on
financial transaction and and therefore
it's a service in a sense yeah like
there's always this emphasis in like a
community but somehow they Airbnb if the
company is not aware that the
transaction or is very much aware of
this transaction but it doesn't micro is
a transaction itself so they kind of
celebrate this idea of like niceness of
the host showing you around the city but
they never mention the fact that this
only happens to a financial this is a
genius of Airbnb they just basically
take care of the money so you never see
it and that's how it started you know
it's there that's the main idea at the
center of it on all the sharing economy
website that's what they do their own
marketplace to just secure money
exchange unlimber so make it visible
yeah
it also shows how the house can be
actually other
a very political it's a subject of
debate which is an issue which we are
trying to explore also in let's say
other types of let's say homes which
have some kind of political rather and
relevance this for example was it was
two days ago it's two days ago it's a
the house that the Mexican president was
designing for himself with like dirty
money so somehow the using the kind of
homeless a way to explain or kind of
interior decoration that explain somehow
medical problem and this was also one of
those images with which sparked some of
these let's say the the turmoils which
which occurred in Mexico recently for
example this one lost in will quickly
and and I guess this is very also a
question which we sort of cover your
house of investigation as a project was
a team whatever but um whether you had
any thoughts at this stage on someone's
interior is put to work view and so I
want to clear things will be put to work
to pay off the debt which so protected
the houses which is in sort of those not
the first time solutely for neoliberal
tentacles were sort of encroached upon
[Music]
have encroached upon the interior how do
you think our current stage effect
emotions of dwelling and in Mississippi
in terms of do you think they will stay
inside the interior of the home and just
morph or do you think they will be
transplanted like away from the home and
leave elsewhere as a haven a safe place
to protect itself against disapprove I
mean I think we've missed part of the
question but I mean I think it's
interesting what you were you saying
about like if Thomas CCC or kind of has
to leave the home because the home is
not a safe space anymore for kind of the
development of
effects and kind of because it has to
become public in a way it has to be
become kind of marketable if it will
kind of a not beat another speech I
think that's an interesting question
yeah I mean it's something to think
about I can I don't
yeah then what do you mean by dwelling
on authenticity
I know it's um I'm gonna offend the
parents in the first question but um
just in that cliche is once you are
looking upon the interior not as of
safeguard from the outside out as sort
of rights to think I find always
photomatic to circa the internet arrived
on always sudden everything changed you
know in the walls you know up in the
house which public I don't think it's
true and also I don't think that the
home was the fortress of the family on
heaven you know for example the feminist
critique is the famous one is
reproductive labor you know happens
within the home this has been going on I
think I don't know it's never been that
clear you know I don't know where I was
the first time ever I know before yeah
it's questions are ongoing and they've
been opened for a while and it's true
that's its effect something well I don't
know if we can say that all of a sudden
all houses of public all houses are
magnetizable all ours is I don't know I
think more or less analyzed very much in
a continual of change also things like
all the cliches kind of reinforce each
other as we said like the home to
function as a marketable assets needs to
also become more domestic or produced
that image and this was in as I mention
before like in New York that we talked
about how during the Depression era when
like there was this housing crisis and
I'm no sorry there the mortgage is well
yeah the New Deal kind of maybe
transformed the home into this kind of
currency and now like the only way to do
that so at the same time while houses
were becoming a currency so something
abstract and liquid on the market
at the same time to be marketable they
had to really be lived as homes so I
think this kind of cliches or you know
these kind of different aspects of the
house I don't think this will never
transform because in a way all these
things are interlocked like to to be
able to to function I think all these
aspects need to really kind of really
interlocked so I don't I mean I don't
see that within changing I see thank you
thank you thank you
