hi everyone and thank you for coming to
tonight's lecture along the rivers by
Lorenzo si UD Anthony and Johnny this
talk is part of our what's next lecture
series which invites recent graduates
back to the AAA to talk about their
unique forms of practice and our
speakers tonight are very recent
graduates they graduated in June last
year and the title of the project the
title of the talk tonight comes from the
project they initiated in the summer
between the 4th and 5th years after
Anthony won a kpf traveling fellowship
and as he explained to me recently they
were each applying four different
sources of funding that would enable
them to do this project which I thought
was quite interesting in terms of like
how you do a joint research project
rather than a single author you start to
do things as a group and this enabled
them to carry out this project into
contemporary Chinese architecture and
the forces that are shaping in so they
spent the summer like not this past
summer but the one before that I'm
traveling along the yellow and the
Yangtze rivers to understand them as
resources for both building and culture
the rivers often referred to as the
cradle of Chinese culture and have since
occupied a central role in the expansion
of that culture as it is understood in a
context of urban optimization and rising
domestic mobility so their research took
the form of emails interviews
photography film bargaining cars trains
and canal locks as they examine the dual
context of the rivers whilst exploring
new ways of talking about architecture
in China and I think the projects are
interesting because it was initiated
while they were all still studying at
the AAA and they spent their fifth year
kind of balancing between working and
their individual units I think all of
you were in different units and and then
also kind of meeting together as a group
to debate kind of what forms this
research could take in terms of how it
could be communicated and become part of
a bigger conversation and during London
Design Festival last year they exhibited
it in a kind of mini exhibition in 32
Bedford Square where they started to
show photographs and films and they've
that was just a snapshot of the kind of
things that they're brainstorming for
the year ahead in terms of how they
would communicate that going forward and
kind of where the project goes from here
and
I just think it's a great example of a
multi or third research project that was
kind of born out of the AAA yet not from
a specific unit or program within the
school it kind of takes on a life of its
own
through the group so to briefly
introduce our four speakers it's gonna
introduce you in terms of which units
they did so Anthony studied for two
years in diploma 5zu D is the exception
in that he spent one year in two
different units so in diploma six and
then seven Lorenzo was in diploma eight
for two years and Johnny was in diploma
17 so without further ado please join me
in welcoming the four of them back to
the AAA thank you for the introduction
and thanks everybody for coming we're
super humbled to be part of this to be
part of the series and even more so to
be counted among all the really
interesting people who have been
presenting and contributing to this
conversation about entering into
negotiating environments of
architectural work as Midea mentioned in
our case I think we're really placing
ourselves as close came as close as can
be in this gap having just graduated in
June that being said we're not really
presenting tonight a particular practice
but it's a single ongoing project that
spans between our time as students and
now as region graduates one that in a
way focuses on how we are continually
drawing on our experiences here to try
and define a certain conversation and
refine the output that we find that we
develop that we think holds some value
in the realm of architecture so as
mentioned along the rivers is a
documentary research project tracing
different identities of the yellow and
Yangtze rivers in China as significant
landmarks and natural forces that have
shaped regional lifestyles and cultural
expressions and as infrastructures
tapped for their potential to support
the realization of modern ideals from
the party of Mao to the present our
interest in this was trying to record a
kind of two parallel histories of the
rivers exploring pockets of vernacular
life existing and emerging monuments
that have come to reflect a new
forms of mobility and getting as close
as we could to the very infrastructure
that we understood to be rooted in the
rivers as well as presence in the
foundation of numerous other
conversations about architecture in
China such as rapid construction and
relocation
so the itinerary that we set out it had
a fairly direct motive which was to
follow these rivers from mouth to source
from the deepwater ports of Shanghai on
the bottom rights to the river source of
the Tibetan Plateau all the way on the
left and then back again to the Yellow
River estuary in the top right but one
thing that we would come to find out is
that this is a little easier said than
done in fact having to alter our plans
quite early on
due to some seasonal flooding that
happened to be some of the some of the
heaviest in recent decades hmm in terms
of gear and packing we we kept up quite
light this made up about 90% of what we
were carrying with us and was one way
that we were drawing on our collective
experiences here to try and strategize
the documentation and coordinate all of
the gear beforehand with setting goals
for filming equipment to bring what
photographic formats to use and how to
design a routine for archiving
throughout the trip which was one of two
parts in our daily ritual the other
being a daily blog that was going to be
kind of a live archive that we cover are
continuing to draw and as we progressed
forward in the project but again in
certain cases the realization was not
always that the situation was where we
could just show up and start shooting in
any location since some of these prop
since some of these places were quite
high-profile requesting visits and
communicating with officials was almost
a project in itself this this is sort of
one of many emails that we had to write
and translate and send out to request
certain visits and so as mentioned
before the whole logistical phase of the
project took place while we were still
here as students and now the transition
both practically and for the projects
has been about how we want to create how
we want to set up this conversation and
collate this material in post-production
which we are going to present here
tonight in three
ters first being cultural and political
landscape the second money mentality and
the third ways of living together
forming the main body of for us what's
next at least so far all right well the
development of China has always had a
very close relationship with its rivers
providing rich and fertile soil for
agrarian life on which early settlements
were dependent or roots were portrayed
by infrastructural projects dating back
1,500 years such as the Grand Canal
due to its important due to its
importance and the rivers and the
surrounding natural landscapes having a
recurring theme in artwork throughout
history from paintings and sculptures
its origin myths which have been passed
on through generations elderly put on
fetal
Idol that's who different I don't know
more recently however the rivers have
also been used as a scene of political
assembly such as mounted on with 1966
swim in the Yangtze River in Wuhan
compositing a kind of cultural
revitalization with statecraft and tying
together a history of living with the
rivers and his vision for large
infrastructural investment to enable a
new social structure this widely
documented event was disseminated across
state media and a clear ed as a sort of
catalyst of cultural revolution cemented
in the hittin the memory of the rising
middle class we see rapidly expanding
today and just to confirm the person
right before mouths not actually me it
just looks like me
well this particular moments
memorialized in the statue that we see
here with anecdote that he continues to
watch over and protect the city from
future flooding and he'd even written a
poem in the weeks after his um in the
weeks following his spectacle entitled
swimming which can be understood as him
recognizing how traditional lifestyles
were hindered by cyclical recovery from
seasonal flooding which was affecting
the rural population year after year and
the innocent and in this idea of a
modernized China a mobilization of dam
and aqueduct construction would lead to
a more prosperous society as we
mentioned earlier
hooha was experiencing one of the
heaviest floods in decades a significant
consequence of rapid over construction
of the city and historically woo hyung
has has always been known for its many
lakes and these lakes were a natural
advantage as they absorb much the
seasonal flooding in the region even
with the presence of Three Gorges down
just upstream the building ambitions
still exposed vulnerable ''tis of the
city to its natural landscape we visited
will hone several times during our trip
to observe different stages and the
aftermath of the flooding as well as how
rescue efforts of flood response teams
operate today
so you're showing
sentiment is also obtained and
- oh yeah just Nagar 10,000 which I
never forgot her
it's in me SS are you know
years ago that so it's in the top of
Minnesota
so we're referring to the Three Gorges
Dam is a very big symbolic project but
part of our research and itinerary
included some of the prototypes and
earlier precursors that came before it
such as the shallowing d-done shown here
and so when we're coming to visit this
place actually we're on our way to the
ticket office and this lady over here
with the umbrella just kind of popped
out of the bushes and stopped our car
and offered to let us through a back
entrance for very personalized tour for
a quarter of the price which sounds
dodgy but it's just kind of the way
things happen but she had a lot of facts
of share and though it was quite lengthy
and still very illuminating to see how
these projects signified a lot of
international collaboration ba ba ba so
I needed a faster push about who should
get off neocon of renewal so the
Vanguard o revised were possible where
there's a whole shuttle kanava
hazard did she tell your family does
emotional journey on an opinion for some
other provision that we are which is our
function or potentially your opinion
without each annual value of the team
with us on your body
sorry called a universal knowledge but
we are you so rude oh you pasado
you're talking about your body and oh
why didn't you go to respond to their
neighbors and Oh leader
uh no way well we are you serving on the
wine cellar yes sorry what are you gonna
edit video that's what some of your
songs you sang Go Go dad - I'll see you
get re the work of five was done over
got their act together this is what
allows you to go boom laughter you want
since none of y'all back if you're
talking about President Obama there are
two key table Ezekiel area TN are
there's a drug war so they another here
people
yes you are propelling yourself as a
scientist Jack Jr yo do it up seen
anything so much info we're actually
much bigger so we're looking for yield
back to the rules of one day use our
children father style you would see
something for the whole family
Devon you can work it out you're hired
what are you are you warming Hut how's
Damien Assante you done neighbor you
gonna do okay if I didn't you boo me
thank you go find any on the Sacramento
ah Ming get me a five Daniel flow water
here yes
don't America right here Jamie as one of
the first hydroelectric dams to be
constructed in China it can be read as a
symbol of Deng Xiaoping's open a reform
policy foreign contractors and
consultants were brought in from the
West for the first time who informed the
basis of contemporary dam construction
there's also a highly politicized
context in which access and claim over
the source of the rivers is the subject
of an ongoing border and territorial
conflicts over Tibet such as that with
India this year due to the sources of
the yellow
yang Tieh Mekong rivers located within
San Jonah and National Park and Shanghai
province this territory is precious to
the country's political and economic
ambitions but also to the ethnically
Tibetan nomadic people who still
maintain their way of living in the
region through activities such as go
hurting and today thousands of
ethnically Han Chinese are moving into
cities in the region such as Yu Shu the
city was severely damaged by an
earthquake in 2010 and the government
uses as a opportunity to reconstruct the
city at a far larger scale than the
original settlement
and by doing this they're exerting
informa soft power in order to lay claim
to the land that provides the water for
the entire country's population for the
same reasons efforts to expand the
highway network leads to easier access
for Chinese tourism and settlement and
thereby establishing a precedent for the
so-called territorial control despite
the shifts in the cultural and political
landscape of the rivers in contemporary
China it remains an important vehicle
for cultural production and public
gathering this is still this is a still
from Burtynsky's watermarks showing the
annual so release from shell long DTM
it's referred to locals as the wave
festival one thing we found really
interesting was how it kind of captures
the river is a site of public gathering
where the powers of the rivers and the
presence of infrastructure constitutes
new traditions and it's gonna pass it on
silver and say no okay we spent quite a
bit of time standing and visiting these
infrastructures more as monuments rather
than significant civil engineering
accomplishments that has a lot to do
with how people are organizing around
them as new forms of settlements or
annual events to investigate the
qualities of this monumentality and that
this monumentality has we visited
certain historical monuments such as the
white horse temple in new young among
many others constructed in the first
century it has been voluntarily
destroyed and rebuilt several times over
its long history and today remains an
important place for daily life as well
as a point of pilgrimage as China's
first Buddhist temple seeing the temple
in plan the complex organizes itself
itself via a common framework of holes
and courtyards these a typical layout in
which each space and its artifacts
retain their own distinguished role and
these allows for a variety of forms of
activity where the sequence of spaces
shapes the way of gathering as one
progresses through typical activities as
bringing offerings to the monks or
burning bundles of incense within the
quarters in quiet moments of collective
prayer and this was a fascinating for us
by what we were primarily interested in
was to focus on the usage of space its
division and its
and how the idea of tradition is not
only expressed in the ritual but also in
the preservation and evolution of
contemporary public spaces the fact that
the temple has been burnt down and
reconstructed suggests that the
participatory nature is a key quality of
the space there is a building of course
and then there is also the Sakura
gathering that is kept consistent over a
long period of time which we are
observing and as the constitution of the
monument itself looking looking into a
slightly different context we pass
through the city of that on to
understand what's going on with a
reconstruction process of the sealing
through its although it's not a
particularly important City the local
government is employing a similar
reconstruction strategy to the one of
the white horse temple the difference
however is on how the city was becoming
run down and the government actually
relocated the population to its
periphery outside the city walls while
they could reconstruct from historical
references a new version of the city
center identical to its original Ming
Dynasty Dynasty state cities like that
song are undergoing this process in
order to try and attract rising to his
figures and what was interesting
interesting for us was to try and
understand what the what motives of
authenticity its relationship to its
local population in regarding the
reconstruction within the city walls the
driving force for this design as you can
see here in the pictures is not the
scale and form of the gatherings and
instead it is the trend for exclusively
zoning commercial activity in the city
center targeted towards attracting
higher touristic revenues and creating a
separation between the domestic and the
public life of the seedings cities such
as the Tong and many others have
struggled with the centralization of
economic power in two major cities such
as Beijing or Shanghai and historical
revival revivalism is a vehicle for them
to lobby funds in order to compete and
rely on tourism rather than local
production hrodna right now with we we
witnessed the reconstruction of
long-lost monuments of antiquity often
clashing with what was the city's what
the cities have developed into
as public spaces they often wind up with
some strange contrasts it is simply the
overlay of the old orientation over the
existing context such as the
construction of this enormous pagoda
over an existing grid we we were
ourselves on the road for most of the
time and often as the only foreigners it
happened that we were able to see large
these idea of largeness at play from the
perspective of the domestic tourists
because aside from the massive
attractions of cities the construction
of large-scale monuments extends across
the country into the landscape shown
here it's the absurd spring temple
buddha in Henan Province measuring 128
meters it's within the landscape as a
dominating presence amongst mountains
completing 2008 it is currently the
tallest statue in the world but it is
however rather Nannan ceremoniously
looking over a highway where only
Korea's passers stopped by and then get
back on the road as soon as they can
but is not an isolated case the monument
of two of the two emperors of linndrum
sits atop an artificially constructed
mountain to match the peaks of the rest
of the landscape and these large-scale
monuments are often built for the
predicted further growth in tourism and
domestic travel but at the moment are
still part of a collection of sites to
be visited in very far future
generations while these contemporary
monuments have been constructed to
dominate the scale of the landscape
monuments of antiquity such as the
hanging temple are built to integrate
into its around the environment the
integration to the landscape and
therefore the way it is delicately
attaching himself to the cliffside is to
protect itself from the regular flooding
of the valley
but today the flooding the valley is
prevented by a newly constructed dam
located literally 20 30 meters up the
temple and when we make the link to the
Three Gorges Dam it sits in at the
intersection of the different qualities
of monumentality that we observed as
possibility the highest-profile
hydroelectric dam visits the
and were visits to the region by a
tourist arising every year these visits
are actually quite choreographed
following a procession of small
showrooms and thirst viewings points
connected by our singularly passing your
pathway nevertheless the vantage points
still attract buyers tour groups part of
X of the experience is to visit the
enormous relics of the construction
process itself visitors passing by
during their curated tour of the Three
Gorges Dam often can observe these core
samples from mountain from the mounting
that they've been just digging out and
now the keep has a we just keep it as a
statute this is just a cylinder
currently there are even plans to
construct a large upscale hotel to
encourage more tourism in the area and
highly advertised hotels are printed on
Billboard's anywhere in the country
including those signs on them on the
right side of the picture the Three
Gorges Dam can be seen as a cover as a
convergence between infrastructural
development and growth of the best of
domestic tourism of which Saudi will
speak along the way of leaving along the
waters so we were also interested and in
our research was shifting ways of living
and the changing nature production due
to the massive infrastructural projects
so we spent a fair amount of time here
talking to locals such as taxi drivers
and such and in the interview coming up
we were trying to understand how such
infrastructure projects
potentially come on tell Rafael Furcal
underpowered and devil
freeway Yami Yami Yami Yami trailers
future on me I'll serve in Ankara
vamos champion
[Music]
she died early
[Music]
I'm attorney Melanie you will show you
--fill on his shine
sandokan Aparna number yes I would hire
a child highest earners Italian
[Music]
t-shirt
you saw the title will seriously builder
afraid
we know free
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
the international talk to her
dr. Antonio Centeno
Paco's Samba genitally geometry
delusional
Israel is a Jewish power
[Music]
very general dealer employed our
dear it's all Jim Mayola room a
convention I go
matzo ball
she opened a rope around yo Kenard
around yeah
yeah whole turkey obihiro hola sharp or
Joe questionable telenovela
trader you know woman are you
don't nod are you yeah all along well
you could change it diagur
not where you don't want him though
whole
Sweden
so as we can see many of those who
formerly lived in now flooded villages
work abroad cruise ships that serve a
popular routes along the three gorges
from Chongqing to each ah was
increasingly disposable income many of
China's formerly reach a formally rural
population are now able to travel
domestically well of which many flocked
to travel along the historical be famous
landscapes such as along the Three
Gorges and as this happens many of those
displaced shift their dependency on the
river from that of manual labour to this
service industry as we took this image
with the drone we were heavily scolded
by the ship crew to bring it down
immediately as that was completely not
allowed those on the three those on
these cruises do not come just for the
natural beauty but also to see the three
gorges dam for themselves which we
understood as a sort of national pride
in such infrastructural projects and
this shift in labor to deal with the
mass tourism of the rising middle class
is seen in many places we visited on our
trips such as the Foucault Falls shown
here and also the arid tourism of Ming
Tsou province previously under populated
and rural those who have previously
dependent on the precious fertile soil
from the river now work at the desert
scene parks two that are quickly gaining
popularity on the other hand however the
trend of increased infrastructure
projects and mass tourism can overwhelm
certain sites such as the three gorges
waterfalls shown here being completely
covered with garbage in a very different
climates at 3,000 meters above sea level
we visited the picturesque rice terraces
in Yunnan Province of which we were
particularly eager to wake up early in
the morning around 5 a.m. to take
beautiful pictures but
as you can see this is what greeted us
in actuality the lifestyle have felt
extremely rural but we were surprised to
learn that many who had to venture it
out to to larger cities such as Maine
had chosen to return due to poor working
conditions eventually yeah with a
backbone
[Music]
[Music]
choose a jeep Hanna Hanna in your
publisher I know you're my aura should
okay sure though
oh yeah I can mail you popular chief a
viola oh no George I doubt you're gonna
go over or knees and let out to one way
of me oh well yeah you're neither funny
we also spent time trying to understand
the shift in place making and urban
development in contemporary China the
main development mode is that of the
mega plot where state-owned urban land
is sold to developers allowing for the
city to develop was the state providing
broadly space infrastructure between
these large plots of land and this
reflects a shift from Imperial Chinese
urban planning which emphasized a
particular relationship with nature and
a richness through the deep structure of
walls and courtyards at multiple scales
today's approach breaks from the
traditional one of real estate
speculation
so we faked to be buyers to buy a flat
for my mom
and viewed one of these large
development show flats secretly Jeanne
ne nd jingle hallelujah and shelf on no
knobby yellow units you idiot how huge
impossible
gotta chill we even made a lot
oh you enter probably in Austria make a
bomb on could I have a stroke and you
kept a let's move me into how that you
would deserve earmark people not sure
you know he's talking about the book
America Wanda rgo million dollars
we called each other listen Angela
singer Doyle she wants to go tell you
before it was
she's a courier dozer engineer for me I
would share with the permeate our assets
when you're in staccato or Jessica mica
mother Goose Rashi sure whether you
wanna go allowance in the gotten
furgoneta much sweetheart entry means
that I should ice hockey tackle each
other
[Applause]
[Music]
to subpoena to go to the channel secrete
dollars in each other to the power
create dollar home finances its we need
to meet
[Music]
as you can see he was very desperate to
sell us the flat and kept on call me
weeks and weeks after we were gone so on
a surface level of closeness was nature
is understood by the developers but the
typical model of dense tower blocks
being constructed allow maximum profit
was the presence of water as an
afterthought of the remaining space to
represent good fortune for both
residents and the sale properties to
understand the human perspective of such
mega plots we did around good I'll be
better to pour out of it the perception
you're here to hold in my view
if you have a bitola to put up top
New Year's Oaxaca Japan tinted Japan yes
but you know I don't know way it's a
catchy pupitar oh god no 14:13 and
bigoted careers and know how [ __ ] and
we'd even get to attack a father when
you into men
Gerard I know Tony yeah Oh what can
catch is so with that kind of a pretty
good but I put at the moment or what
that guy needs a kite dissing areas on
the little donation from him was the
collect so the police units oh so you
agree 100 quid okay approval you today
happy for Fukushima you know Rebecca
does it a secret she has genital mmm the
canary totally democracy even Pokemon
pieces sweetie many tears of a hurry to
make Colin see cinema so it'll make hash
we wish McConnell you swish the
achievement of Celebi
dear chairman pshemek maryoku de matar
paneer ghujiya chachi chachi see you get
high every building for you okay
puh-puh-puh punchline civic hi Padma
every antibiotic for the dog show that
you shouldn't sighs it's not gonna do
that
in absence of the universal education
exam she lashes out before the shantu
inhibitor and all the charity Department
that's the one Carla is at the appendix
to the silicon on another large scale
infrastructural project we examined was
the south north water transfer project
spanning across the country to bring
clean drinking water from the south to
the drought ridden North first imagined
by Mao in the 50s today water from the
d'angelico reservoir travels over 1,600
kilometers to ease the drought crisis in
Beijing in the world's longest aqueduct
and trying to arrange a visit to its
termination point in Beijing was
particularly difficult where we had to
coordinate with government government
officials and gathered correct documents
which kind of eventually led us to know
where we found it was particularly
difficult because learn is always white
we did however manage to get into the
construction site of the surrounding
areas again actually was the help this
time yeah g'bye soon as I saw this he
wrote in Psalm 91 lovely there never got
it wrong
Saida your junior anti-zionism right now
just naturally be the only a kids I'm
going on Branca no see my bar line honey
I pulled one of my so about three
hundred and forty five thousand
villagers have been displaced by the
project two days where many were moved
to the Koba new migrant village by a
dusty highway in rural painting shown in
the neighboring Hunan province and at
the source of the reservoir we met a
family that you still live in the
village which was relocated to make way
for the construction and this satellite
image shows the original existing
reservoir where the village used to be
in 1984 and in 2017 this shows the shift
of the landscape and the raised water
levels the relocated family comes back
to the area as is still their source of
income where we shared a fried fish
breakfast over the conversation yeah I'm
gonna get aa dream event
- MA - the homage idea who they are to
each other you see an Aloha together you
can see the major headaches you sure
your children there's a bathroom oh dear
God
this aqueduct though only recently
completed has a much longer history it
extends and reuses the existing Grand
Canal and the first segment of which was
constructed in roughly 500 BC allowing
China to grow and trade domestically the
South Wars water transfer project
therefore can be viewed as a further
development on China's historical
infrastructural network and ending this
chapter on ways of living we'd like to
provide a little anecdotes that we enjoy
where despite the severe flooding that
shut down behind shown earlier the
resilience of the citizens to assist in
the anti flooding efforts and their
ability to enjoy something as simple as
fishing as a result of the floods
is very commendable and for us that
shows the constantly shifting
relationship between the river and those
who depend on it
it's quite slim mmm so a lot of
information to cover quite a few
different strands of interest spreading
out in different directions but I think
we just have a couple of notes to close
on for one it was definitely a trip of
discovery and even more information and
even more documentation that we could
have anticipated even with such a
designed and tuner itinerary but it was
super interesting - what was super
interesting was to step into this
context with the intention of testing
our experiences here and using certain
forms of inquiry that we've learned to
frame these conditions in ways that can
inform another level
another visitation that we're interested
in with even more architectural
investigation and the second quite
simply that it's been very encouraging
to know that as we're sort of figuring
out what's next with this project that
we can still think of the AAA as a place
to come back to to test these ideas in
front of an audience so I think we'll
call it here if there's any questions
obviously don't be shy otherwise we can
also we take it upstairs but in the
meantime
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
