hello everyone welcome to the live
broadcast of the design and make program
here at the architectural Association my
name is Emmanuel fork racer and together
with Martin self we direct the course
down in Oak Park we're going to start
this presentation with a little
PowerPoint to illustrate some of the key
components of the project Martin you
wanna yeah thanks the manual so this is
her Park but you can see in the middle
here a little campus our workspace
workshops places to eat live study and
more than beyond so this is our
industrial context this is our world
material source for what we do so we're
an MSc than a mark masters program based
out in this campus who inherited an
amazing legacy from these guys by Otto
there on the right
basically we are a design-build master's
program that inhabits this place so it's
really important to understand that the
woodland is both a material library and
our resource I think one of the key
aspects is that we we make through
experiments but our main attitude is
that we provide a not if for an practice
of architecture so we are engaged with
making and iterative designing so the
making is really the key act within a
design process so the looks the material
we're we're pretty hands-on so the the
current project that we're developing is
this dis library component for which we
design and make all the components under
tooling so these are some of the
components on-site
and this this is a darkroom project that
the students will be talking to you
about in a little bit so the main
premise of the program is that we learn
through doing by engaging physically in
attention we gain this much deeper
understanding of the I guess the
intuitive and responsive aspects of how
we work with our tools how to work the
material how we really work with the
vision of the site and the context by
living in it
you know breathing at every day so these
are some of the unique tools that we
make so we reinvent or reappropriation
of the existing tools and by attaching
them to our robotic setup we explore
potential potentials of fabrications
which are really exciting and be
combined out with all so we combine
analog and digital technologies that's
really important to understand that it's
not just digital we spend loads of time
in our hand and getting involved with
the material you'll hear from the
students in a minute blunt to strands of
the program and MSC and the Newmark
course the 'mark being sixty months and
the MSC 12 months you'll see in a minute
we've recorded some footage from the
students ballon hook park they're
working away super busy on their
projects at the moment and you'll go to
understand the way that they interact
with our workshops and material so let's
have a look at the video
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
so in the Sun I'm a person what I must
enjoy was working with the materials
that I would be kind of either drawing
or just imagining in my mind to be able
to have that imagination and be able to
construct it at first whether it's a
small predicting and then getting to
something that's building skill think
it's something that I really enjoyed
since I arrived here
parasite I mean the place fares please
it's amazing place it's not on the place
also the people that work here it's it's
a lot of people that can teach you
something not just the tutors or the
people that work here every day with
material with the forest with a book
workshop is the completely environment
that you get you learn by osmosis it's
here every day and every moment that you
take a piece of it you know then
like Charlie of the workshop manager
press the force
yeah you can't see what everyone nice
it's so multiple yeah even just like the
collaboration of different students of
all these theories coming together yeah
my dear friend art science it's for me
if we talk about or like experimental is
it's completely true release each time
that we receive a brief just I mean not
just a design with the friends and
hanging previous with the previous
project it's time that you touch a piece
of wood is relating one kind of talk
that you need to feedback all the time
the design the process so it's like
every single decision that we take in
the friends or even you in a test piece
of prototype was completing form by the
tool but the way that we used it to and
also by the knowledge that were were
transfer from the people who teach us
how to use the tool so it's like it's
not that never has been at is just a
design decision Sonny sign basin and
complete net morphine from a cross
information mmm so in each piece of
prototype is completely we have like
sketches and we try to model and then we
kind of model so we built it physically
and and the physical model and then it
just kept going back and forth because
they stood beside each other so it's
just awesome awareness it broke that's
why I mean this covered much more to
start making them not just a model also
like they fit but this always always
even in the fabrication the design
process is a path that never stop always
go in partner with each making process
rather a prototype being even model but
each all of us like contribute both in
both elements we don't come necessarily
just stick to our own kind of I mean the
robot the fabricate I mean the rope
there are a lot itself I mean there
Charlie who be able to make the tool
that the director create and in the same
way you continue the version of the tool
he knows he's related with the thing
that we want to achieve and also the
design is
so this this building is composed to 14
individual sort of prefabricated parts
you have as you can see the model seven
legs which are kind of acting as columns
and then you have these two long sort of
portal frames that spanned throughout
the entire the width of the library and
then you have these smaller sort of what
we call butterfly frames for them that
transfers to these longer portal frames
and they are joined SBC in this you have
of legs connected to these transverse
butterfly frames and they are bolted and
in addition they're bolted kind of in
all together in one piece it's probably
also I think there was kind of its
development off of the previous year
that did a lot of prototyping and of
attaching the chainsaw onto the robot
and in this year the opportunity to have
a bad song their love was kind of a
different sort of but a key opening so
the opportunity for us to utilize that
tool also it's quite important the
difference between the old the last
project that has been many who pirates
like the amount of Vanessa that we want
to achieve in the skeleton is quite
different at the last row in a way so we
wanted to include a structure inside
that this is completely like well done
and one feeling what finished anyway
we'll get inspired by like furniture
makers and other kind of wood works
no nests and buildings that show show
the hand being the shapes I don't know
how to express those like
it's their cellphone the shape like that
completely connected with it with the
hand that make them so themself then
yeah we could startle sort of like
references sort of like skeletons and
furnitures and things like there and not
only just it's you know like aesthetic
of objects but also yeah it's kind of
inherent he thinks as a structure and
then so you're fascinated with kind of a
structure like a furniture in a building
sighs yeah so this is where we fabricate
those bars for the structures that was
scale-model here in this big shed what
we call the big shed do our lamination
cut custom glue foundation and not far
away from that process we have
robotic shelter saw the custom killer
cutting that's the program I guess by
how you say maybe it's not the robot
yeah you in there what we selfie
she
[Music]
after they were ready after the roast
[Music]
so this is one of the big Frank at the
moment so it's
it's a pretty large
his face
so it won't like the bees need to move
on reference in a different position so
in that way through which the different
so is in one of the most challenging
climbs just
make this processor is here with the
process of all the process machine of
making became more important than the
accuracy
so everything's that check it here to
the rope
so it's a constant process have received
feedback every time each of the
processes and club nature
in marketing
we also need to do Polish presidency
existing with reference informative
addresses to make it more awkward
so everything yeah
I'm Valencian from Celia I've been here
for two months now we're face one
students I'm jacking up from California
and yeah we've been out here in the
woods for the last couple months this is
our course to do doctor project that
we've been focusing on for the last so
many weeks and we kind of started off
this project by getting this domino
structure that was put together by the
last year students 7.55 years that took
us one week so we can have a dry place
to work underneath and then we'll start
thinking about that darkroom that has to
go down there yes I mean kind of along
with putting up the roof we were working
on considering the design of the
structure inside the domino and kind of
all these cookies going on
simultaneously and once the roof was
complete and up on top of the structure
we began constructing the doctrine
building that's within the Domino yeah
consists of a series of fold walls on
the side you know we start thinking
about how these dark room has to go with
the light light group so in depth side
of the building goes the dark part of
the program square window looking at the
forest so and this folding wall takes
out that furniture we think and some
equipment tables right now we're working
on the cladding of the building so this
model shows a few different of the
options that were considering a raw
cedar finish and a charred finish and
then over here is an example of the
weathered cedar once it's been outside
for a few years so we're here inside now
you can see there because this was like
a quick exercise and final project one
to one building
we have this big gesture like that
square window and where are we now
yeah I think this has been a pretty
amazing the process of making the
one-to-ten model and then to actually be
standing here now and seeing this
building up and almost done and ready
and almost the same strategy that we
used to build they went to 10 model kind
of if this exactly the same Halloween so
it's been an amazing experience and a
constant learning process how to build
something quick
teamwork we've been working as a team
very well I think for my end
is better than what it means to be a
student we've been receiving some
questions so we'll try and answer some
of those one that came in is a question
about criteria what criteria I needed
for entering the designer may program in
terms of skill sets whether you need
glass hopper background whether it's
useful to build things or have
experience in the workshop I think we
can maybe answer that quite well sure I
mean obviously it's always handy to have
a bit of experience with some of the
components that we deal with but it's
the the key thing to understand is that
the full first term we used at that term
that time for skill development so we
perceive there are six fundamental tools
that we work with and we spent the first
three months becoming really efficient
with and so that range from analog
fabrication skills to digital tools like
grasshopper and looking into fabrication
methodologies like robotic fabrication
or CNC machining something else that
came through is what's the difference
between the MSE and mr course so that
one so designer make runs is a
bifurcated program so we start the
course as the MSC in the air mark
working together and both quote programs
fundamentally we design through making
so right from the outset we're working
hands-on you know engaging physically in
what we're doing
the ultimate output is slightly
different so the air mark is a 16 month
program and no students say their main
project is working collaboratively
collectively on a full-scale permanent
building components within that you know
contributing to the built legacy at a
park the MRC is a bit different it's a
12-month program it's open to a broader
intake of students so as the air mark is
more about
students have completed a conventional
architectural training the MSC s is more
broadly open so we've had some artists
and engineers have come into the program
and their main focus is a bit more
individual and it's about pursuing
timber technologies through full-scale
prototyping so it's working with the
technology is like the robotics our
robotic arm within the workshop within
that with our material exploring
technologies still kind of contributing
to our research and projects that hook
park but a bit more of an experimental
focus that can be I supposed to take a
bit more risk than the more holistic
work that the air marks do on the
full-scale permanent architecture it's
another question someone's asking
whether it makes sense to visit hook
Park before making an application well
we kind of hope that from the videos you
noticed that we are not based in a
traditional architectural building we're
out in the forest so do you do to that
really exceptional setting it really
makes sense to come and have a look
because students are residential out
with us in Dorset in the forest so it's
it's a really good thing to do it's not
it's not compulsory but if you are going
to spend a year or a year and a half at
us we highly recommend you come and have
a look at a fantastic location now the
question is can I apply to the 'mark
program if I'm not a professional
architect and what are the exception
acceptable related disciplines so I
think I mentioned before the MSC in the
air mark have different intakes
generally for the air mark we expect
students have completed a four or five
year professional basically
architectural study to a professional
level exceptions can be made if there's
a very particular professional what kind
of in practice experience it is
equivalent to that you know to that
degree of expertise with the MSC it's
broader so we expect a first degree you
know to a bachelor's level in a relevant
discipline so as I mentioned before you
know we have
taking on artists who then evolved their
interest to be around wood or making and
then this is a course that makes sense
for them I guess other design background
is coming yeah come into our programs
yeah I mean I think it's important to
understand within the program that we
read so we're really looking to put a
team together so we don't want 12 people
direct digital experts we want people
that have manual skills and have a you
know some have a diverse background so
really to put a team together so we can
all work together towards building make
our experimental constructs I think
that's important do you understand now
the question here about accommodation
will the school assist me an
accommodation in Dorset we obviously
understand that it's a different
situation to a student driving in a big
city so the first term we actually
accommodate the students you know we we
pay for their accommodation and sort
them out after that it's up to the
students to decide some students stay on
site living on the campus itself other
students are keen to be a bit more
engaged in the community outside the
woodland itself and find spaces outside
of outside of foot Park but it's an
amazing place to live you know we're
near the sea it's a fantastic bit of
England so it's an interesting they you
know very much alternative to
conventional urban place to study so
then last one on our list here is where
do most graduates go on to work well I
guess that's quite diverse but as we
mentioned in the introduction what we
really aim to do is provide an
alternative practice for architecture so
quite a lot of our graduates attempt to
set up an alternative practice to engage
with making and fabrication that
slightly offsets your conventional
office job so yeah I guess there's a
there's a plurality within that yeah
quite a few have gone on to teach
interesting lease of taking our teaching
model and you know taking it to other
parts of the world you know some people
go back into conventional practice some
really get hooked on them
some have become timber famous after
doing our course so there is a real
richness in in where people go what we
do now sit for the immediate questions
it's probably just a couple things type
there's a lot more information obviously
about the course online you know there's
a website as we found we can pretty leap
maybe end this with the web address we
have Instagram presence a Facebook page
and we're actually doing a takeover of
the AA's Instagram account next week so
there'll be lots of it live coming out
from hood Park through the week next
week yeah I mean we hope we answered a
couple of questions if you have any more
queries please you know find our details
online and get in touch with eager to
hear from you thank you very much thank
you thanks
