hello hi everyone and thank you for
coming
my name is dr. Ramirez I cuz I dragged a
landscape urbanism program here at the
AAA and what we're gonna do today as
part of the planned a planet seminar and
we're gonna try to answer the question
of how do we confront a world on fire
and the conversation or the topic we're
gonna cover today is the green new deal
I am not sure whether you are aware or
not a green new deal which is there's a
quite a big momentum about around the
green new deal in UK but also in the US
and what we did was to indict some of
the main actors that have been at the
forefront pushing a green new deal here
in the UK and in the main idea today is
on the one hand to introduce a greeny
due to the design community and on the
other hand is to engage yourselves as
designers to shape that green new deal
the Green Deal is not something that
it's set in stone it's something that is
say a ball being that is being shaped
and I think is there's no better moment
then we have chosen as today just one
month before a general election but I
think it's important that you know that
designers get part of that those
decisions so we have a number of people
and I will introduce them just before
they speak we have today people from the
New Economics foundation and which is a
think tank that produces a number of
policies and that produced while trying
to produce a sustainable economy we have
people from a Commonwealth and I know I
think tank that is been releasing a
number of reports
trying to detail you what does it mean
to have a green new deal in the UK we
have people from labour for a green new
deal which is a grassroots movement part
of the Labour Party and we have a action
which is part from the architecture
education Clare's know which I also will
present what what they are demanding but
other things that they're doing so this
all start a few months ago when Tim
Waterman who is here next to me at world
Breiner
decided to write a letter it was a
response to the demands that
architecture is getting nuclear wrote no
have you are aware of the manifesto they
wrote the letter they also share him
with the community and we decided to
write a short text no explaining how a
green new deal or how designers involved
in a green new deal could be an answer
to those demands so each of the speakers
today will give a introduction on what
they what they're doing in ten minutes
and and I will try then just to explain
what we think about the green new deal
in a couple of minutes so so given the
climate in ecological emergency the
world's facing it is paramount support
socially just restructuration of the
world we inhabit intrinsically depending
on the health of the earth systems and
to trigger along the way a radical
transformation of the role designers can
play in developing design proposals
mitigation strategies advocacy
initiatives and activism one way to
achieve this is by supporting a green
new deal from those involved in design
land in designing landscapes whether
they're architects landscape architects
artists planners
or engineers that critically engage with
relations between people and environment
in which they interact from
infrastructures to productive landscape
coastlines to cities to coordinate these
efforts we need to get behind a project
with the capacity to unite all the best
intentions preoccupations and existing
proposals from the design community this
project is called a green new deal and
designers should contribute to shape it
landscape architectural environmental
designers expertise on visualization
mapping and especially understanding of
socio ecological system are crucial to a
denuded project and the challenges it
will bring ahead the current condition
of the design profession mainly
unregulated service provider for private
capital must aim and give rise to a new
design culture that places environmental
in social justice at the heart of its
activities because of these we are
excited to join existing calls to
transform the process the profession
such as the architecture education
declare and a action initiative and to
acknowledge the urgency of the situation
by advocating for a radical change in
the priorities of the design profession
and to discuss the Green Deal and how it
can change radically the design
profession we have listed a few points
to help frame it in order to shape a
Green Deal from the design perspective
we need to explore and switch to new
design methodologies that place
environmental and social justice human
and more than human at its core by
developing design brief that correspond
to the contemporary climatic and
ecological emergency we are living
through to the erect and focus the
investigative efforts to place design
agency within the limits of earth
systems and to establish ways to define
and redefine social cultural political
and ecological concepts and practices
necessary to achieve a green new deal to
develop mechanisms attached to a green
new deal to re-engage designers with the
public sector
as part of local governments
institutions and organization to design
and promote the necessary policies that
will make reality a green new deal at
local regional national and even
planetary scales and finally to redirect
designers engagement with citizens to
democratize design and to ensure
designers are involved in the
empowerment of port so they can make the
best in most necessary decisions to
shape the future of people places and
species which are the planet with so
with this I wanna give the microphone to
Fernanda balata Fernanda Velata is a
senior researcher from the New Economics
foundation she works on coastal
economies which aim at reconciling
social and economic prosperity for
coastal communities with marine
consultation Fernanda has since 2014 in
two major reports in building a growing
network to deliver a major action plan
for the UK coast
Fernanda frequently invited by a range
of organization politicians and
community groups to talk a debate and
debate about economic development
coastal issues and environment and today
she's gonna give us a short introduction
of what a green new deal means thank you
thank you for having me and I really
welcome this initiative by the three of
you and the students at the architecture
Association and more broadly in London I
think that's exactly what we need so I
just wanted to start by saying that I am
originally from Brazil and come from Rio
de Janeiro which is one of the most
rotten cities by sea level levels rise
in South America so you know as it is
for everyone because it matters to
everyone like this issue the big
challenge that we have you know means
not only a lot to me in terms of I care
about the world and I care about
everything
but you know my family lives in Rio and
that's you know the place like I call
home and I know that the challenges
already happening there and it's only
gonna get worse so I think everyone has
like a personal connection to this and I
just wanted to leave that in the room so
I've been at night for nearly seven
years and like eyford aside I've been
leading the blue media initiative which
didn't have a movement behind it and I
think that's the first difference with
the green you deal the blue needed was
an initiative led by Nath and we have
built an amazing network across the
country we did engage with coasts of
stakeholders comes to people residents
and researchers for a number of years
but I'm gonna talk today about the green
new deal and why I think this is
important so first I wanted to start by
saying why not supports a green new deal
and naff has been working for over 30
years on what's wrong with the economy
what's why are we not delivering on
sustainable development on our
environmental social goals and we've
been doing that by evidencing the
shortcomings of the economic system the
current mainstream neoliberal capitalist
system model we do this by reframing
economic arguments to make the case for
new ways of thinking and doing economics
and most importantly it is about finding
out what's already happening out there
so oh don't ask is a think-tank and it's
about you know coming up with ideas and
solutions I think you know over the
years what we've learned is that the
solutions are already out there and you
just need to bring them to the fore they
have no power and they don't succeed
within the current system and so we need
to unite with those efforts and make
them you know the norm rather than the
exception
we also work directing our resources
towards people in communities I'm
increasingly and I will touch on that
how we're doing that for the green New
Deal and the kind of just transition
work and finally which is very relevant
to the green you do we work on policy
and we're very interested on what does
it mean now you know in the face of the
global challenges that we face to do
policy differently to do policy in a way
that it's led by people that engage
engages people and that therefore has
public support and political power so
why do we need a green new deal well we
know that you know people everywhere are
facing a number of challenges it's not
just about climate change there'd be
multiple crises that we've been facing
for a long time since the last financial
crisis in 2008 there's been lots of
movements actually from the Occupy
movement to movements around the world
you know in various countries kind of
fighting the system you know and and
people come from different sizes might
be health issues it might be jobs job
insecurity you know an environmental
degradation there's a range of issues
that affect people everywhere but
increasingly there's that sense of like
you know and now definitely firmly in
the agenda that like we want systems
change because you know people started
to realize it's all kind of connected
now climate and ecological crisis I
think has been the final strand of you
know a kind of global understanding of
how it is this kind of dominant system
that it's not working for so many things
and now you know we get this kind of
ecological planetary dimension of how
it's all going wrong any won't go away
so I just had you know some images there
sorry
like go from housing crisis to refugee
crisis humanitarian crisis crisis and
democracy but now we have this target
right and is imperative to to act so in
the UK context we know that we've
declared a climate emergency and
increasingly lots of local authorities
are doing the same and that's happening
around the world but now we must act
building the movement so I would argue
and I mean we've been we are not feels
like we were part of the green you do
movement in the UK and we work with the
movement in support of the movement but
I honestly don't think that it is a
movement yet I mean I explain why but we
definitely have a lot of action going on
that is demanding action on demanding
changes to how we do things and so how
is it that we can combine forces to
build that movement for our greenie deal
which is a which is a concrete way in
which we can ask for an action so we got
extinction rebellion we got the UK
climate strikers
we got workers and unions we got the
global protest Commonwealth greenido UK
New Deal and many others so there's a
new generation and everyone is trying to
do this differently you know the climate
movement is really trying to I don't
think it has yet but it will because
everyone is really trying to do it
differently like you know branch out not
do environmental movements the same way
that it has been done which is you know
keeping to a middle-class thing and you
know not understanding the structural
inequalities you know and how you know
we're not an equal society and and we
are living in unfair society and so how
can we build a movement that really
addresses that
and then design in the policy package so
those are the two I would say main jobs
that the green edu needs to do now one
is building the movement getting green
you deal in the agenda and designing the
policy package and the join up plan so
the green need is a movement and a plan
the join up plan to invest and deliver
one the work that we need to do to the
carbonized society and there's a bunch
of things that we need to do as we know
we need to do this by generating this
enjoy generating decent jobs in green
industries so securing really you know
the livelihoods and of people everywhere
and we need to we need to do this by
building economic democracy and I'm
gonna let Commonwealth talk more about
so just to be positive because you know
there's a lot of and and I can't sleep
most nights because I think of this lops
in the Amazon but there is a way out it
is economically viable and you will make
the world a better place that's kind of
what the green you do is setting out to
do and I think that's where we have
common understanding not forgetting it's
a global crisis that demands global
justice so when we talk about a greeny
do UK you know we need to focus in the
UK and what's possible within the
political reality of the UK and for UK
people or UK residents but we cannot
lose the kind of international lands
especially given that the UK is one of
the largest contributors to our
challenges so I'm just gonna take you
through quickly just to set the scene
for the next speakers that I think the
context matters for the solutions that
we need and throughout this process we
need to really be honest about what's
wrong and what are the barriers and why
have we not been achieving our goals so
far because otherwise we're gonna get
lost into fighting battles
are not really gonna give the solutions
that we need with the urgency that we
need so the first thing to say is it's
the economy stupid um so that's what
we've been hearing for so long right and
it's true you know the economy has
dominant dominates our lives dominates
everything you know dominates how we
relate to nature it dominates everything
and I will show you three slides action
the economy the way works now it
basically sees people and the planet
a simple inputs into a kind of you know
machine or a model or a way of doing
things that it's just aimed at creating
you know more returns financial returns
you know generating money capital and
that obviously leads to over
exploitation extraction because you know
if you see people just as labor and the
planet just as resources then you know
you just kind of overusing it and then
the consequences of it that we feel
right mental health increase and you
know environmental destruction and for
everything else all the other problems
become an afterthought for the economy
so the problem here is that if the
economy is running that way and it is
the dominant thing in our lives then
it's quite obvious why we have so many
problems and why we really struggle to
address them but I also think there's
something deeper because the greenie
deal or in fact the way that we address
these challenges we'll have to tackle
not only just how the economy works you
know like how we do balance sheets and
how we make economic decisions and
what's gonna get built or not but we'll
have to change our minds you know in our
culture because the war has happened do
the way that we do things is that it has
placed nature against jobs for example
it's either it's either or and people
versus nature you know and you can see
from you know I have a critique of the
conservation
movement actually over the years that
you know he has basically segregated
nature you know it has put it into
reservations and protected areas removed
from people never acknowledging and
removing people from their home
it has also placed people versus people
and we know that not everyone is the
same I mean I was reading the global
risks report by the World Economic Forum
and it starts by saying are we
sleepwalking into a crisis or something
like that
I was like we have no idea
you know the complexity of things are
going on a lot of people know you know
so you know the we is very tricky and
that creates a huge challenge for us as
a movement and as people trying to do
things differently and bringing people
with us and we need to remember that you
know when people campaign against
refugees coming into the area into that
country I mean we know from brexit you
know experience in the UK etc that you
know it is about people feeling
threatened to their jobs and their
livelihoods and you know the how that
culture has been created you know how he
has been it almost like you know it's a
value system that almost like
asphyxiates us because we know
inherently that we feel differently
about things yet you know it's the whole
system kind of making you think and act
in a certain way and finally individual
versus society and this is really
important too
because I don't know if you guys
recognize this phrase is that it
yes the famous quote and that was really
the beginning of the end of collective
power and collective action you know but
we know that that's not true you know we
know that's not true and but but we need
what a lot of concerted effort needs to
be put into actually reversing the
damage that that has created you know
and we can talk about unions for example
you know the labor movement you know and
how they've been shut down really with
laws actually against them being able to
manifest and do collective action and
that's what we need right we need
collective action now but this whole
thing that I described how the economy
works and in fact how our lives work
right now that's that's not a democracy
that's not what most of us want that's
know what's benefiting and most of us
are not benefiting from it and so again
when I say the context matters for the
solutions that we need I'm not trying to
provoke here you know like let's go and
attack the corporation's although let's
do that it's it's just to keep in mind
because you know I I do research and I
sit in an office and I'm reading lots of
you know reports coming out and everyone
that's doing things and I know that
that's not how we going to go engage
people but it's it's overwhelming like
the amount of wealth accumulation and
power accumulation and what has happened
now and I was i ashamed to say I did fly
to New York for the UN climate summit
and I was I mean I already knew that but
being in the room and seeing how
corporations get to speak sometimes even
more than government officials they are
the ones governing the world now you
know like governments have no power
really anymore to do things and we need
to keep that in mind as well when we
talk
to government when we ask the Manning
for policies but everything must change
everything will change whether we do
something about it or not and it's not
the economy people and nature in the
planet have always been and will always
been more important than the economy so
we need to find a way to change how the
system works and so that it does value
people lives and nature more than
financial returns and I just wanted to
put a picture there because I care about
the ecological crisis as well I really
care about the orangutangs so and I just
a couple of minutes okay so I just
wanted to mention something about the
just transition in terms of the
challenge of delivering the greenie deal
and I haven't said too much about what
the greenie do policies actually are
because I know Commonwealth whose gonna
do some of that and Nath will be working
on you know that kind of people that
policymaking I suspect them in the next
few months so I'm happy to talk to
people about that but I just wanted to
finish by talking about adjust
transition especially in the UK the
challenge now is really to build trust
to build solidarity and most importantly
to build power and we are already living
the transition right there are people
right now in the country losing their
jobs feeling frightened that they will
lose their jobs tomorrow they're
probably well and actually that's in the
context of in a context of a country
that has not managed industrial
transitions very well and by industrial
transitions I mean you know having to
move from coal to go to work you know
moving moving from from certain
industries to to others it has not
managed to do well you can think about
the coal miners in the 80s you can think
about fishing communities that I've been
working with you know in the kind of
these industries and and it has happened
in a way that communities have been left
you know with no alternative with no
plan to you know what kind of new jobs
can be created how they can rethink
their economies and people talk about
left behind communities but we've
increasingly be using a term that
someone wrote at the Guardian which is
how about communities because people do
have a lot of things that they're doing
you know if you go a local place you can
find lots of solutions to problems
because people have to get on with their
lives and I'm just gonna sit there and
cry but they have back because they
don't have the level of resources
the power that they need to actually
deliver the kind of transformation that
it requires so there's a lack of trust
because that's how people feel right now
and again we know that from British
politics there's a lack of resilience
because of that because you know the
economics resilience has not been built
over the years
and there's a lack of processing power
because the UK economy is heavily
centralised the UK governing is very
centralized and that creates challenges
for people to be able to you know
implement solutions and where we need to
be we've been doing work on the just
transition and and I think everything
like we just live in the just transition
everything is but when you talk about
the term just transition like focusing
on the people the jobs at the forefront
of the transition you know in high
carbon industries it's really important
and I say this for kind of movement
perspective that we do understand how we
have to respect really where people are
coming from
you know what those industries have
meant to communities into their places
and really allow that to be a part of
the conversation you know and not just
kind of hammer like you know but it's
climate and you know it's the
environment and stuff it's like you need
to we need to talk to people where they
are and really bring them with us I'm
gonna stop talking and I have more stuff
to say but I think others will
contribute more discussion and it can
answer questions afterwards thank you
[Applause]
we have next in line action a reaction
is an inquisitive continuous and
collective project formed by a group of
students to promote education as the
primary place to reflect on the urgency
of climate and ecological breakdown
being aware of the importance of the
architectural profession in the context
of climate change the group works both
within and outside the yet challenged in
address the necessary theoretical and
practical challenges and we have
teaching Angelica and Tong explaining us
that a bit further thank you thank you
you just introduced first lines of our
representation so we would like to
introduce our group especially focusing
on a few points of the manifesto that we
wrote and the manifesto is really about
a change that needs to happen and we see
in in architecture in architecture
education we're going to to move towards
different different systems so the point
that I selected are the ones that are
more related with the topic of tonight
and the word naki Foundation
Commonwealth and other institutions are
doing with the green UDL the first point
intersectionality our institutions
pedagogical systems must recognize the
intrinsic link between ecological
breakdown and social injustice it is
imperative we adopt an intersection
intersectional analysis of climate
change can acknowledge that the threats
of ecology will breakdown vary in
intensity depending on class race gender
and geography we must therefore
constantly challenge global inequities
of power by renegotiating our
entanglement with high finance the
construction industry really state and
then your liberal state
and the next manifesto that we would
also like to highlight is on embedded
ecological understanding ecology should
not be an afterthought
it must be elevated and wholly
integrated into all aspects of
curriculum and serve as one of the
primary tenets through which we
understand our roles as responsible
members of the ecological community
articulation of a new politics which is
the most important one probably out of
the other ones tonight
our capacity to care for environment has
been country constrained by the
interests of capital and other
economical imperatives they rely on
exploitation dispossession our
commitment to social justice
necessitates new modes of operating
within the political economy the
promoter local and global redistribution
of power and access specialization
architecture is inherently political yet
the challenges are too great too varied
for any one unit department or schools
to meet we must specialize and develop
deep competency in particular areas and
support the free circulation of
knowledge and expertise which are
subsequently produced
forming alliances in a spirit of
collective endeavor for components
cross-institutional cross-disciplinary
dialogues need to be established to
ensure that actions are not localized or
temporary but expansive continual a
multiple so these are five of the eight
points the other ones being diversifying
cooperation aesthetic and Quranic
evaluation decolonization and canonical
we articulation which were pinned down
exactly to highlight the change that we
understand that needs to happen in
architectural early in a practice of
architecture but especially in in the
education we understand that there is so
much work to do and the architect can't
do it alone so now I would like to go
through a few initiatives that we've
started and ongoing and future projects
so there has been a summit on climate on
the 4th of October this year focused on
four main topics America logic
understanding intersectionality
articulation or new politics where
Christian is from New Canaan foundation
was present and also Julian from
Commonwealth decolonization and his
second set is revaluation so these were
the main topics that we touched upon
during the summit and it was an
interesting day especially for the
raising of awareness that we we try to
get out of that and we actually were
glad to see that there is a really some
chain that happened we got an email back
from the ETS which is the environmental
intention status tutors in a great
support of our project and telling us
that they're really ready to help in any
possible way
and I think I would say another way for
us to apply pressure to the institution
that we're in right now would be kind of
having these meetings with so director
the so we had a meeting with director
and some of the changes that we actually
saw were through the briefs so design
studios actually incorporated notions of
climate change and the relationship to
architects role in the ecological
emergency as well a few weeks ago we
actually met up with the council member
Catherine to talk and where we kind of
spoke about this necessary needs of
changing bylaws of a architecture
Association but how we could move on
from having this symbolic gesture and
actually accumulating I guess knowledge
that is beyond almost like a checkpoint
of climate emergency we also we also
started student-led seminars to bring to
start also speaking about different
levels different aspects of climate
change the first one we had two weeks
ago was about a coincide he was quite a
interesting meeting and the next one in
line they're going to talk about IPCC
reports RIBA climate proposals food for
samples and then others they are going
to be shaped yeah and then we try to
reach out for possible collaboration so
I mean I just landed from Chicago today
so another thing that we're trying to do
is kind of build alliances and try to
understand what other understanding of
climate emergency is happening
throughout architecture education so in
Chicago biannual we harvested this
discussion about how people move on from
education to teaching position trying to
be aligned with institutional structure
how we can analyze better understanding
and embed ecological understanding into
the pedagogy of architecture
how do you have anything talk to I mean
there are a few others
other initials you that maybe can come
hour later they're like not even like
ten percent done so I don't know yeah so
so we've started with those initiatives
basically a few weeks ago after the
summit so everything is really an
ongoing process of trying to mediate or
raise awareness of what climate change
is about also we are really curious to
know more because we actually it's a
really an ongoing process of discovery
for us as well so there's really a lot
to to be taught and so we are very open
to collaborations it's really really
need them thank you thank you
[Applause]
Commonwealth Commonwealth is a
think-tank which designs ownership
models for a democratic and sustainable
economy and they have released a series
of reports in the past few months which
I think there may be an example of how a
collaboration between designers and I
think that such a common board could
happen cuz I can imagine the way those
policies can be visualized or we can
actually describe the way we can have
impact in space and from common world we
have material Lorenz who is the director
Matt even has extensive experience in
the design in aprica' see of alternative
models of ownership and previously he
was a senior research fellow working on
IPP Arts Commission on economic justice
and has collaborated with Neff and the
Democratic collaborative and we have
also do DNC double with an architect and
urban designer and she's part of
Commonwealth think-tank leading the
design for the
New Deal City 2030 billion is also head
of the urban research at autonomy where
he focuses on the spatial implications
of new welfare and employment policies
on aging population in sustainable forms
of leisure it's her first day at
Commonwealth entire Commonwealth team
now as a result but it's supposed to be
in a pleasure to be with colleagues from
a and Neff and what I thought I'd do
pretty few its of sketch briefly the
roadmap to a green new deal which think
just tells us of caveat it's quite
interesting that even our so mental
geographies of like how do you move
beyond a sort of carbon civilization
kind of relies on some of the core
infrastructure of carbon civilization to
roads and you know we've got to fly out
of here or whatever the cement walls
would be I wanted to set up what it is
and then tease out some ins of policy
interventions that a greeny deal could
actually constitute beyond just of
rhetoric and thence of hand over to 2d
and sort of sketch out some of the sort
of habits of in terms of design and
architecture so I think I mean at the
core of the green New Deal is
essentially an unprecedented project of
world making I'd argue so I'd say if we
look at the science if we look at so
this forms of intersecting crises that
are already here they're not sort of
coming down the track they're already
here so the comet has already hit the
earth in that sense we really have
little more than a decade to
fundamentally transform and move beyond
to the infrastructures institutions and
ways of life of the carbon civilization
in which we've obviously all been born
into and grown up in and that is a sort
of obviously a deeply supporting but I
think ultimately quite hopeful sort of
and very political project and in that
sense I think as is alluded to it sort
of fits very neatly with of architecture
and design because in some ways both the
green EDL architecture is about thinking
and reckon sexualizing house of
intervened in space in matter and
redesigning it to have new ways of
flourishing new forms of living and
thriving together so I think there's a
lot of overlaps and symmetries there
and I think for progressives which
serves a need Commonwealth an F and from
the presentations and sounds of sums of
shared omens there
I think fundamental to the greenie deal
is that it's lots of a series of
discreet interventions of
decarburization ami but what it seeks to
do at the same time as decarbonize the
economy it's uncoupling environmental
footprints of destroying our wider
ecology that we all depend upon I think
alongside that it seeks to dismantle the
hierarchies inequalities and in justices
that are endemic to fossil fuel
capitalism so that patriarchy the racism
so the extractivism from not just nature
but obviously labor from the Commons
from the household and in doing so
seeking to build an economy and a
society that is democratic and
sustainable by design so what we did in
this roadmap that was kind of the the
framing then we sort of tried to tease
apart what are the types of
interventions you need this of
overlapping intervention should need to
scale that type of shift from a sort of
extractive to the generative and
flourishing so for the social economy
based on ecological reproduction
nurturing caring of social reduction
that's just rather than a focus on
accumulation for accumulations sake and
there's some four three so we'll the
fork or nodal points which all overlap
in some ways with the work for the a a
was financed it's for green industrial
revolution industrial strategy rather
two minutes of buzzwords flying around
the center of new infrastructure of life
making and so nurturing which I'll go
through in a second and into a green
internationalism and I think in some
ways the easiest of these of policy
questions to answer is often the one
that sort of seems less problematic and
is the one during the general election I
imagine will hear the most about which
like oh how can we afford it it costs
seventeen trillion pounds or whatever it
might be and of course the obvious
retort in some ways is well how can we
not afford that given what we know is
you know already upon us buddies would
like to exponentially accelerate but I
think also what we set out in the
reports in a series of interventions
including from colleagues confirmation
from clays at Neff on some of the rules
around fiscal spending some of the ways
that we can throw of channels of the the
expansive power of central banking the
ability of great
channel credit and reshape the rules of
finance and some of the sort of powers
we have around green taxation to both of
repress carbon heavy activities but also
to provide us with the resources to
build suppose carbon so flourishing
sar-21 I think in some ways it's a
financing question is in some ways the
easiest which then obviously opens up a
nice box of toys of like what how do you
spend and dry where do you direct
investment to what do you do with it how
do you reshape the built environment etc
etc through those forms of intervention
and so the first one in some ways was on
a green industrial Stracci which sounds
quite nerdy in sort of wonky but
essentially means what are the types of
interventions whether it's you know new
forms of coordination around trade
unions are collective bargaining whether
it's new forms of direction of public
investment whatever it might be
what's of coordinated forms of
intervention we can do to reshape both
production and consumption in the
economy and some decoupled environmental
footprints from forms production and
shape production shape away from
production towards caring and social
reproduction forms of work in doing so
so fundamentally shape reshape rather
the nature of work its purpose the
purpose of economic activity as a whole
which was alluded to previously so
that's of one building block but I think
in some ways more interesting Lee for
discussion in some ways was the
infrastructure of life-giving and
sustaining of life and so there was a
series of policy breakdowns on how do we
take an energy system which is you know
has been decarbonizing in the UK and has
like got cold for example off-the-grid
reason excessive degrees but ultimately
particularly taking offs of carbon
footprint in the round from imports etc
high energy system requires radical
change to be decentralized to be sub
decarbonize quite clearly and to be much
more sort of democratically owned and
controlled so what are the interventions
we can make around that around reshaping
beyond an oligopolistic current present
much much more decentralized future we
looked at housing and the built
environment and that student can go
further into that but I think one of the
key things here is Cle sort of twofold
one the needs bits of retrofitting
revolution so if you look at carbon
emissions if you look at energy
efficiency in the UK roughly September
sent fire emissions come from that sub
household and building sector so clearly
we need to Saran eclis upgrade our
building stocking again that should be
you know not just how do we do carbonize
but how do we make sure that everyone
can live in the type of communal luxury
and the type of sort of safe well
designed spacious of living environments
that everyone deserves to have as a
right lots of market-based imperative
and then obviously the built environment
more widely how can we rethink serve you
know how materials flow how sort of you
know people flow how infrastructure
designed again to both be decarbonized
but also to create the types of human
flourishing that we need we also look to
things like industry so the corporate
forms or how do you radically rethink
and scale up a motive you know
sustainable pools Enterprise bolts to
reshape radically how corporations in
ways really radically basically break
apart some they're concentrated
corporate power and democratize those
things and we look to sectors like
Transport which in some ways the hardest
not to crack it's there's only the
biggest admitting contributing globally
I think and sunny in the UK so we put
out a series of papers calling for and
of London of being a caucus of private
car free city by 2030 we recently put
out a report calling for the abolition
of fossil fuel jet planes within the
next few years and the series of
intervention and hacking scale up you
know electric buses and cycling lanes
etcetera etcetera to sort of have the
Korean forms of mobility and then serve
one of the other big ones we looked at
was land-use agriculture and how you can
use new forms of ownership
new forms of serve stewarding of the
natural commons new forms rewilding and
which again Jillian will touch in a
minute to begin that transition again
the land sector is a huge
under-recognized contributes to our
emissions but a potentially huge source
for the types of good green work and
sort of that reconnection of some nature
and society which is deliberately
disentangle dance of made exactly that's
of abstract nature human cytopatch we
need to reinsert the economic and the
natural and recognize this of radically
intertwined and the final thing we
touched upon and maybe labor for green
your deal can touch on that sort of what
you've been doing
there but what does green needle
internationalism look like in terms of
serve and this obviously what I've been
putting out is UK specific but clearly
the Green Deal has to function as a
radical green sort of internationalism
at its core and some degree you know the
Britney deal clearly echoes
anglo-american culture reference points
in some ways you might want to think
what deserts of Green bandim look like
what would a sort of bring you deal but
wouldn't be called a greeny dear boards
a green age equivalent led by the global
South look like there isn't some
anchored in the imaginaries of nineteen
thirties America but nonetheless you
know echoes some of these ambitions as
of dissenters with extractive Insignia
colonial power that has driven us into
this crisis and the series of other
steps around sort of how do we sort of
do technology contractors things of that
nature and by quite a long way the
highlight of Commonwealth six months
existence was that a set of policy
papers was liked by AOC on Twitter so
that was by a long way for a few months
now does his work do yes and I did some
work on the green New Deal city of 2030
and some work on how to rewire the UK
and we we did some work with some of the
researchers to help them visualize and
imagine what that might look like so I
just want to share some thoughts on how
how we should approach this how we
thought we should approach this because
design is in a sense the last one of the
last day's disciplines which in academia
is taking seriously futuring prototyping
prefiguring that is
you know that is very well within a
remit and and and we know how to do it
so we should really use that and I guess
as architects as urban designers of
landscape designers we think a lot about
the social and the technical we can call
it a socio technical and we can think in
a multi scalar way in which which which
which are all really crucial crucial
things to be futuring the green you deal
so I think our approach should be hybrid
it should be trying to move beyond ideas
of growth and D growths and trying to
really think that what scales do we need
growth or what skills do we need D
growth what do we need to grow what do
we need to grow and what design allows
us to do is say design I mean let's take
energy we just don't think of this
solutions for energy we think of energy
for what for what kind of work for what
kind of mode of life
and I guess about that um a lot of the
work with green yujoe city was about
thinking about low-carbon forms of work
so actually really thinking it's not
just you know green tech but it's about
care work and the teachers a series of
jobs which in one of the books on the
green new deal it's been called pink
collar work so that's all work which is
very gendered exploitative underpaid so
we really need to think about how we
grow that kind of work and how we create
the spaces in which in which that work
can really sort of assume value and and
and and help us all flourish and that
involves also designing new spaces and
new modes of negotiation in in the city
so really really thinking about how can
we reuse our ground floors to bring all
the people who need to engage in the
democratic process of redesigning
everything where are we gonna have these
conversations how and that's all stuff
that we we should be thinking about as
architects as landscape designers and as
urban designers something
[Applause]
okay and finally before we start a
conversation we have a Adrian bull which
got a director of labour for a green you
did and now as we know part of the
Commonwealth is one she directs policy
for the campaign labor for a green new
deal is a grassroots organization
dedicated to driving radical
confirmative action and climate in the
Labor Party in September 2019 they
secured a radically new deal including
an ambition of economy-wide the
carbonization by 2030 as Labour Party
policy thank you for joining us thanks
so as a favor just said about two months
ago we passed a green util notion at
Party conference which effectively means
that the Labor Party
signed on to a set of principles by
which it would tackle the climate crisis
in government I won't try and repeat too
many of the principles and policies that
entails I think Fernanda and not have
covered a lot of those off but very
briefly it's a green industrial strategy
to achieve you know total
decarbonization by 2030
it's the provision of universal basic
services to tackle inequality and
finally a sort of a core tenet in which
i think is maybe the most relevant for
the people in this room tonight is a
commitment to broadening democratic
public ownership and a lot of the time
when that's discussed we'd like to think
of it as sort of a major sectors like
water or energy and rail but for us
that's this is more about you know a
fundamental reorganizing of our economy
that's the essence of the green new deal
or at least Labour's brand new deal as
it stands which is the recognition that
we will only succeed in tackling the
climate crisis by targeting it its route
and that is through the complete
transformation of an economic system
that is hardwired for privatization for
extraction and for the exploitation of
both labor and of nature
so I was asked to give the activists
perspective tonight and so I think what
I'll do is drawn to sort of main
criticisms that we get as young
idealists doing this work and the first
is that our approach is too radical and
that we should be focusing on pragmatic
incrementalist solutions rather than
advocating for nothing less than the
complete reorganization of our economy I
think someone actually called me a loon
in the Financial Times or something like
that for some of our proposals as a
highlight but to me this criticism is
not only wrong but it is an indictment
of our collective imagination to treat
as natural and as inevitable structures
that we have in place that we know are
driving the viability of not only human
life but all life on this planet to the
brink for me there's nothing inevitable
about eight million people living in
poverty in the United Kingdom a majority
of whom are in work there's nothing
inevitable about the housing crisis and
there's nothing inevitable about fossil
fuel infrastructure and about private
car ownership or any of the systems that
we are used to and that would be the
first instance that we need the skills
of the people in this room to push the
boundaries of our imagination the second
thing that we're learning sort of from
organizing and canvassing and knocking
on doors is that people don't really
know what the green New Deal means you
know they've heard about it you know
it's a popular idea from a very popular
American congresswoman and that's sort
of the extent of their knowledge but
more importantly they can't picture how
it would affect them and change their
everyday realities and that's a huge
problem and a huge barrier that we need
to overcome because as the juillet John
have demonstrated so vividly we will
only succeed in this project if we are
bringing people along with us and so
that would be the second instance where
we desperately need the skill set of the
people in this room because there's
nothing more powerful in driving in a
movement than for people to imagine you
know how things could actually be
different and to have a tangible vision
that they can engage with that is
radically different from the one they're
used to
so car ownership is a really good
example of this V's are often held up as
sort of the pinnacle for tackling the
climate crisis and for a bit of context
V's currently make up about 2% of annual
car sales in the UK that's all right but
the more important fact is that even at
the point at which we reached 100
percent of car sales it would still take
an additional 20 years for EVs to become
the vast majority of the fleet we just
simply don't have that kind of time
the other sort of this is what I mean by
a lack of imagination which is that it's
it's an easy thing to picture
transforming our vehicle fleet but
ultimately this isn't this isn't an
effective use of our resources in time
not least because private cars are left
parked for 90% of their lives or that we
have 50 square kilometers of space in
London alone currently dedicated to
parking that is a travesty and that is a
complete waste of a finite resource and
these are the kind of things that we
need to change and that we need to have
the vision to change there's nothing
natural as I said about private car
ownership but people can't imagine a
world without it so I would call in all
of you to help us be radically
imaginative this can't just be about you
know changing current systems we have in
place but about absolutely transforming
and building a vision of something
completely different and that is where
we need all of you I'll end it there
[Applause]
okay I think we we have some questions
from the action cares and also perhaps
from team annette to start the
conversation and afterwards we will open
up today to the viewer and if following
your notes about imagination
I just remembered why I was probably
brought to this table because they
brought me on last minute that's why I
was very confused when they asked me
what to say it would say something but
basically I think like my my personal
interests within a action is mostly
about kind of the culture of Education
and like how we learn in like our
attitudes towards kind of learning and
this kind of imagination a very weird
way to string all three kind of things
I've heard so I've heard two references
you said that you put the image of the
wrong return because you like nature and
stuff I don't know I don't know why you
picked the wrong turn but it seems to be
like a symbol it's like I mean orangutan
means basically forest man so it's kind
of like our counterpart I suppose and
then you said that what would green you
do Bandung look like and like you know
another kind of reference to like
Indonesia Borneo you know those kind of
vibes
I'm from Borneo you know wrong the times
before not in a natural environment
because I get malaria hit there but and
then you said something about kind of
imagination I started thinking about
what would green you do Banda look like
and I to be honest going growing up in
Borneo I felt we don't have the
imaginative capacity to dream up those
kind of things because we know
inherently we don't have the political
power to do so so one thing I found
quite ironic when I was thinking about
where environmental destruction was
happening with in Borneo so I'm not from
Indonesia I'm from Brunei which is the
tiniest part of Borneo
and the interesting thing about Bruna is
that it has an entire state that's
pretty much as a forest reserve know
pretty much nobody lives there there's
only two states in the country 1/2 where
people live and the other half where
people know but no people live and
that's time wrong
the interesting reason why I'm wrong is
allowed to exist is because Brunei's
economy is heavily dependent on oil
extraction and it's it means that with
the amount of oil we can extract it can
it can support the entire for hunting
like less than half a million people
that live there very comfortably so you
know in a way the entirety of Borneo and
kind of like Southeast Asia had through
kind of colonialism at least has
inherited a legacy of kind of like
extraction as economy so the reason why
we don't kind of slash-and-burn the
entire forest for palm oil is because we
have no need to because we're extracting
a different oil but yeah so like one
thing that I was very interested coming
here was realizing that yes I don't
necessarily have the kind of negotiating
power as someone from that part of the
world but I feel like through education
there's abilities to allow us to kind of
dream in a way one thing that I kind of
got into more recently is this idea of
afrofuturism and that's acknowledging
that there are certain kind of realities
built around certain people based on
your identity and to imagine unrealistic
futures is the only way kind of out you
know it's to entertain this idea that to
experience kind of discrimination and
oppression is unnatural because
currently in its current state it is
kind of seen as natural and I think
that's kind of the point you know
because in a way the word nature is
originates from the word as born and we
only the way that we kind of define what
nature is is the word the world in which
that is the the stereotypical image of
nature as is the state of the world in
which humanity was kind of born and not
so it's we define nature based at the
point in which we arrive and you know
with our current generation we view kind
of these capital systems as natural
because this is the state of the world
that we have arrived in so yeah we are
questioning and changing nature in a way
in multiple levels so for me I'm very
glad to be part of this conversation
because when I deal with my projects in
my my daily life university I never
really know where to start from so of
course I started thinking about how can
I be
how can a project be sustainable how was
the best idea where can I start from and
I sometimes I really don't know and also
I feel some really happy that I have you
here because I feel there's a great
possibility for you to to be a sort of
driver you know we were some as I'm
leader that we can can follow because
also to see that you guys are so engaged
in a real project really gives a lot of
hopes for us because as I was mentioning
before one of the series one of the
seminar series here that we had two
weeks ago was about Eco anxiety and what
came out mean was really the sort of
depression out of these periods aspect
appeared in in time they were living
which it's quite toxic it's a instead of
being productive
I feel so as an architect with a lot of
will to learn
I would like to ask you if there is a
study point where we could start from or
is it a full full project in that needs
to start in May
levels all at once I just say them I
mean religion to the green you deal and
if we think about how the New Deal
actually happened in the US how you know
yeah we don't we shouldn't think about
it as like you know we need to figure
this thing out and then you know for it
and then implement and have it all
costed and all because you know that's
not gonna happen and we don't have the
time to do that so I think thinking so
the New Deal in the US was a you know
program over over that cage of different
initiatives and there were loads of
shortcomings with that so without trying
to be like that just that idea of you
know a package and a program of actions
is a good way to think about it and so
whatever we do first like for example
knife we're thinking we're collaborating
with the green ug movement we need to UK
sorry which is an organization that's
convening like working with youth
climate strikers and with flavor for
greenie deal and others to maybe work
out like to policies in the next like
four or five months that can be one
developed in a way like with places like
maybe you know organizing different
types of workshops with people in places
and seeing you know what kind of ideas
people can come up with what kind of
issues maybe a you know transports might
be some because it's so hard to talk I
was talking to someone a counselor from
Brighton today and they just passed the
motion and labor council they just
passed the motion for the green eg like
within their council but now it's like
okay so what do we do it like how do we
actually deliver this and transport sits
idly is gonna be the main challenge so
anyway what I'm saying is them you know
you guys have ideas and things you can
do and that will require work at all
levels like education level like you
know like what I said about like there
needs to be a culture shift we need to
kind of set the
the stage for the next generation
because the the transition is gonna take
a while you know like it's a massive job
I think first thing is we need to just
put power into creating that movement as
soon as possible so that the ideas that
are already out there because we have a
lot of the solutions already can just be
pushed and politically supported and as
we do that we can all kind of bringing
new ideas you know a new solutions at
all levels like education at a local
level or a national level
so yeah just thinking about the green
ideas as a process rather than just a
one thing I just want to add to that as
has everybody seen the sustainable
economy Act is that what it's called the
bill the green new deal bill that was
proposed in Parliament which includes
the idea for a green new deal commission
so I think it would be really useful for
all of us to start thinking how our
discipline in our profession can find
its place in in that structure just to
make it really real and yeah
just-just-just
but absolutely we should start with some
place-based futuring projects are
absolutely essential
yeah I mean I think the New Deal is
historically you know there's lots of
literature on how it's a kind of
reflective and provider so lots of
racial imputation of inequalities of us
capitals of the time but one of the have
some interesting elements to it one of
the interesting have kind of Forgotten
histories is the second largest
expenditure item into Syria somebody was
a process it wasn't like a one-off event
the second largest subset of
expenditures actions of arts culture and
sort of design and so you can kind of
see this in the built environment of
America if you serve you know lots of
states in the US have like lots of
buildings libraries cultural centers
etcetera etcetera that kind of emerged
out of that and it sort of artists
writers would pay so there was this like
explosion of its of imagination
rethinking and a lot of that was from
pressure from below as well and like
left movements and you know tenants
unions in the south and athletic ceteris
of pushing for new ways to try to think
through the crisis rather than just sort
of lots of state money being thrown it's
a definite thing like that archeology of
like what the New Deal was and what it
could be now about imagination and being
funded to that and I think just to echo
your point about I'm in some ways the
nature load no longer exists in a way
we've kind of like property obviously
which is much more probably like the
capitalist scene but like there's no you
know nothing outside of ourselves really
and evenness of pristine reservations
are themselves acts of a huge scale
human intervention and which obviously
to some degree is like wow that's kind
of extremely Apparel's at some degree
while trying to remain not to Promethean
and humbly then it is that well we do
have well making capacity and either we
serve you know try and repair the
extreme damage of our current extractive
model or we serve use that world mega
capacitors try and built and then quite
different and we clear the capacity just
of intervening in ways that can scale
justice rather than extraction
I mean lost in settlement but a few
gonna points is that so rather than sort
of a single starting point
I think labor for every new deal our
focus is definitely on creating as many
starting points as we can so our
conference motion was sort of the seed
in what is meant to be sort of many
visions of what a green new deal is we
use the phrase once which is a bit
flowery for a workshop but I think we
said there will be as many green new
deals as there are communities and on
the one hand that's kind of an annoying
tagline but on the other hand I think
it's actually very representative of
what we are trying to do and I think
what has to be done speak back to sort
of the Sheila gem point is that you
cannot succeed in this endeavor without
bringing communities along with you and
that starts with sort of realizing a
vision that people can relate to you
that is localized and that sort of is
brought together as an overarching
stream but that is unique to sort of
each place in each community and again
that's rooted in sort of the design of
those communities
to think of a concrete thing like you
know if you're thinking there is already
like trying to build on things that are
already there like if there's investment
going to social housing and it's gonna
be a massive kind of social housing
rollout how do we make that a green you
do project you know what are the types
of houses that we're going to build or
how we're going to retrofit and and all
those things so it's almost like we
should make I mean the way we are
framing policy now is that all policies
climate policy it has to be an all
policy must deliver justice because
justice is really the transition that
we're living we're living from a world
is unjust the tour that must be just in
order to be sustainable so if we think
about it like that then it's about
identifying the opportunities out there
in terms of you know what relates to
your discipline and making it a green
you do project one thing I always like I
think kind of the current kind of
condition of architecture culturally and
what we're deciding as a discipline it's
kind of like I think one of the
dominating questions is kind of now it's
like to build or not to build there are
architectural practices that like
literally just don't build anything and
they just talk about architecture
research architecture and then there are
people who build it and somehow feel
complicit or actually building a
fantastic stuff the challenge is easy
but it's harder to build something that
challenges the system because like
buildings are expensive so one thing I
found interesting about how to say
activism that surrounds buildings let's
say is that they're not actually like a
lot it's not really performed by art it
takes like you think about because she's
my idol right now rashida Philips like
you know lawyer / artist extraordinaire
you know helping vulnerable people get
into housing then there's like you know
so many housing organizations that help
house like refugees and such and like
the issue is not really the building or
the shape of the building or the social
house itself but like the legal and kind
of how to say the meta layers that
surround the building so I don't know
like as
I'm not an architecture student and why
I just graduated recently but like I
don't know what to do anymore as a
architect you know like I I was just
wondering as people who kind of deal
with the territory of like policy and
this kind of like metal a or buildings
that prevents a building from being good
in a way like what do you think I think
I'd like to bring into the conversation
ideas like what you said there are
pretty much two types of practices the
ones that build the ones that don't
build we used to have a lot of
architects working in councils and I
guess I guess this might be a
conversation for another time but where
is it where is it that we think that we
want to work where how can we be
effective is it going back to the
councils and saying set us back up is it
about I did a lot of work I did a lot of
research about the two years of
Revolutionary Government in Portugal in
74 and they set up what were called
bri-bri Gaddis Technica's which was a
way of basically bringing top-down
investment and bottom-up grassroots
movements together everybody should
really look it up because it's a really
sort of fun unknown history so I think
we really need to think about what are
the structures through which we would
like to work and who do we need to place
those
who do we need to bring those demands to
- yeah I think and I don't know where to
even start that conversation decide
something so that so I think that while
I agree I've been very much I think that
the current generation of graduates are
prepared and extremely and students have
been extremely difficult to position and
I think that's the architectural schools
have led a charge and you know a
commodification of space through
designing products much more than a
thing they have been designing sort of
frameworks and sort of ideas building I
think that rather than to build a not to
build I think it should be only what is
that we are designing and I think that
Fernanda mentioned you know green UD not
being a process and there's something
very important about designing processes
rather than designing the project and i
wonder i mean i i'm extremely impatient
and i'm just a completely fed up with
let's say a sort of a waiting for
permission to act and i think that's why
i think the green you deal is fantastic
i do think also that everyone else just
to get on and do stuff and I would
encourage both my own students and
everybody in this room to be hijacking
the process of their design students and
studios and their units and actually
designing processes and resisting this
urge to you know to modify space whether
it's through you know the architectural
project or whether it's through the
representations not to say you know that
actually doesn't manifest in something
special or something very visual but I
think we need to be very careful that
we're focused too much on let's say the
architectural objects and if we focus
more on the infrastructures which are
going to be addressing issues around
transportation as sort of more of a
spatial manifestation of stuff rather
than me saying okay and design another
damn station
I think as long as it's down here
there's there's a couple of things that
I want to bring up that I feel that are
sort of missing from the conversation
that and that can maybe add because
their places in the future where we also
need to get significant amounts of
traction if we're going to solve the
problem that looms ahead of us first of
all is just challenging absolutely all
of the core narratives that are
prevalent at the moment and they're I
don't know how many academic papers I've
read that start with the line that we
are an urbanizing world and population
is growing we really probably need to
think very hard about the way we do
low-density better about the way that we
provide low-density urbanism four forms
of Association and ways of growing and
building together that are much more
engaged with land based processes that
empower people in local places and this
has everything to do with designing with
processes and also I would say with
relationships that if we're going to get
our heads around the future of how we
design it has to be designing not with
objects and baubles and toys of the
Heather wick variety but it really has
to be with relationships
[Music]
the idea of the rural is also something
that's that's been slightly missing from
this conversation and I think it's
absolutely crucial cities are not all of
the problem with emissions with carbon
we can pain with with with nitrogen
oxide the other climate gases that are a
significant problem we need to think
about doing agriculture differently and
perhaps start to think about ways in
which the rural can capture carbon and
other greenhouse gases in meaningful
ways and just turn that that whole idea
on its head it's not extractive but
rather agriculture can be something that
captures agency justice power and place
are all connected fundamentally in the
rural and people are being driven off of
land as a result of climate change so
that's one place that we can really I
think as architects and landscape
architects urban designers and planners
we hold the power of narrative we hold
the power of image we hold the power of
text we know how to tell good stories so
we've got to make sure we tell rich
connected stories that read landscape as
a continuous condition from urban to
rural and that is simultaneous and lived
and occupied all at once so that wasn't
a question that was a it was a ramp
we need more grants
I mean on that I think or
answering the question of what we can do
to collaborate for me one of the
strengths of our discipline is the way
we can visualize stop and one of the my
main interest of bringing you here in
this table is basically drinking let's
call it top down with bottom up and how
we can visualize that of them might be
represented here by the policies know
that perhaps you guys are thinking
writing detailing no but they need a way
in which we can imagine how do they look
like I normally put the example of the
policy of that labor
I think it's putting forward four days a
week working with now and three days we
can so what does it mean for for space
no to have that no people mean that the
hot people will require more leisure
spaces no and that will be materialized
into you know cultural spaces parks etc
there will be less commuting no perhaps
the transformation that the guys from
coming back were talking about about how
we get rid of private Carlton that will
be the street will won't be designed for
cars but rather we decide for people and
for public transport now and so for that
we need images no we need to produce
visualizations that explain to people
how does it look that specific point and
we can and I can actually imagine to see
every single report that you guys have
produced know for every single policy
and produce images to explain people how
what is the space that these policies
would produce no because the space
that's around us is basically the the
faces that capitalism nor neoliberalism
has built in the last 40 years and so
that's something that we as you know as
designers can actually produce so we can
actually talk to you and say okay
there's hundreds of policies that have
been produced in the last few months
no but barely any of them can have a
specific image in the future meaning
projected images no so that's something
that at least very you know good at no
producing images that project to the
future on how those it look like but it
just never disconnection between policy
and image that they produce notice
always once a policy is established then
the process of all the way down were you
know the designers gets Commission no
and then and then you just produce a
product no as you were saying but the
police is part of the process know that
that you want explain to people and the
same would go from the bottom up kind of
process it know like how to allow other
people to join the book and not to put
some pressure and that's again the
production of images in what's saying
like that's something that we we should
be able to produce more not to to
communicate through that you know and
that's something that perhaps might be
part of a potential collaboration not
only to transform the way school teaches
thing know through policy but also to to
communicate that not to to to other
people
I think in a way I would like to
criticize the conversation that we're
having right now because when we talk
about climate emergency even in this
moment I think this is such a crucial
gathering but there is no notion of
human beings embedded in nature we're
always kind of talking about nature as
something else and we're still talking
about transportation and housing but
what about the nature that we're so
detached from and perhaps this cultural
shift that needs to happen from the
conversation we're having is how do we
start to become intellectual in a way
that we are we are part of nature how do
we enhance that notion of nature yeah
because when we are kind of talking
about let's say like what is politically
enviable what is politically possible
and how we can argue this case is like
yes that's acknowledging that we need to
be realistic in order to make change
because if you're you know too crazy
like it's not gonna happen you're just
gonna get dismissed but then that is
still operating within and slightly
compliant within the very patriarchal
system no so like when you are arguing
you know kind of like in that kind of
negotiating since you're complied with
in that system and I think we're we're
discussing in a way like Eco patriarchal
systems but not eco-feminist systems yet
and eco-feminist systems are not about
the female it's like evaluating anything
equally you know having the wrong motor
and having a stake every every single
plant head mistake so yeah I don't know
that's
can i comment well first the orangutan
is like 99% they basically you know they
should have the same rights as even more
so I think I mean linking to what Tim
was saying like raising the urban sorry
the borough debate and what you're
saying about you know the nature sorry
and the visualization actually just
giving me ideas I've been I mean like I
said I've been just like doing so much
research and reading so much and talking
to so many people about this and I went
to a conference on indigenous like the
brought together like different
indigenous leaders from different parts
of the world in September at UCL and
that was really inspiring like I've been
obviously felt like being from Brazil
like I've been falling quite closely
like how the indigenous communities had
really well crazy face they'd be dying
you know just trying to basically stay
within their homes but anyway I'm
diverging what I was gonna say is that I
think on the question of the culture of
shift and values and the value system
like what I said about like I literally
feel aspects associated that's fixated
sometimes you know but like the the
value system that's imposed on us and
how we inherently want to do things and
care for things and value things we have
to remember that again the we is not a
uniform thing we're not one thing only
and there are lots of communities out
there in the world and indigenous
communities are you know the leading
kind of voice for that that live within
a different value system and they're
already valuing nature and the
relationship with nature and food and
everything in a different way and I
think part of that kind of rethinking of
how we believe this movement and we lead
this change in a way that actually
transforms and that delivers justice
it's first and foremost about like
acknowledging that that it still exists
in the world like even
dominated by the culture that we live in
they exist and the fact that they have
existed despite they have survived sorry
despite you know the incredible forces
of capitalism and you know that is
amazing and what the system does right
now is that it says that you know well
that's poverty or that's living you know
in caves you know and actually women is
a part of that narrative as well because
women is seeing you know the historical
is more connected to nature like Mother
Earth and things like that so you know
tackling all that and I think there's
some really nice of you know the
Solidarity peace you know some really
nice alliances that people are starting
to build and an extinction rebellion is
starting to engage indigenous
communities for example but that we can
do and maybe it is that process I was
thinking like you know visualizing of
the overlapping of you know of course
you're not gonna translate like how
indigenous communities live right now
like with in how we live in London but
maybe there's something about the social
technologies that they use and you know
that the way that interact that can be
overlaid into like maybe forms of common
ownership that exist in communities
around the country here already in terms
of community energy and other things and
then something else about the kind of
wild urban
they'll be great to hear about what you
think but I've been reading about
rewilding as well and I'm really excited
about it but I know it has lots of
challenges as well and the rewilding
movement itself in Europe has been led
by the kind of I would say like the kind
of old and it's like it's great of
course they you know all these efforts
are welcome people are trying to leave
with you know but we're not gonna get it
right if you know if you don't combine
the kind of environment nature and the
justice element and I think that's still
missing from the reality movie but you
know thinking about the urban spaces as
actually like how can we make wild urban
like we need to make space for for
nature right and actually
the ecological crisis then becomes a
part of those kind of climate solutions
and while you're saying like you know
the whole thing about building trees and
having carbon sinks and but there's also
protecting the ones they're already
there anyway so yeah I think there's
lots of exploring that that you can do
as a discipline in terms of helping us
visualize how we bring all this elements
together and it's about justice and just
a few words about the rewilding project
I think the most the crucial thing is
that it's so much about ownership in the
UK especially where I'm sure matt has
that has has the figure about how much
how much of the UK is privately owned by
1% of the land so one actually we
discussed visualizing this I'll feel a
bit further from compared to what we had
done is it has to do with linear forests
are actually connecting different
natural areas to each other with
literally linear forests corridors of F
green and that brings up a series of
multi scaler issues of you know of the
kind that actually you showed it an F a
couple weeks ago but mainly I mean the
the ownership side of things is really
is really the sort of mind-boggling
aspect and and and I think somehow as
designers we have the possibility of
just sort of making is really very
simple arguments you know this park this
park and and and it served illegitimate
is somewhat arbitrary layers of
of ownership so so so it's actually
really powerful and in sort of undoing
the legitimacy of these these things
like one thing I thought interest when
you were questioning why do this like
indigenous populations still kind of
survive in a way like one part of the
reason of that is because of like like
native reserve lands in a way and I
found that interesting because that's
there's a parallel to what you were
saying about nature reserves and I
remember choose Martinez came and did a
talk here a while ago and she said that
there is no possible future of like a
fair kind of nature no way in the world
when we don't when we continue to miss
the sighs I'm apologize indigenous
people because we are in Scent
essentially treating them as animals and
treating their experience as just
narratives and stories and like kind of
entertainment to a certain extent we
don't view them as equals and they're
confined kind of reserves so it's not
even so so regarding kind of like this
kind of capacity for storytelling
instead you know there are kind of a few
like there was there was a unit here a
few years ago called diploma six which
was run by Liam young and Kay Davies and
they were kind of you know the unit that
was really like trying to go out there
and like experience all these spaces
where like extractive processes are
taking place and I think that's great
because there they were taking kind of
exposing the shape of the global
ecosystem in a global economy in a way
but then the point in which and I I'm
fine with the work they produced but I
kind of disagree with it because the end
product is speculative fiction and in a
way to see this kind of they I I really
preface the exam that's fine because
like you know this is a heavy subject
and to be really serious it's like it's
like difficult for people you know to
engage with that so they they introduce
the two students through fiction in a
way and that it makes it kind of
somewhat palatable enough for people to
engage with but
in a way this kind of processes that
global and very very real is still kind
of inhabiting the world of fiction and
people don't embody it enough to act
upon it like you know you just see this
nice story with like cool visualizations
I they they do have imaginations in
which the world is more fair but then
there are still imaginations they don't
engage practically so when we're talking
about we it's also about when we're
telling these stories we need to really
really not we need to be discipling of
how these to be tell these stories
because representation is so important
and also in a way what I'm kind of
hearing this table about visualization
representationally it kind of reminds me
of like you know that Cambridge
analytical scared well then like you
know representing certain information to
help form some political mobilization we
are also in that kind of system of
political mobilization and we need to be
conscious of how we are mobilizing in a
way we can't just be so saying that
we're good we're good with showing
exposing blah blah we need to really
like be careful about what we say so if
we're trying to use our skills and like
profession to politically mobilize like
I I think we need to give more space for
other voices and that's one way already
to tackle that challenge you know like I
want to see like personally more
conferences that is not me or someone
else no seriously because you know that
culture shift will require that we open
the space for those voices that have
been perceived as not having expertise
or not out being poor or whatever and
letting them actually have the floor you
know at the space and I like this
conference that they were gonna it's
because they actually flew and you know
if we're gonna prioritize flights
prioritize bringing like indigenous
leaders from around the world to
actually speak because when you hear
from them
um you know first hand then it's not
something the matter it's a real person
that has a family that has a community
that they're linked to so when they're
talking about how they live and how they
interact with the land you know it's not
me telling a story about someone who
lives far away and I think that's really
really powerful and in a way like it
could really go a long way you know into
changing people's minds and and kind of
activating people and to be more engaged
with this and just to say that you do
the II do wish me you do mesh means the
North India it's a small community and
they live just next your Nature Reserve
their community is not part of the kind
of National Park the husband site from
UCL when to study the Tigers into you
know amazing like he went to study the
Tigers in the reserve and what he found
after his experience I'm cutting the
short the story short is that the Tigers
spend more time and there's the
population is larger in the communities
al and then in the national reserve you
know and you can see there's loads of
reports out there these days on how the
lands of indigenous people and they have
you know protected are actually some of
the most biodiverse and most best
protected areas in terms of biodiversity
in the world and so we need to start
looking at people like that in
communities like that as you know a part
of the like they have the solutions you
know and and we need to think about them
as experts into something that we need
expertise for yeah it's so funny because
like from Borneo like I do like I have a
lot of friends like indigenous people
and like one thing is like I went to Tom
Brown one time to go camping in the camp
guy he was the old war vet in a way
and it's interesting casino for neo has
headhunters the guy openly admitted that
because they briefly decriminalized
headhunting during World War two so they
could kill Japanese soldiers in the
jungle and the guy just like legit just
told me he like he killed people it was
part of his culture and the really weird
irony when you're saying they were
looking after that so he's looking after
the nature and that was that's too bad
that's too bad but I just rub them
they're funny I wanted to hear a little
bit about ownership models because I
think that's something that for me it's
it's crucial know to understand
different ways in which we would use the
spaces it's something we use the space
know whether it's Ruben or and it's
something that perhaps it's not well
understood no I mean the figure that you
just escaped about one percent only
fifty percent of the land but also there
are ten tips of that not because if you
have some ideas on that I'm one can
imagine you know ways in which it can be
arranged in a different way yes yeah I
think it's kind of being almost
deliberately naturalized property
relations and ownership and through deep
politicize design of contests and like
exploration but I think that's actually
sort of that's a permafrost is kind of
breaking a little bit at least the
conversation and so I guess the premise
would be there I'm Tracy sucking like
the gravitational force that kind of
locks everything else into places shapes
a relationship for each other to make
sure to surpasses two institutions and
that the sort of dominant models of
ownership and their private operate
financialized
extractive both from labor and nature
lock us into a dynamic that you know
it's very hard to ameliorate and Sophie
intervene after the fact to address the
sort of dynamic that underlying property
relations that we have
drives us towards and so that is why
suits of democratic ownership has been
fundamental to the argument the greenie
deal is of institutional turn to
radically shifts of wealth and power but
also control and some how it's used and
by whom and for what purpose and to
bring in communities have been super
excluded by the dominance of their very
particular patterns of capital ownership
and deployment and so I mean twenty
series it's like quite specific sectoral
greenie deals almost try and really
tease out rot in the abstract greenie
deal like what does actually meaning
yeah we're all UK acceptor etc and it
those will be underlined guide bytes of
arguments for new models of democratic
ownership and that's not sitting you go
from a binary private to serve binary of
public but it is to say you can scale a
much at richer at ecology of
institutional forms of policies of
ownership
it could be commenting so it could be
democratic governance of a held acid
that stewarded collectively rather than
held individually or held like your
interests could be an asset for between
G so looking at sort of the work of
someone like Helen our holds from etc
and so you can think so take the land
where you just have these very deep and
you know deep in the courts of land
ownership would kind of you can trace
directly backs of primitive accumulation
dispossession in serve you know 17th
century England and then you'd I mean
there excite laugh map prints algebra is
kind of disgusting like markup on this
country and you know many countries that
people like that controlled so much land
by rent patterns of violence and then
but and then you could say well I can
fine so how do you then begin to
mobilize and build the silver
alternative imaginaries and then
actually institutional practices and
politics that scale centers and you can
I mean one report I think it's got a
huge range of ideas in it which included
some authors from X and NEFAs and whole
variety brilliant people was earned for
the late party reports to the Labour
Party rather than the Labour Party's
reports called land for many which came
out that's been a long year but I think
muddy it might've been this year and
it's got a series of brilliant
recommendations at multiple scales from
a national to the local to sort of you
know regional from things like a
community
Trust which would sort of slow a common
ground trust rather which some like
breast Stratford in particulars worked
on which you can look at so slowly
socializing land D financial icing it
and then opening up a lot more
interesting potential uses of land
looking at things like County farms
bringing those back which new ways of
managing land in common you know much
more useful ways on that side there's a
very good piece by Raj Patel on a green
new deal force of rural the US which
both brings its opposite that was some
of the most radical elements in the New
Deal not lease because it's the Dust
Bowl etc but then also how you can them
with that practice today but then it can
be through to things like Community Land
Trust which conserve you know lock in
assets and enable you know deep
financial aids forms of social provision
et cetera et cetera so I think you know
to land is a very peculiar asset in
terms of factory production and I think
we can't really do the subtypes of a man
raised or at least take those match
means from the fictional to serve actual
practice unless we can kind of reshape
fundamentally how land is controlled
around and there's been a singles of
unimodal for that but I do think any
greeny deal right any serve you know
more flourishing human started will rely
on displacing current patterns of land
country ownership if there is any coming
from from the audience or any question
that you may want to ask
that has been floated
about the need to engage new audiences
and about the need to reach people that
are disenfranchised nowadays like
they're basically not the people they're
already converted what we actually
should be preaching to the non converted
but first of all would be question
ourselves whether this is something we
should be doing trying to fabricate
those images to reach those people and
then obviously the questions for the
people who are close to policymaking is
how do those images look like what
describing the products the images the
documents that we need to be producing
to actually engage those people are we
doing the right thing now or we are it
sort of like talking to ourselves
how would you how do we go or did we
just produce images and you just say yes
no yes no like how do we you know is it
a briefing
to your point about are we doing it
right right now I would say absolutely
not unfortunately good answer but I
think my experience has been that while
people are engaged by the issues that
they face people care about the climate
crisis they care about inequality they
recognize these things in their daily
life people do not feel at all engaged
by the solutions and that is a huge
hurdle we have yet to overcome and so I
think that's because I myself included
in this we tend to sit in rooms and
dream up policy solutions and/or design
solutions main isolation and the biggest
lesson to take away from the past year
for me has been that you will never
accomplish anything doing that except
for you know some back patting about how
brilliant your ideas are and in order
for them to come to fruition and be
realized they actually not only need to
be applied to people's lived experiences
and communities but they need just begin
there so no we're not doing enough now
and yes that's where you need to base
them I would say that one of the things
that we need to be very much aware of is
ways in which public opinion is
manipulated or changed and the way the
world works is largely through processes
of advertising that advertisers know how
people work know their primal drives
they're absolutely in command of that
and if we are going to create change on
a fundamental level we have to get smart
in the same way that advertisers are and
we have to not be afraid of using these
tools even if they're called propaganda
yeah because if we have a good idea that
is good for people in the planet then we
should do everything in our power to
work so I call it shall we trying to
target with our skills
those guys which are nowadays glued to
the tweets from Al Farraj will be
targeting those people and Michele will
be using so we're thinking how to do
that I don't always we're in a really
interesting moment actually in which eco
fascism is on the rise so right the
right wing is about to take over the
climate change narrative they are going
to try to enlist people into sort of
fascistic nationalistic regional you
know and we need the regional narratives
we've got to have landscape based
realities place-based realities that
people can buy into so I think we've got
to get there first really not be afraid
to use relation especially if we have
good ideas answer something about that
cuz then when you raise it I do because
then I think the biggest risk now is if
any of us who are already in the space
or part of the movement or engaged miss
the Justice element right because as
crises start to mount and as natural
disasters start - well unnatural
whatever disasters you know it becomes
that narrative will become easier to
break because people you know I think
literally we just firefighting right
it's really hard to tackle challenges at
the root so I think in terms of like the
design community can help with in terms
of how do we do that justice process in
practice is that increasingly we're
gonna need you know good design for the
processes to engage participatory design
processes and
and helping the visualize so there are
opportunities in the UK if we talk about
the UK you know local authorities are
calling climate emergencies
you know our councils are passing
greenie of the emotions so now it's like
what next so you know people are and
unions as well so I was with the PCs
which is the Union for civil servants on
Saturday in a green forum and like union
reps trying to learn how they can engage
you know that their workplaces into the
climate emergency that now the Union has
sat as a thing as well so I think there
are lots of opportunities there but
people still don't know is it you're
saying like we we all have the will now
and the understanding that we need to do
differently but we don't know yet how
you know and it's part of it is that
kind of help with like designing
processes and how do you do something
that's participatory how do you you know
if you get a bunch of workers in a room
you know to discuss how they want better
workers and stuff like is there actually
a way to you know have some sort of but
you know visualize like how the
workplace come differently or how you
know their engagement I don't know but
but what we need to be also like careful
about is that even if we do design a
very nice good you know participatory
process we still have the challenge of
okay people are engaged people excited
you know the visualized solution you
know they want to go for it we don't
have like the power the means or to you
know like it's what Matt was saying like
you know we don't own the land it's like
you know I've been working Kosuke means
and it's like you know the coast is an
asset for coastal minutes but who owns
the coast you know so it's like I I've
spoken to communities I've been trying
to implement different projects and
they're like wow we have like
Bournemouth Beach apparently it's owned
by two private people or something like
the Bournemouth Council has to like us
anyway
it's crazy so just going back to my like
the context matters for the solutions
that we see like there is the psychology
of engaging people that are not engaged
but that must be engaged and also they
want to be engaged it's just that they
don't know how and also they don't have
to trust that you know it's so much
history of participatory processes that
don't go in you aro that don't be
Liberty anyway I'm not giving the Optus
solution but I think that that lies the
the challenge or the brief I guess just
one more thing that perhaps concernment
I am designers or architects is the fact
that the majority I mean right now as
the profession is organized is it's
basically once you are out know the
options for work are mainly in private
companies and so this basically means
that even though you may produce a
visualization you have a great
imagination how transform things I can
at least within our compounds then you
know how power to do anything because
you work for somebody so I think this
question was rise in the last section we
have no and I wanted to you know ask
around the table if they have any ideas
about that know one of the ideas I came
across was and the fact that this the
green new deal and all that we are
talking about here it's a it has to come
from a collective effort and you know a
thing that if that's the case perhaps
one option for architects Landscape
Architects that work in private
companies is to unionize know like to to
form unions not exaggerate I mean they
are usually protecting a rights for
workers but
that collected boys perhaps allowed you
to say what kind of projects no ethical
practices can be done by certain private
companies No
so at least while we wait or not way but
what we try to change no to agree New
Deal know that perhaps in hopefully no
we have the means the power the movement
and the policies it's implemented no and
the professions on firms into perhaps
something that allows architects of to
be involved in the public sector that
might be the force of how to
collectively yeah no I mean forints or
produce different type of projects than
the private is right now
producing nothing is something that
again we can rely on experience on other
disciplines nor other ways in which it's
being produced because right now in the
architecture discipline there's no
unions no like what certain bodies that
should be acting on that but they're not
really that the case
no and that perhaps might be a way out
no I don't know if nothing is it for me
it's an important question and perhaps
something that we should be also trying
to answer know as a discipline know what
what would be the way out if you really
want to embrace change I just want to
add to that I after the last meeting
that we had here I met with the people
who started UVW s.a.w mansions United
versus United voices of the world's
section of architectural workers which
everybody should join immediately and a
lot of the conversation was about making
the Union a mechanism to refuse
unethical and unsustainable practices
which we also discussed this or through
through the lens of actually making the
Union attractive to a workforce which is
actually not as concerned with their
working conditions as other workforces
because of the weird culture that we
have you know that starts in
architecture school just like oh no it's
it's fine I stayed too
last night was great but actually
surprisingly a union could actually be a
mechanism to say yeah I did stay till 12
actually to do a really shitty project I
don't want to do anymore because it's
destroying that part of town so actually
it's it's not unprecedented but it's
it's always a very uphill idea of I have
a story about that kind of the ways I
was asked in a job interview well that
wasn't really asked yeah it was a
question but he was the the interviewers
like I see a lot of social justice in
your work and we have a project in like
Saudi so I don't know like I don't know
how you would react to that are you
gonna try and boycott it internally like
this or something and I was just like no
if you give me money I'll just and then
obviously I didn't get the dog but like
I'm not doing that Saudi thing but yeah
that is a reality that we live in
because the the the practice was like
I'm sorry but they commissioned this and
we can't refuse the money and yeah we
know that it's probably not great but
we're still do we still have to do it
anyway because we've no choice one of
the one of the problems that unions have
more than anything is a is a
concentration on the financial you know
the strikes are always about tensions
and things like this
unions have got to focus on processes
and relationships rather than just money
that's the bottom line
maybe I'll just punch aside I mean I
think that we all need to be more vocal
as employees because I think that's the
staying silence is a large part of the
problem that we're happiest designers to
be vocal about the things which maybe
were trained to be vocal about but I
think the many many of the things in the
background project surrounds the flow of
materials or the treatment of workers I
think that is our concern shared by many
of our friends and colleagues I think
also shared by clients I think we lose
the let's say the history of what we do
being professionals our advising our
clients and I think that's where every
of the opportunity I think we should
speak up that's not necessary of course
it's not always an easy thing to do but
I've everybody in their work now but
also you know previous generations have
their red lines and obviously some
things that we won't do and we'll do
others are the other times when I think
we can bridge quite hard without
breaking things
it's also a nice project that I have in
mind I have been in Japan for the 2011
Tohoku earthquake there was I didn't had
an impressive and powerful impact on the
nation so was not starting from the
employees actually the architects who
owned the frames because they actually
have the power so I think as much as we
can if we have any kind of power we
should try to to unify like to
collaborate together so those architects
were like Toyo Ito Digimon Utley Baba o
and others and they collaborate together
without any no one was funding it but
they saw a potential of actually reading
in a profession of architecture that's
why they engage with the project so
divine get any money out of it but they
kind of stopped potential for learning
more for themselves I started doing
gauge with the community and in fact a
few projects around and to you it was
open has opened a full project and a
school there were some those community
regeneration projects and it's quite a
meeting I think the work that they are
doing so it's like to have them in mind
as kind of a possibility though so
rather we we can collaborate together
non from really like from the rebellion
point of view but with a collaboration
with with with the other things okay
well I think we'll leave it there and
but thank you very much for your
participation
come well for the Grammy Foundation we
are planning a series of seminars in the
next term where people from Neff and
Britain from Commonwealth will be coming
back here to DAA
to explain in more detail some of the
policies there are designing some of the
ideas they just explain briefly and
hopefully we can also organize a
workshop in the in the future where we
can actually put some hands-on into some
of these ideas and see how what could be
the outcomes of this know today was
meant to be more an introduction to
green you deal in to see ways in which
we can understand the work they're
producing and how it is linked to to to
what we do so thank you very much
[Applause]
