okay so maybe I can start can you hear
me
yeah so I mean I'm Yvonne Lopez mono era
under on yato we are going to do two
separate presentations that are actually
sharing one common point and it's the
architecture of the epidemics and
especially how architecture was shaping
hiv/aids first in the 80s and then
afterwards actually in the 1960s 50s 60s
we took very different geographies so
maybe I will I will start and you have
to think that it's a v8 happen not only
in the human bodies let's say but also
in some of the architectures were the
hiv/aids was taking form in a way or
taking shape and there were like very
specific places especially New York
where one of the first locations of
where hiv/aids was located in the early
eighties when this epidemic was actually
faced a lot of contact station from very
specific kind of groups that were formed
in a very specific kind of architecture
that is what I call this culture and is
the architecture of nightclubs so in
1978 New York was in crisis the large
factories which at one time form part of
the landscape of Manhattan lay abandoned
the scenery was desolate a scary place
yet suggestive to live in the new your
Daily News published its infamous cover
with the sentence drop dead a phrase
attributed to President Gerald Ford who
he declared the hit Beddoe any bill
calling for a federal bail out of New
York City and who instead proposed
legislation that could make it easier
for the city to go into bankruptcy
yet the city's crisis also had an
unexpected effect
it allowed spaces where
music architecture politics an art
mingle and emerge urban decay provoke a
drop in rents and gave an opportunity
for those linked to the music design
architecture and art scenes to inhabit
the large spaces of lower Manhattan with
minimal rains as we can see for example
in the famous photographs of Thomas
truth in Soho in New York the urban
environment of New York during this time
was materialized as a stage that came to
be known as Soho Tribeca an alphabet
city
well theatrical and living on delivery
space merge an enigmatic psychodramas
were enacted in the streets below 14th
Street New York was an announcer Ettore
known as the wasteland space there was
abundant and relatively cheap given the
availability of former industrial spaces
which became the loft movement for
living producing and exhibiting from
their very beginning all of these
actions converge in a continuous
performance where daily life was
considered a prolongation of artistic
intentions and vice-versa
these new spaces included The Electric
Circus where the Velvet Underground
stage of evolution 80 Wooster Street
were richer Foreman gave his first
performances of ontological historic
theater the house of jack smith we
baptize the plaster foundation of
atlantis an incubator for the majority
of films by Smith and others like from
chum loom and the components of cinema
grotesque the Mudd Club converted into a
meeting point where performances gave
way to concerts or the Palladium a place
that came to be to mark the end of an
era
these were joined by the well-known cv
g'v max kansas city''s the barrios
factory spaces of Andy Warhol where the
cold world could be a star as well as a
multitude of loft spaces units and rooms
hired for creative ends these sites were
host to different kinds of happenings
and events that blur disciplinary
boundaries and identities between gig
and performance theater and exhibition
space and between artists performers
spectators and activists amongst them
certain aesthetic components based on
the provisional or recycling or the
unfinished we're repeating elements
indicative of the haphazard and
temporary nature of the spaces that
house them this was a game-changing
situation in architecture and design as
Nancy food explained in her revelatory
1976 article the apotheosis of the
crummy space these places were not only
important because of the redefine beauty
found in their industrial decay pitted
floors crumbling plaster exposed pipes
emboss tin ceilings but also because of
the freedom they gave one to interact
with a narrative embedded in
architecture for example here we could
see what it was
MoMA ps1 or what it is going to be MoMA
ps1 amidst this landscape night clubs
and discos became the epicenter of an
architectural revolution this is a map
that I contributed for the batura museum
exhibition a night fever'
on the design of Muhammad is nightclubs
and you can see that most of them were
in the lower part of Manhattan or at
least in below Central Park they
included the Palladium a dance club
designed by Arata Isozaki in new york
and described as an urban apocalypse in
keeping with its cities decayed status
located on 14th Street the building's
history as a movie palace concert hall
and Club is lengthy dating back to 1926
when the structure was built as a movie
theater its incarnation as a nightclub
lasted from 1985 to 1997 a short time
for architecture but a good life for
nightclubs in that time the Palladium
came to define an epoch it
tane shape and propagated a very
specific architecture one that I call
discotheque sure the architecture of the
disco understanding the architecture of
these nightclubs as more than just a
spatial configurations but as the
creation of an event that enacts the
politics and social constructions of the
period relating to architecture and
urban planning discotheque sure is a
continuous performance and a collection
of assemblages that renders visibility
in the construction of bodies
technologies media and environmental
ideas in the interaction between
designers and citizens DJs and dancers
technologies and regulations
architecture plays a fundamental part
The Ballad iam circuit section shows
that what happen in New York's
nightclubs had a series of wide-ranging
ramifications throughout the city that
proliferated in all directions and
generated instability emancipation and
dissidents in the street homes Town Hall
and governmental decisions the Palladium
started life as the Academy of Music a
movie theatre designed by William freed
located in front of an opera house with
the same name like many other cinemas at
that time its architecture resembled the
balls arced over houses of the 19th
century frescoes a model a moldings
decorated the balls and domes of the
main room supported by rows of
Corinthian columns from the beginning it
was considered a prime example of the
cinematic spaces created in New York in
the 20s and 30s where the powerful
combination of architectural an
electrical control over sound an image
represented a culmination of the modern
soundscape an architectural artefact
were space sound a light atlantean were
unified this idea continued even after
the building's Transfiguration into
other uses the building operated as a
movie theater and in the early seventies
beginning in the 60s the theater was
also used as a rock concert venue were
bands like The Beatles the Rolling
Stones blondie and The Clash perform
here you can see Brian Jones from the
Rolling Stones performing there are many
different tickets or of course in the
entrance the theater world Christ then
as the Palladium on September 18th 1976
with a live radio broadcast by the band
in the early 80s the building was bought
by Steve Rubell and Schrager with the
intention of turning it into a club
rubble and shredder
were two former college friends a
restaurateur and a lawyer respectively
and they became Club promoters most
famously as the owners and operators of
a studio 54 an adventure that lasted for
20 wild months at Studio 54 they record
the idea of having a nightclub inside of
a theater an extremely powerful image
that related to the cheap and abundant
spaces available in the post and post
inertialess serie the theatrical context
with the Rubell and Schrager believe
that nightclubs offer a certain kind of
atmosphere or sonography an arena for a
new community to perform the dancers who
came night after night to the club in
this custom clubs everything is a stage
there are no distinctions between the DJ
and the public interaction through the
steps and the music ask him for more
rhythm and having it in response go
together construct an agent the dancer
who agglutinated these conceptions in
their body in his/her or their bodies if
the dancer was a main star the velvet
rope was their new york its actual
device during studio 54 opening Rubell
and Schrager decided for the first time
to install a velvet rope an
architectural device that created
expectation and attracted a new kind of
people who waited to enter the club will
be in photograph and stock by a curious
crowd
the Rope perfectly symbolized the Bennis
exclusionary door policy Bianca Jagger
Brooke Shields being a yellow
celebrating her birthday in white horse
inside the studio 54 Brooke Shields
halston Liza Minnelli and Andy Warhol
cute together with other dancers and
curious people all tried him to get
inside and not all succeeding for
example it was very famous that Frank
Sinatra tried to get in but he was not
cool enough to get into the club all in
the glare of the flashes of
photographers ready to capture a moment
and then publish it in a magazine or a
newspaper there were other attractions
for the assembled media a studio 54 and
then the Palladium challenged the morals
of the time with their widely publicized
sex scenes in VIP spaces and on the
dance floor as well as the drug Jews
that was experienced inside the chemical
regime tested here was part of the
atmosphere as nicotiana a DJ at the
gallery and in studio 54 confess Douglas
crimp remember that without drugs
disco can be fun but only just fun
cocaine and amphetamines were part of
the everyday cocktail at studio 54 and
the Palladium increasing the body's
temperature in concert with the dancing
which heated the environment in turn of
course the pet of studio 54 that was
Kangin in the dancefloor was this moon
is not in full spoon of magic this is
why most of the outfits born there were
summery even during the winter tank tops
for birches and sweaty bodies abounded
in every picture of studio 54 and the
Palladium witnesses claimed that the air
conditioning and refrigeration systems
were not used often and maybe they were
right less than a year and half after
studio 54 opening the FBI discovered
garbage box stuffed with $800,000 in
cash hidden in the ceilings and
air-conditioning systems in the basement
Steve Rubell
onion swagger closest studio 54 I'm
going to prison for tax evasion spending
15 months at a minimum security prison
in Montgomery Alabama here is Reich on
his lawyer and that it is going to
become Donald Trump's lawyer and the
labor release on the morning of January
30th in 1981 after their release they
decided to create a new nightclub the
Palladium
according to reach our mayor after the
pair were released from prison nobody in
New York wanted to work for them which
may have been one reason first rather
and Rubel to commissioned an architect
from a country as far as far away as
Japan but this was not the only reason
of course of Harry Sasaki it could seem
that the Japanese architect was an
obvious choice a shredder wanted to be
part of the art world he said artists
are the rock stars of the 80's and he
Sasaki had recently been appointed
architect of the new Museum of
Contemporary Art in Los Angeles this art
is famous silk screens for for the
competition which followed previous
commissions for museums like the Museum
of Modern Art in goombah in 1974 for
this latter building he proposed a
strategy that he later adapted to the
Palladium a forum that is a conceptual
statement about the museum as buried and
frame using a 12 meter cube as a
metaphorical form to express a frame
it's a sake turn the museum into a stage
and a container for displaying and
insulating our world this grid of cubes
inspired by Sol lab it became the
central element in the palladiums
transformation although largely absent
from writing Sonny Sasaki the Palladium
was one of his most significant projects
a laboratory for some of his most
significant ideas specifically those
related to the creation of a
technological environment a space that
could gather together different ranges
of technologies and the exhibition space
in Sasaki was first known of course as
an architect related to the gap
his metabolism or look he always claimed
even nowadays that he was not part of
that movement this movement in its
manifesto palace in 1916 proposed the
production of buildings and cities as
analogous to natural cycles of growth
decay a regeneration inhaling the
constant replacement of parts they said
we regard human society as a vital
process a continuous development from
Adam to nebula for ISA sake
the lack of irony in some of the
metabolized projects was his reason for
filling separate from the both men he
was more closely aligned with artistic
groups like the Japanese neo Dadaists
but although he Sasaki rejected his
inclusion in the metabolism ou've meant
he was part of its million especially
during his years working at the office
of camphor Tonga during the 60s in 1970
Tonga asked is osaki to design an
intervention for the festival Plaza in
the International Exhibition Osaka 70
conceived of as an international event
to celebrate Japan's rapid economic
growth during the previous decade it
Sasaki decided to create a robot
activated cybernetic environment lights
and smoke and bubbles pour forth from
large tubes on its sides according to
Paul's instructions this is an and
cymbidium that Sasaki gave it to me I
think that it was like really fantastic
because even though it was like this
kind of futuristic idea of technology
actually they didn't develop the
technology necessary to move all of
these elements so it was full of people
that were like step by step moving it a
mobile subconscious station activated
light sound and trolley equipment this
idea was foundational in the design of
the Palladium at least in its earliest
sketches especially in the configuration
of a central element that ultimately was
not produced a gigantic chandelier
three times the size of a human being
that was to hang in the middle of the
dance floor
if it's a circus robot could be seen as
the optimistic face of technology a
celebratory cyber representation of the
economic growth of post-war Japan then
an earlier work work of his the electric
labyrinth and the 14th Milano tree an
ally could be interpreted as the dark
side of the same phenomenon he described
his intervention in the following terms
my project his light projection sound
music to involve the visitor in a
technologically created environment in
the display goes figures from the Edo
period of Japanese history overlap with
the Royal ruins of Hiroshima and the
destruction of the city of the future in
what amounted to a criticism of modern
urban planning for doing no more than
painting Rosi utopian pictures this
project and its description shows that
he Sasaki was never part of the
metabolised optimistic point of view on
technology he was instead always a
skeptical of the Ridgid opium for his
sake the dark side of technology was
central to the configuration of the
palladiums architecture in this specific
project there was neither an embrace nor
a rejection of Technology rather
technology was imagined as a space of
possibilities with this background and
these two fields of experimentation the
ideas and Technology on art spaces the
Palladium transformation ability did a
hybrid space for testing the
possibilities of an environment for the
Palladium is Sasaki decided to intervene
only in the interior from the outside
one could never guess the extent of the
transformation achieved within yeah it's
a circus addition is itself an enormous
estate said that has move out of the
traditional confines of the stage to
modulate and animate the existing
ornament as well as the undulating
dancers and spectators in the auditorium
proper
the new high-tech double staircase cause
floor is twenty four hundred thousand
round lights setting glass blocks is
wondrous to behold it was said during
the the opening at 8:00 p.m. on May 14
1985 security men in coats and ties
admitted the first people through the
bell bathrobes in front of the Palladium
a silver cubic framework rising 65 feet
was dropping to the crumbling shell of
the theater at its large level this
framework was described by a Sasaki in
the following terms making
multi-dimensional spaces from concrete
objects necessitates basic lines and
compositional units to serve as minimal
clothes the device that I ultimately hit
on was the use of a grid composed of
homogeneous limitless square
compartments to cover exterior surfaces
my entire visible wall he told me was to
be covered with this grid of equal
squares the lighting system was integral
to the architecture it was designed by
fishermen and stone that are going to
design for example the can ESP Center or
the wall Trade Center Memorial and this
film also designed the dance floor
concept which was framed by 225 scream
video arrays on which artists like Nam
June Paik or Laurie Anderson show video
works although now because these were
the first ever to be conceived and build
fishermen stone work very closely with
the Sasaki they rented one room in the
New York office to the Japanese
architect in order to have a permanent
location in the city where he could is
Osaka steam could work a system of bar
lights was installed in the grid which
produced 60 color tones in one quarter
of a second the sound system produced by
Richard long associates was described as
a unique Beast the relationship between
sound and lighting system in the
creation of new kind of architecture the
disco texture can be traced back to the
60s when
Electric Circus open its doors this is a
drawing by Ingrid superstar of The
Electric Circus the dome and you can see
of course Andy Warhol John Kane rib that
are also there in the stars of The
Electric Circus located in sir Marx
place in New York the former Polish
national home was turning to the dome
restaurant and in 1966 was sublet by
Andy Warhol and Paul Morris a with the
idea of turning it into a nightclub the
dome to host the performance
performances of the exploding plastic
inevitable what it is going to be known
as The Velvet Underground eventually
were hung himself function as the
architect under it was his early work of
architecture under the name and the
architect trademark but only after our
work on the dielectric circles become
the laboratory for this collection
it was redesigned by Surma jeff and i
smart as a new multi-sensory
multi-sensory Benny with light and sound
performances as materials to create
create a semi-solid environment
Life magazine called the circus a mind
bender that combines life and art in a
way that has never been done before
the medium the message and the audience
are all in the same body just colliding
in just colonnade audience participation
is a flagrant understatement
quote this discotheque sure became so
important that when a series of Italian
architects and designers like far reach
a few me came to the United States with
the idea of a study in Franklin right an
American organization they changed their
minds and decided to dedicate their
thesis project at the University of
Florence to the piper or disco which
launched the careers of Pedro de Rossi
and Alessandro Paulie and the members of
super cool super studio are kazoom of
course all of their first projects were
nightclubs and you could see here some
of the Piper's by Peter de Rossi with
the specific equipment maybe Bruno
Manari
Torino and in Rome
if the disco was this place to gather
together different ideas of median space
then the art scene could not be left
behind for the Palladium a swagger and
ruble Henryville saller the former
curator of 20th century art at the
Metropolitan Museum of New York to
create the artwork for this space it's
just like we remembered that the
galleries tonisha Francie was involved
in the selection of artists like Keith
Haring who painted a mural for the dance
floor to other minerals by basket were
also installed Kenny Scharf decorated
the bathroom with his trademark graffiti
and stuff animal world the bathrooms
were absolutely wild of course and there
were also frescoes by Francesco Clemente
uncomplete is a key with Clemente here
as well as complimentary drink tickets
be signed by Andy Warhol himself during
the time that the Palladium operated as
a nightclub a shredder Andrew bell
program continues exhibitions and events
including a launch party for the opening
of the war collective worker basket
exhibition at Leo Castelli gallery in
1985 and you can see some of the of
course some of the Flyers that were this
time from Keith Haring to Barbara Kruger
too many different artists Issa sake was
not the only designer of the Palladium
environment s architectural record
pointed out perhaps it is inevitable
that Japanese targeted Arata Isozaki
will be credited as the author of the
Palladium yet to discount the other
names in the lengthy credits is to do a
disservice to reality the Palladium is
the product of a true multidisciplinary
collaboration the project was also
incomplete with it without its
inhabitants a community of cyber dancers
were the architecture the light and
sound system and the artworks were an
extension of their bodies this is one of
the Boggan prepare parties of the
palladium this synthesis was in his
Osakis mind from the beginning he said
in a disco technologies pour over the
whole body of a person it is as if
hidden desire is a bulk rather it would
be better to say that a shower of
technologies give birth to successive
desires it offers a possibility of a
theophany rebuild in banality of daily
life involved the use of technology here
was something that went beyond the world
temper environment alongside the
controllable aspects of humidity
temperature light and sound the effect
of drug Jews and other chemical regimes
music and interaction with dancing
bodies together built a situation that
was not tempered but was also not
perceived as natural the Palladium was
inhabited by narratives art architecture
technologies but ultimately also dancers
on the dance floor even though the
Palladium was far from being radical in
the politics of its investors the
community of dancers that populated
discotheque chairs in New York
promoted a kind of activism embodied in
their own performativity
at a time when men only spaces for
dancing were still illegal and New York
legislation required clubs to have at
least one woman for every three men the
dance floor was a highly contested
contested space it's making heritance
were mostly lgbtqia+ communities blacks
Latinos and women there were communities
that were struggling to develop forms of
resistance an empowerment effective in
making themselves visible in order to
achieve representation in the US
democracy of the Nixon years and decades
later and the Reagan administration as a
result of this process a collective
political intelligence was developed one
that could later be momentos in the
generation of coalition's by which these
communities responded to the emergence
of a crisis like its ABA
during the mid-1980s for example the
first meetings of gay men's health
crisis were called in the Paradise
Garage that ability did a very specific
party like April showers or the many
parties that are going generally to be
held here were atop gram fury and some
other activist groups are going to
spread information and some even
treatments or possibilities to face the
epidemic in the nitrous in the dance
floors themselves during the Bolivians
existence parties were often dedicated
to fundraising for this causes the art a
party
promoted by act up or March 26 in 1970
in 1986 at which artworks by Cindy
Sherman and I will share were option or
they grab gay pride balls like the one
thrown by a stiff corn in 1986 these
inhabitants were as important as the
architecture in the configuration of the
Palladium as a blues you highlighted at
the time they said the people who they
were who they work with and what they
were and not the architecture has
dominated the press to date the article
continuously described in the Palladium
as an organism of hedonistic pleasures
whose heart and brain are the building
center this organism was an event where
the architecture itself was performed in
this context it was not so odd that the
palladiums performative architecture
it's this code structure disappear when
it's Malia did when many of its dancers
who come to hiv/aids and the advances of
gentrification in New York City during
the late eighties
without its dancers the Palladium was
just a space not a tisket section in
1997 the Palladium was bought by New
York University the building was
demolished and replaced by a student
dormitory on a gym it Sasaki predicted
that the Palladium and all architecture
would meet this faith he said space
equal darkness time
nation and matter or architecture and
cities equals ruin and ashes thank you
[Applause]
wonderful
so from the Palladium and city of 54 we
have to take a pretty big step back in
time and in space even just really
suggested how the star like what is the
dark end of the story right so we all
know that from the nineteen eighties the
hiv/aids epidemic really starts to hit
New York and the rest of the US and in
particular the communities of people
that were the ones who most ardently
were making use of such architectures
and still today I think it might be
tempting not to think that the history
of hiv/aids begins and ends in the
nightclubs in New York after all this
particular geography as Ivana's like
powerfully like suggested has dominated
the narrative of the disease for for so
long
right but a number of recent
developments in the medical sciences
demand that we take some step backs to D
actually to the end of the 19th century
so almost 100 years before so around the
1880s the global demand for natural
rubber had a sudden a percent in spiked
as a consequence of the invention of the
vulcanized tire the Congo Free State was
the largest colony in sub-saharan Africa
and it had been set up in 1885 just on
the back of the Berlin conference as a
personal property of King Leopold ii of
belgium the Congo Free State was now the
largest source of plant coal and all
fire variances which is the wild rubber
vine that abounds in the Central African
rainforest but he cannot be planted in
captivity so in 1891 an active
King declared all the land that was not
seen as inhabited or cultivated in
European eyes the property of the crown
once enclosed the land was distributed
to a number of concessionary companies
controlled by European investors almost
overnight a region 100 times the size of
Belgium was turned into an open-air
harvesting ground operated with the
enslaved labor of the indigenous
population in the 20 years of the
Congress state up to ten million
Africans are thought to have died in the
violence starvation and diseases that
ensued the colonial quest for rubber and
we will never know of course the right
numbers because there were no written
records and whatever records that
Belgium had were destroyed as soon as
the Congo Free State became a formal
colony controlled by the government so
it is in this place at this time that we
actually have to look for the origins of
HIV as far as it might seem from the
nineteen eighties in New York so a virus
called the simian limited
immunodeficiency virus or SIV begins
infecting humans at a rate high enough
for the initial epidemic to develop
so using phylogenetic dating which is a
technique that looks at the evolution of
the DNA scientists have recently been
able to establish that SIV was
transmitted from chimpanzees to humans
between 1900 and 1915 we don't know
exactly how this happened and there's
not really much point in trying to
figure it out but it is thought that the
ecological turmoil that ensued the quest
for rubber and sort of I completely like
upset and destruction of existing
networks of existing within the tropical
forests have altered the equilibrium and
sort of like relation collage occur
relationships that are taking place
between Apes and humans from the forests
of Southwest Cameroon where the first
transmission has been located the first
transmission in
and we really talked about talking about
a single event you know scientists have
been able to point down like to one it
was enough for one successful virus in
other words right to actually be tossed
on for a whole epidemic pandemic to
develop so from the forests of Southwest
Cameroon the virus followed the newly
open trade routes down the Congo River
tributaries it landed in the early 1920s
in léopoldville the capital of the
colonial state which had been founded as
a trading post by the English explorer
Harry Morton Stanley in léopoldville the
virus from the habitat suitable to its
survival a large and dense permanent
settlement inconscious with the smaller
mobile the colonial agglomerations and
it found a highly unbalanced population
composed of European settlers and
African workers with widespread rates of
sex work and high rates of sexually
transmitted diseases among both groups
so both among the African workers and
the European settlers it is crucial to
not here of course that both sex work
and STDs were completely absent from
central Africa before the colonial
period so they were introduced together
with civilization strikingly Jean Sousa
a Portuguese microbiologist that has
reconstructed the story has found that
the beginning of the HIV epidemic in
Kinshasa which was dated to have been
taken place between 1919 and 1930
coincides with a spike of syphilis cases
which is visible in colonial in colonial
records so it is in this way that the
virus of course undetected and
undetectable started to reproduce and to
slowly mutate and adapt to the human
body
after in the Belgian Congo became
independent in 1960 the virus was
transported across the Atlantic by
heightened functionaries that were sent
by the UN to replace Belgian ones and
from there let's say the current
pandemic begins but let's take a step
back actually and look closely at the
architecture of
léopoldville in the crucial years and
the 1920s because the city was planned
so that European dwellings would be
located close to the river which is up
in the drawing with the workers comes
farther inland in what came to be called
the sitting region you can see like very
clearly the difference in urban forms
between the European neighborhood which
is this kind of like Parisian or
aspiring to be Parisian and set of
Boulevard and place and squares and the
gridded street plan of the indigenous
parts of the city so as the number of
workers started to grow people who were
migrating from the forest it was they
are completely depleted Europeans became
more explicitly concerned with the
management of the African population so
after 1915 what had started out as camps
were replaced by a gridded Street plans
and in 1923 European concessionary
companies were required to build new
houses for the workers and you see how
much the city in design starts to expell
quickly it grows so despite the fact
that native so-called native areas were
deliberately kept semi-rural by the
colonizers to distinguish them from the
more urban and modern european quarters
the new homes were presented as the
civilized and benevolent alternative to
traditional African dwellings so this is
a set of photographs that was prepared
actually by the Belgian authorities to
be shown at an exhibition in the 1950s
to show how indeed benevolent they had
been in providing new homes so John
Souza the scientist has found out that
the main site for casual sexual
encounters in lapa
veal was precisely the Sun Newt and here
we have to remind of whatever saying
before that somehow sex work is thought
to have been the main fact in the spread
of the disease and I would like to
stress that we are talking of likely
heterosexual sex work so most of the
sexual encounters were taking place in
the neutral zone a strip of empty land
that was carved out for ionic purposes
between the European quarters and the
city in the journal which you can see
here on a map of City at the time like
just at the right to the right side it
is marked explicitly as neutral zone
reflecting the European colonial
discourse that disguised dispositive
racial segregation under the covers
sanitary measures in October 1928 the
Governor General of the Belgian Congo
had written to the Minister of colonies
recommending the implementation of the
neutral zone to separate the black and
the whites
this was an urban strategy that had been
experimented with success in the point
of view of the European planners in
French and German colonial cities and
was now being applied to the Belgian
colonies as well so having rapidly
become a no-man's land the neutral zone
which was the very urban device designed
to protect the health of Europeans was
likely decides that more than any other
in the city permitted the ongoing
transmission of HIV and it sublet types
adaptation to the human body and
crucially its survival until today so
the preceding reconstruction is based on
the past ten years of biomechanical and
genetic research as well as the opening
of the colonial archive which enable to
excavate and archaeology of the virus
and of course to give us a completely
different awareness of what the disease
what hiv/aids is yet the language of
science alone is not enough to excavate
the implications of the facts that it
exposes because we're position in the
origins of AIDS at the site of one of
the worst instances of colonial violence
demands that we ask for example whether
epidemics are natural or whether they
are in fact human-made
or colonial made so is a virus that
mutated because of a human actual
natural or artificial of course the
global circulation of pathogens how to
be reframed and in terms other than a
generic threat that comes with
contemporary travel as is often the case
in media representations of epidemics if
you think about the idea that people who
move bring disease right
then the 1885 Berlin conference
explicitly advocated the principle of
free trade this is something that is
often forgotten but the idea of like
free trade capitalist capitalist
capitalism was really at the heart of
the of the conference as much as borders
were European nations that to be able to
move commodities around Africa as they
pleased
including ranbir so the Congo Free State
is then the model of an entire territory
there was reconfigure solely for for the
extraction of natural resources and
they're channeling to Europe it is the
case that Imperial networks laid out in
the 18th and 19th centuries combined
with the extensive settlement and
commodification of wild environments
were taken advantage of by previously
localized microbes which are now free to
circulate around the globe so turning
back to architecture we also need to ask
what are the western city which is
always assumed to be the normal form of
urbanization and of living together was
really a way of bringing civilization to
the rest of the world or whether in fact
it was a spatial model that might work
in the so-called temperate environments
but turned out to be a powerful
epidemiological condenser when
translated to different ecologies
because far from being a mark of
primitivism the sparse pre-colonial
villages that were reproduced endlessly
in the imaginary of the late colonial
period where in fact the optimal built
form for african society that African
societies developed to live in a natural
environment as rich in microbial
wildlife as the African rainforest is
because we have to imagine that
biodiversity of the rainforest doesn't
only apply to be
animals it all supplies to
microorganisms so limiting settlement
side and population density in such
context was a highly effective way of
avoiding the spread of infections by
contrast the European colonial city can
be conceived as an ally in ecology which
amplified the pathogens that had been
unleashed in the forests and yet the
recent discovered that HIV originated in
sub-saharan Africa has contributed to
furthering the long entrenched
representation of the continent as a
dark savage place and the equally
entrenched representation of infectious
diseases as something that belongs
solely to the global south and that
might be here just by mistake even in
the most recent accounts of the history
of AIDS and I really like browsed a lot
of them both in the popular in the
medical literature the colonial context
is rarely if ever mentioned relegate in
the Empire to an asterisk as Cristina
sharp so powerfully as put it the
history of HIV suggests that we can then
think of an infrastructural unconscious
so infrastructure not only encompasses
as material structures of circulation
but also the structures of oppression
and exploitation the relationship across
different species and the macroscopic as
well as the macroscopic at the same time
as colonial scientists were discovering
the existence of bacterias and viruses
and as European planners were concerned
with the problem of sanitizing and
cleaning up the city preventing the
circulation of avoid unwanted matter and
people other types of matter started to
circulate around the world like other
epidemics HIV which is still so
painfully with us today exposes I think
the rationality of the roots of the
promise of Western modernity to bring
order to the rest of the world I think
we can finish it
[Applause]
if there are questions now we are happy
to take them or maybe him to discuss
more informally yeah later
yeah yeah absolutely and I think there's
like there's of course a like a long
history and along awareness of of this
process and smallpox blankets in North
America also I think the the whole like
what is being called the Columbian
Exchange No
yeah so I think that's I think it's
really like stimulating like to think of
of these exactly like these be
directionality I think of disease now so
so there is an always acting to keep
firm is important to maybe a now wait
ones were the question is to like keep
the ecological dimension of the epidemic
in the picture and also you may be
imagining that like certain viruses that
were brought to the Americas and
decimated the population actually were
developed in the in the ecosystem of the
European sitting of the overcrowded
European city and again so somehow out
the city always returns in the story now
so in this case it's just the city again
attacked as I sort of like developer
like sort of incubator of viruses I mean
it's not quite an answer but is just
like some ways exactly like to to begin
to think of that I would say
I think that for us it was very
important to try just like to think
tv8 through unexpected perspectives
related to architecture for us it was
very importantly on the one hand to
explain it especially these the impact
of colonialism on colonial development
at some point in Congo but for me it was
also very important how to trace back
some of the architectures that were
actually building up some of the
activism in the 1980s in New York that
are not very common to be told in this
literature dedicated to hiv/aids
so both what I'm trying to do I think is
to show some of these hidden first
stories related to hiv/aids but also not
how it was shaping how it was affecting
the series but how the cities at the
same time or the architecture of the
cities sort of a fabric
urban environment were shaping the
epidemics and themselves and the
understand is that we could carve
specifically in this case it's a v8
meaning maybe just wad to that I mean at
the point of our work now which we are
very much trying to develop together now
is that if you take an epidemic such as
HIV you can see that the same the same
kind of entity right connects to
incredibly distant geographies Dean
right
so it's both in the clubs of New York
and in the forests of Central Africa and
for us it's an incredibly like
stimulating way of thinking about like a
whole set of questions on modernity in
structure and what like to rethink all
this question learn to writing subvert
on certain assumptions about
architecture as being somehow existing
in a void No so I think you see how
actually mean that the whole point of
showing my part after Yvonne Zeno is
like to kind of zoom out of the picture
and and and and connect like a very
urban setting with like a much broader
ecology so which is I think something
that we very much like argue for my
question is really which is a project
yeah it's really interesting and the
configuration of the knife drops is
going to take place in the 60s and 70s
before that for example and it's with
the creation and specifically of the
figure of the DJ that before that there
was only like a playlist of hits people
just like have to listen to them but the
DJ started on interaction between the
dancers and the DJ himself or herself
that was playing certain kind of music
and try and just like to find a response
of these kind of cancers in this kind of
interaction suddenly the configuration
of the dance floor where the DJ is going
to be located and the technologies that
are surrounding them are going to gain
importance and momentum for architects
it's quite interesting and especially
during the sixties nightclubs are going
to be places where different social
realities classes
especially in places like New York also
different identities are going to mingle
at some point but what is interesting is
actually to see that this level of
interaction and this level of social
enthusiasm is going of course to gain
momentum in the in the 60s when some of
the architects are going to explore the
same in different parts of the
definition of the public space or the
definition of art institution or the
definition of what conversation in a
city could be let's say so it's very
interesting that for example even in the
firm palace Cedric price at the very
center of it there is a huge discussion
like almost for 20 years in his plans
and with the people that were working at
his office of where they could locate
the nightclub inside of the from palace
of the Italian architects is going to
happen the same at the same time because
it's a kind of architecture that it is
rejecting the idea for example of the
facade because as as you know like for
nightclubs or it is typical it's like
the design is in the interior is even a
kind of an unexpected architecture some
of the architects involve with it even
is a psyche at some point are going to
see the architecture of nightclubs as
something that it is not as respectable
in the traditions of architecture as
other kind of configurations and
especially with the eighties I mean we
have to think that one of the first
places were sabh was located by the
medical community or the places that are
going to blame for the spread of the
disease are going to be actually the the
nightclubs you could if Elmen dr. Corey
Feldman from NYU policy in 1981 there
was a bug that was coming from the pipes
out of the
nightclubs or that it was coming from
the poppers that were of course Jews in
the dance floor so at the same time this
idea of the night classes and space of
desire or as any space of
experimentation is going to die at some
point also during the late 80s and 90s
and of course the advances of
gentrification so I think that what I
was trying to do also is to make respond
respectable in a way the tradition of
the nightclubs are spaces for
experimentation actually for architects
and that are going to actually do to
have very good a big connection with
some of the other projects that they are
going to do eventually
[Music]
you're seeing a kind of disruption you
could argue that New York
actually potentially the spread of
what else might
yeah and I think that's a very good
point right because I think it's
precisely immigration but I think
precisely the idea of like a social
order that is in fact extremely fragile
right and extremely imbalance in all
sorts of ways of demographic in terms of
power of course relationships that that
of course makes this neutral zone
completely I think in the terminate
space of course a very tragic way as
well right
and they're in extremely violent way and
it kind of also hard to really just
understand what was going on in this
kind of size because it's not the kind
of thing that would be recorded in the
colonial archives so so to to kind of
like go back to it you know it's like
one has to like just look sideways
really and to like try to think how
these like forms of social organization
of like violent organization bodies I
think in space was recorded I think but
I think it's great for to actually like
think of of New York in a way yes this
kind of wasteland as well no nightclubs
themselves because I mean I think also
there is an excellent point in that
sense because these covers not respected
at all I mean maybe there is like some
nostalgia right now but it wasn't
respected at all in 1979 there is going
to be the disco demolition night in
Chicago there is going to be in this
babel baseball stadium with full of
thousands of people that were burning
disco albums wave claims like disco
socks
for example homophobic or racist as Lars
because of course if you think in the
main protagonist of disco music are
going to be the disco divas that are
also trying to propose other definitions
or women could think of course or
femininity or the idea even of a woman
think of for example in people like
Raytheon's
that was proposing even a kind of almost
posthuman in in that sense and they are
going to be very conscious about these
attacks they are going to be very
conscious also of the political
possibilities of it of course is not a
space of night class were not only a
space or of happiness
there were also species of segregation
and not all of them are going to perform
in the same way Paradise Garage is going
to be extremely open most of the stuff
for example where African American or
Africa Abyan or women but it's volunteer
for example said that it was impossible
to be a DJ the gallery because it was
like no there's no place for a woman DJ
so I think there is always like it's
always very very there were very
contested spaces let's say yeah I mean I
think the the length of gender and
especially in the politics of sexual
relations is actually a crucial lens I
think true looks throughout the history
the long history of of HIV of course
so from indeed their encounters in a
colonial city to this kind of encounters
[Music]
yeah of course the further irony would
be that condoms are hardly available in
Susana and Africa today or at least er
there of course the use is still like
very much impaired right so in so the
people keep dying off this is in the
place where the robber was like
harvested right so I mean I Sheila
member I was actually pointing this out
in relation to another epidemic of Ebola
I know in which people were dying
because there were no gloves in Liberia
which is the country that produces the
the most rather in the world or
something like that all the rappers of
course goes goes to Firestone in the
u.s. to make tires yeah I mean if there
are no more questions we can probably
just continue with a drink okay
oh yeah that was amazing actually at
some point because they were of course
upstairs and they were coming from
fluorines but frankly right and I'm not
gonna miss him and it was just like
absolutely by chance that they had a
common friend and they went to the Andy
Warhol's Factory and then it was his
place and they went to Canal Street
actually on to Bowery um both all of
these kind of lighting systems that gave
to Bruno Murari and started actually
some of the experimentation with them
and it was like what are we doing with
our lives whether we they design it like
museums in the gallery of fitzy in
Florence we should do actually some of
these nightclubs I was it was actually
quite quite interesting of course later
on is going to be like run domestic
revolution and some of the of the with
the new landscapes is already the new
domestic landscapes exhibition and some
of the other relationships we with Italy
that are going to be increased actually
and some things just like we design not
only with architecture especially
through the figure for example of
Barbara Darcy that is going to be in
charge of Bloomingdale's design
department is going to Commission for
example to by Elaine T and America
Staley and in a super a from Garrett who
do like some of the interiors of these
places and is going to be like this kind
of there is actually a claim and is also
like a kind of a brand for disco music
that is Italians to eat better
all my related to design yeah we should
leave it at that
