this is the last lecture of the series
on the face I should say before we start
that there will be a sort of final
lecture next week with a sort of
freestanding one which is thoughts on
this piece of furniture the lectern
everyone is very welcome to come but I
guess it's probably wise for people to
come early da a say it's making other
spaces in the building kind of to be
relayed but if you want a space in all
[Applause]
you should get here early
it's already to be very strange to be
not only ending the year series but to
it being that's it
I shall kind of hide a bit and try and
turn what in the lectures can be to be
turned into books however there will be
next year's next week's lecture I want
to conclude about the face by
drawing attention to the profound what
seems to be essential to the face is its
ambivalence
I mean ambivalence in that we use it as
the major site in somebody to kind of
investigate what they're thinking or
feeling or how to recognize them how to
in a sense know them how to love them
also how to hate them and I should be
stressing all afternoon this what you
might call the constitutive role that
ambivalence plays in the face as it does
really in human psyche and whatever I
mean let's remind ourselves that within
the psyche how can I put it
love and hate are very close it's
strange though when you go down the line
I mean I'm always amazed in an
architectural setting the continuing way
in which people talk about utopia
without realizing especially in
architecture utopia is has almost less
than a cigarette papers gap between
dystopia the two go together
they're part of the same condition and
we think we can separate things we often
think in opposition's
but for the human opposition is a very
rare condition altogether we are divided
and ambivalent one term may be
predominant that that doesn't mean is
not attached relative as Freud said very
late in his life love is strong but hate
is stronger because hate is older so
these are positions are usually kind of
groups out of each other if 8 is more
primordial it is above all because the
human being wherever possible
will always turn away from reality
reality and the human being don't really
go much together so the face I've
already tried to indicate some of them
the impossibilities of dealing with the
face that actually our grounds for
knowing what the other person is
thinking feeling even expressing is
always extremely provisional
indeed a certain pluralism by which I
really mean different is manifest in
people because they're experiencing a
third party in quite a different way you
know just think of the times someone
says oh he looked nice I was thinking of
it I don't mention it again I think here
last week when three candidates made
their pitch to be chairman and I thought
yet again having certainly people are
being presumably honest and sincere some
people would think one presentation was
good or bad and you thought I'm not on
the same planet as you my view was
entirely different and we'll have
experience of that and you should really
you know wonder what this difference is
now in the face the face concentrates
many of these and here the face is not
only the face in a human sense its
orders calls the the general face iation
of things we in addition to faces we
tend to elect other things as having a
face that's partly related to the
question of frontality but it's partly
a way of electing parts of objects to be
kind of somehow the thing you need to
read the thing you need to concentrate
on if you're to understand it the thing
now obviously philosophically there's a
certain contribution by dealers in
respect birds to the face and to face
iation it's one which she develops in
his work on cinema and I find the
argument quite elliptical I assume in
some sense in a very Parisian way that
his argument is a sort of unstated
critique of Lavina
that is to say manual Divina develops a
whole theory of really the face as
having a kind of priority in the realm
of ethics and that is to say the
encounter between two people is
essentially an encounter between their
faces but if we say the encounter
between two people we can summarize it
as a relation between their faces
and for Lebanon in his sort distinctive
way of arguing that really constitutes
the the moment of the birth of a certain
ethics in a sense II encounter with
another is the first moment when what
other people would call a community is
born here we don't have the normal
attributes of a community a certain
number of people who are thought to
share certain characteristics often and
increasingly complex lay in the field of
gender or ethnicity or coming from a
particular town or like in gardening at
some level these can all kind of produce
a community every NASA is not interested
in that so much as what this encounter
marked by the encounter between two
faces means it does
[Music]
for him involved like an ethical
dimension because with him an encounter
lies the beginning of responsibility
it's just central to the idea of
community though this is often neglected
is the idea of a dead the idea of
community makes no sense at all unless
you found it and identify it with a
certain debt you over to the community
indeed I'm not entirely persuaded as his
and I said you don't find it desperately
attractive one sees today one seems to
spend one's life trying to deny the dead
and get out of the community but that's
basically just my problem I don't find
the community a heartwarming term
anything communities are rather
oppressive and certainly reduce people's
intellectual capacity you have only to
walk into a community basically destroy
your brain away
[Music]
but I think in a sense we can take
dealers as giving a kind of report to
that though in a very very brilliant way
he does never kind of acknowledges it so
him the characteristics of a face is
like a surface in which extension has
given way to expression our kind
reinvent what he means by that I think a
lot of this comes from Bexon and it's
the idea that you know if traditionally
with animals we think of instinct as
leading automatically to a motor kind of
action an extension of the limbs or
whatever part of the body it might be
he's concerned with the special case of
where in a sense
there isn't really kind of room for
extension and in the place of extension
there grows expression as another order
I mean we could partly relate this back
to the arguments of chi-wah where when
instinct is abandoned in one way or
another where something ceases to be
like a stimulus and the consequence a
kind of gap opens up in which like what
you're going to do about a stimulus
isn't obvious you have a very crude
level to decide what to do your decision
will be based on like what your mind is
like what your mind thinks how your mind
symbolizes the significance of what's
happening but at the same time as
chi-wah says this gap contains a kind of
rather black kind of nightmare where
instinct was the decision to act comes
kind of shattered with like a terrible
fear a fear which you can see sometimes
and even see something of the transition
in our kind of immediate fear of certain
animals or like our response many of us
to snakes
we don't need longer have an instinctive
reaction reaction or many people don't
they have almost like a mental paralysis
of not knowing what to do but that is
attached to a kind of fear so almost
like somewhere the fear that we've lost
our instinct which in a sense we have
now four delays it's complicated because
he argues this in respect to his work on
cinema so in some sense I got a prize to
work away from cinema but he has a sense
that there is what the translation calls
and affection image I think this is
probably a very bad translation I mean I
think and I haven't looked at the
original but I suspect it just should be
effect image I mean that that's very
awkward but it's not affection in that
you know you smile weekly and whatever
it's not about kind of cuddly toys it's
the image of effect or the effect as an
image
I'll just give you a quotation the body
has lost its moment of extension and has
begun movement of expression a jinx that
mostly happens when you have a surface
which is somewhat reflective and can
reflect upon it
and it expresses by kind of micro
movements let's say of the face these
micro movements which are taken by
another party to be expressions I mean
they are somewhat but there is no
obvious kind of semiotic of expression
so we're always caught when we think
about expression as to whether the some
natural system of expression you know
that it's a sort of reaction instinctive
reaction at another level but we know
that can be extremely misleading
there is something ambivalent and even
when we get to know someone's face very
well even when we correlate like what
they seem to express with what they say
with what they do even when we think we
can use all this evidence to come to
fairly firm you know when he does that
it's because he feels whatever we never
said
just think to yourselves a number of
times that when you think you know what
someone's expressing in their face you
then say what do you feel I mean the
what do you feel is a question which in
a sense never has an ending so there's
this moment when in a kind of
constrained surface some sensation
touches on I think what Bergson calls a
nerve the reaction is not some
instinctual motor action but some micro
movement which we can call an expression
I think it's perhaps clearer when you
think about some of the examples of
facial take I think it's quite
interesting that in a mechanical clock
which has a face
we project expressions onto the clock
onto the clock face
we don't just how can I put it tell the
time from a mechanical clock I think we
experience that the clock has a relation
to time and so for example the position
of the hands on the clock face are
actually significant to us and if we to
do something at 12 noon and we look at
the clock
and it says 22 11 something about the
disposition of the hands is an
expression of something which is to do
that there's an hour and 25 minutes to
go I mean it's not it but that's it's
not a given in terms of measurement it's
given in terms of an effect you now I
may be wrong but I don't think that
happens with digital clocks I don't
think the digital clock manifests any
relation to time I mean it's what is the
time now but that is like pure
information I mean it's it's not it's
not configured as an expression I don't
myself look at the figure
on a digital clock trying to tell its
expression whereas I think I do
on a mechanical clock so I think I read
a mechanical clock something in the same
way as we read a face and we could say
the world is full of faces of things
which function according to what de
leurs calls face reality it was very
clearly it was very brilliantly
demonstrated in an artwork by Christian
mark which some of you may have seen
essentially the projects the video
project was to take an incredible number
of movies which have the time showing on
a clock or a watch and then to use like
a two-minute cut from the movie which
will show the time now the time will be
let's say 5 to 12 in the morning but the
project went on for more than 24 hours
and so you're always at a number of
different kind of intersections there's
on the one hand what time of day it is
whether it's night or day
and the second kind of intersection is
whether it's minutes and or hours so
there's like the series which is minutes
and the series which is hours now that
plots then an incredibly complicated
number of worlds into which you're
thrown it makes you realize how very
crowded events are at o'clock and at
half-past at o'clock it seems to be an
incredibly important moment at least in
movies for any military operation the
number of times you see in the marquee
its o clock and some gun fires you know
it's the start of something
half past doesn't seem to figure in the
military imagination how fast an
enormous number of people sit down
Jameel in restaurants
somehow everyone's reservation seems to
me ohhohh possible sentence was laid and
so you have these sort of coordinates of
minutes which have their own kind of
ecology and ours I mean you know a quiet
moment is about 10:00 to 4:00 in the
morning you know the movie that it shows
will have two people unable to sleep or
waking up and one saying what's the time
10:00 to 4:00 and liking nothing say you
begin to absorb time as I mean the whole
project is a device for demonstrating
certain propositions that's one way of
looking at it about the passage of time
and really the the difference between
the minutes which have their own economy
and the hours it's very kind of strange
in itself they're not ambulance but to
go back to the face the face is and
they've learned in order to say
something about this more about this
ambulance it's a bit like various forms
of like the idea of communication
which we see diagrammatically
represented in textbooks so there to be
communication there will be something
like you know something that sends the
message the message something that gets
his message and is able to like decode
it understand it not all the message is
the message because part of the theory
will always kind of have a notion of
noise so the problem is that systems
actual systems of communication be it a
bad line on a telephone you know but
they always come with some kind of
interference what they don't go on to
point out for obvious reasons because it
would destroy the diagram is the problem
we have as humans is we don't know
what's the message and what's the noise
we don't hate simply we don't know or we
don't know very well we know it's really
obvious forms of a bad line on a
telephone but we don't know when it's
like an intimate conversation between
two people
pushed if I had it much longer
pushed a lot further it wouldn't be
difficult to say there is no such thing
as communication or rather communication
never gets better than like something
unbelievably simple and so when we
approach the problem of communication we
sort of need to be aware that you never
really know what's being communicated
that's why they still use examples of
Morse code because that's fairly clear
right
there's the intimate conversations
between people online Morse code so
imagine as it were typically that to
human beings they have a way of
communicating but they have a way where
that communication still goes under a
large question mark and there are many
sorts of human events I don't know like
divorce where people conclude I never
understood him for a moment will
actually take hands literally in all
those years I mean I mean you didn't
listen or you didn't hear or you didn't
understand probably true
that's why I have a kind of deep
anti-humanist contempt for those things
which based on a kind of humanist
optimism about communication of all the
adverts I've ever loathed there was one
on TV about 15 years ago put out
obviously for obvious reasons by British
Telecom which said it's good to talk
well you would say that wouldn't you if
your telephone company but for all I
know maybe there are some benefits to
talking but that doesn't mean that it's
with someone else
go onto a distant mountain and talk just
don't do it all dime
so you know I put it as a kind of just a
question like as to whether there's ever
been any communication at least in the
terms of most dumb theories of
communication you know a speaks to be
communicates a message which the other
one understands that doesn't seem to me
a good basis for trying to describe what
happens if anything between human beings
it also kind of introduces a subordinate
proposition which is insofar as there is
not so much communication but like a
message it supposes what people might
call sense it actually emerges out of
nonsense again here we have to make a
very you know clear statement that sense
and nonsense are totally porous and
there isn't some logical where you can
try making logical distinctions between
sense and nonsense
there used to be an argument in English
philosophy when I was a student as to
whether the quotation from Heidegger -
nothing nothing's itself could be
regarded as having meaning or not it's
like a really dumb alternative I mean
what do you mean yes or no I mean
depends depends so the question of the
communication sort of props up I think
the ambivalence about the face the fact
is unlike well let's just say academic
theories and writing these are really
hopelessly simple-minded
I mean real occlusion real hiding of
what actually happens so whether you're
looking at the face or trying to speak
first of all you're not in control of
what you mean I mean people are always
saying sorry I didn't mean mad everyone
they've said something evidently removed
from their intention but you can't
explain intending to mean just by their
being a kind of fit between a
formulation and your intention anymore
ever if there's like a lack of
communication at that level there's also
an excess there's also an excess of
communication in that you may start by
thinking I just wish convey a simple
message but you can very far more than
that I mean in some sense you always
convey everything all at once I've
always found the administrative practice
of interviewing people for jobs fairly
pointless I think you know you wouldn't
know who your choice would be after
about one second and the rest is just
blah blah blah you know oh I see you did
your degree somewhere you know and then
he went somewhere else
yes I did
and it's not terribly revealing all of
you live at some point I'm not sure I
ever have properly written a CV I think
when anyone's written their CV they look
at it you know with strange amazement
and think but that's not me at all
that's got nothing to do with me the CV
is just a sort of very public kind of
inscription how you did it a level so we
returned to the ambulance
it's as if here the importance of the
face I mean it's obviously why painters
try to kind of engage in portraiture to
capture the expression it's very unclear
to me often what they're doing what they
thought what they think they're doing a
blunter case comes into nurses remarks
on Francis Bacon he says largely for a
number of pictures done in the 50s
Francis Bacon is not a portraitist he
paints the head makes a a total kind of
difference even like at the level of
genre between the head and the face
since they far as the face is what a
portraitist
normally kind of
goes for and in painting the head may
say much more about the sitter but of
course it doesn't matter how long I went
on we still in some sense treasure the
face we think it's the first object in a
body where we recognize now this
question of recognition I mean it's true
but it's remarkably malleable I mean I
want to point out the fact that when we
use the face as a point of recognition I
actually had to go to court Crown Court
last year because there was a criminal
case in which the defendant claimed that
he came to my Friday lectures
the plaintiff said he didn't I find
myself quite baffling they compelled to
attend st. Albans Crown Court I'd
received a ferocious email from the
judge because I'd rather kind of
offhandedly said I was rather busy could
I you know could I send him an account
and he wrote me a fierce email back
saying you are within my jurisdiction if
you don't if you don't turn up at nine
o'clock at court
I shall imprison you for contempt of
court I got there he was the most
charming and clever judge I've ever seen
though his hand whole demeanor sort of
came from central casting he had those
Halfmoon spectacles which were sort of
worn at the bottom I was in fact
although giving evidence in nine I was
the last witness so I explained to him
that I didn't know what I was doing
there and that I felt like a bit part in
Alice in Wonderland he looked over his
spectacles and said I have a large
speaking part but like you I often feel
like I'm in Alice in Wonderland
I was then asked by the the young lawyer
who was exceedingly irritating do you
know the defendant
I said no and so he pounced and said say
you've never seen him at your lectures
I said yes I have but you just told the
court that you didn't know him I don't
know him for some time
I was thinking during it I mean I cuz
I'd recognize his face in the court it
seemed quite like a lecture hall there
was perhaps more at stake when you
recognize someone it's normally in the
middle distance it's not you know there
is a certain point beyond which you
can't recognize someone and I once had
to wait three hours but someone had to
draw a railway station I was supposed to
meet them at ten o'clock but they
weren't on the train and I thought
there's nothing else I can do except
wait train after train came in as people
like at the back of the train started
walking up to the ticket barrier where I
was standing it was extraordinary how
many people you projected the person
onto you know are there years and then
you know they get about fifty yards
closer and you think that's not at all
now obviously you have to be quite close
thank to recognise but it also dovetails
with another thing that dealers and says
essentially what he calls let's call it
the effect image when you talk about
cinema is a close-up in fact when he
says the face he always means Eclipse up
put that even more strongly you know a
close-up is of the face whatever resolve
the kind of deal imitation of the veil
the idea that is this relatively flat
constraining limited surface
what Bergson you know calls the
inability to extend and therefore
compelling you to express is what's at
issue here it's really an account of the
close up but used in some sense well
beyond the academic constraints of like
studying cinema so you think of
close-ups elsewhere and it's really what
I'll kind of leave you is he extends the
fatality really to the question of the
icon I mean it's not only that the face
of Jesus is normally something of a
close-up it's that he says Jesus is the
face
I mean meaning it's not just that Jesus
like other humans has a face and you can
look at it very carefully
it's the way in which we treat John the
the the prayer the interrogation the not
knowing what we bring to that image kind
of famously is what we always bring in
part to something which doesn't pretend
to be an icon but is in some sense a
face
for this reason we'll never solve this
problem there isn't going to be a form
of painting which kind of cracks it but
when you're dealing with communication
or even questions of perception which
involve projection our fundamental
ambivalence is always there is always in
clay and that's why we'll be
differentiated as between what we
understand what we see what we think we
see it isn't that there is a real
account somewhere there are just the
accounts that you hear in exchange and
perhaps learn you're always going to
fail at this but you can in Beckett's
terms fail better with the implication
of Beckett I'll end thank you
