hi everyone thank you for coming tonight
I'm money-saver Gleeson the head of the
public program here at the a and I'm
delighted tonight to introduce Leo
Lambert who are we speaking to us about
weaponized architecture towards a
revolutionary practice of the discipline
this talk is part of a new lecture
series we initiated this term called new
canonical histories and it aims to
address the decolonization of knowledge
the series invites architects artists
historians who through their practice
and research redefine inherited
historical models giving us tools to not
only reimagine our past but also project
forwards into the future and tonight's
speaker has been doing exactly that
throughout his career to date through
investigating the politics of the built
environment and so he's been doing this
by providing a platform through the
bimonthly magazine the Phenom B list
which he founded in 2015 to give
contributors a platform to discuss
spatial perspectives on an anti-colonial
anti-racist queer feminist and
disability related prejudices and
struggles these themes are also
reinforced through his own pudica
logicals and books and this research
collectively expands interrogate and in
some cases even rejects the conventional
architectural canon so Leopold trained
as an architect and is based in Paris he
was last at the a which I thought was
much more recently but it was in
December 2017 to chair a discussion
between architects and a Marathi and
geographer Melissa Fernandez Iroquois
TIA on the role of family in shaping
space issues of gender class and race
and the lack of specificity to context
in social structure that accompanies
housing projects in the global south and
both of them were contributors to the
fun ambulance which would made him the
perfect chair for this talk and and
we're so excited to have him back here
with us he's the author of three books
weaponized architecture the
impossibility of innocence the corporeal
politics of the cloth the wall and the
street and bulldozers of politics this
Palestinian ruin as an Israeli project
his next book is tentatively called
states of emergency a spatial history of
the French colonial continuum and
hopefully we'll hear a bit more about
that tonight as he discusses how
architects are often complicit in
manifest
political power space and through that
he's going to question how we can
rethink practice to resist this so
please join me in welcoming Liam for
back to the a good evening everyone a
big big THANK YOU to manager for both
creating this lecture series and for
inviting me to it and I was very
enthusiastic about about this this this
series and so I sort of decided to play
the game of it which basically meant
pretty much trying to build a
presentation from the from the ground up
and so as such I'm a little bit less
confident that I would sort of telling
you only about my current book project
or some things that I'm really that I
really that is much easier to articulate
today for me but I really wanted to sort
of reflect them on the discipline of
architecture itself and understanding
the importance of doing so within within
a place like a school of architecture so
bear with me if it's if I'm a little bit
as it turns out time and I'm actually
going to finish by something I never did
before which is sort of reading reading
a manifesto I wrote an hour ago and and
so same thing like bear bear with my
style there because I'm not a great
writer but I did my best on putting that
together perhaps perhaps starting with
something a little bit easier for me
which is just to introduce myself and
introduce my work perhaps giving you a
little bit of of an idea where I'm
coming from with everything else
I'm as many Jo said I am I'm originally
a trained architect and as such I've
been I've been tasting the delights of
design in a long time ago and I
and I never really forget that even
though it's been a while since since I
was able to put that into practice but
that's I still despite everything that I
despite everything that I say about
architecture and it's always problematic
dimension I think I'm very I'm still
very much attached to the very idea of
design and and so most of my main job
now is consists in running this this
magazine that comes out every every
other month sofa number list each time
around a particular topic that has to do
with what I call the politics of space
and the bodies and bodies with various
topics as you can see this was like the
ten first one then the ten the ten that
followed with again various topics that
range from the many range many many
geographical scales and many geographies
and many scales from the from the larger
to the smallest and then more more
recently we started a new new series in
2019 the six issue of 2019 or our armed
or more specifically dedicated to
promoting some dimension of political
struggle so the first one January
February was about space and we have at
least one contributor in the room and
the second one that will come out either
tomorrow on Monday is about publishing
and we also have another contributors in
the room and and so I'm ready I really
like this this series of that tries not
so much did they construct state
violence as we were so used to do but I
will do tonight and but but actually
very much trying to promote so various
dimensions of political struggles I am
also writers manager was kind enough to
mention those three books and and I
think that's that's kind of a little bit
more with this
that I come to you today it's usually
this one so it doesn't really
distinguish but and and I suppose the
two the two main geography the two main
jo-jo histories that I'm that I'm
particularly involved in are to be found
in Palestine and and and through through
various through various analysis and
projects and deconstructing of the
apartheid state through architecture and
through this through this work on the
French colonial continuum trying to
write a book about the spatial history
of the states of the state of emergency
in Algeria
so in in Algeria each time again like
with through through maps and I'm saying
Algeria it's actually not in Algeria
necessarily but during the Algerian
revolution was in Algerian in France
so that's the first geography mobilized
in this book
Kenickie New Caledonia which is which is
another example of French settler
colonialism that you may or may not know
that is still currently a French colony
what I would very much call a French
colony were and I'm particularly looking
at the during the 80s the the indigenous
connect struggle against communism and
then in the French bonheur in the
suburbs in the various parties of of
perpetuation of French colonial violence
through space and architecture so so
that leads me to the proper presentation
itself in which I propose to look at
three some habanero components of
architecture and that will that will be
the wall the corridor and the key and
then I will I will finish with this
small manifesto so
starting with a wall which is probably
the one out of the three that I've been
spending the most time on and obviously
when we think of the wall we immediately
think of the various the various border
walls of the of the earth and
particularly the wall as it's been
promoted during an entire u.s.
presidential campaign but I think before
we even before we even look at this most
extreme manifestation of what we call
the wall we can sort of try to go back
to we can try to go back to what the
world does and what a wall is and to
think of it first and foremost as
crystallization of architecture is
violence being meaning a sort of
physical material formation that
organizes bodies in space and and so
this is this is kind of like the most
obvious form here almost almost a cliche
but if we go back to the very idea of
the very idea of of tracing tracing the
lines that end up becoming the walls we
can think of it as like the four I mean
I don't I don't know I don't know
whether that's useful or not to to think
of the sort of of to think of it almost
chronologically in history but as
agriculture and the furrow in particular
beings the sort of first materialization
of of dividing territories but which
which will end up being the wall and I
always like this story I always like
this maze of promise and reminisce at
the formation of Rome and the idea of
like so you you may or may not remember
those two browsers who sort of decide to
create a city and for some kind of weird
reason but I guess there would not be
any miss otherwise on the
can can can can actually create the city
and and so so asking the gods one one is
one things I mean both of them obviously
believes that there is a one chosen by
the gods to to create to create the city
of Rome what to create a city and in
Romulus decides to trace to trace a
trench II all around the perimeter of
the city that he imagined he's about to
create and and Remus has this as this
sort of like defies defies his first
gesture of architecture by jumping over
the trench and sort of violating the
violating the perimeter of sovereignty
that Romulus had been creating and I
think this this this shows well how the
trench can not really do the work that a
wall can and so and but the law the
legal apparatus that this trench and
later the wall implements can only works
if there is a sort of like planet --iv
operative apparatus that goes with it
and that's how Romulus killed his
brother killed his brother Remus for
having defying this this state of order
and so we can see we can see how
obviously all those lines there are
traced by our architects among among
others act symbolically I mean you know
we're we're sometimes surrounded by
lines and don't worry don't necessarily
need the sort of physical enforcement of
them to do to act in accordance to them
just think of being at the airport or in
one of those lines with with those
straps and
and but but this symbolical dimension of
the lines is usually is usually not
really what what fundamentally enforce
and for them and most of the time we we
do have walls as in like the physical
formation of it like that prevents that
we can sort of explain as as being a
physical formation that a body with that
with its proper energy whatever it is
would not really have any any sort of
ability to be able to damage the wall or
to move the wall or to go through the
wall and I use I use those skills from
the from the zoo ballet cafe mirror by
up in a box because I don't know if you
if you know it I mean the skills are can
only say so much because it's it's
something involvement but you have those
you have those female bodies
encountering the wall I mean they close
their eyes and they're they're sort of
going knocking into the wall you know
pretty in a pretty violent way actually
it's very hard to look at some time but
I think I I don't know any sort of
artistic manifestation more powerful
than this one to really talk about what
a what a wall and it's sort of soul
physicality incarnate and so obviously
obviously a walls can this this violence
this sort of material violence that is
that is not even political yet I mean
when we analyze when we analyze it can
embody various political programs from
from from some pretty mundane ones to
the most to the most violence but I
think it is my contention to say that
that all of them contains this at the
very least this material violence that
is in then instrumentalize politically
and so that's that's also my my that's
also why after all those years I'm still
very much enjoying the fact that the the
the editorial project is called the
Phenom believes if you number this being
another word for tightrope walker and
and so those lines with those lines very
much
organizing the world and organizing
bodies in space
I think the bodies the bodies that walk
on the line are definitely not liberated
from the line far from it because they
they're definitely contained within
those few few centimetres walking on
them but somehow by being on neither
side on either side they there's they
subvert this order that the line
contains those to me that's always a
very joyful figure of absurd version but
as I said I just talked about a few
centimeter of the lines and obviously
you know in a sort of in a sort of
mathematical you know sort of
geometrical definition of a line doesn't
have any thickness and I think that's
that's something that I've been very
early on quite interested in because
obviously when when the line turns into
a wall the wall itself embodies the
thickness and and sometimes the
thickness is just as I said a few
centimeters of the of the Burdine wall
on which someone can walk and we saw we
saw in the wall fell that it was maybe
much less about the wall falling and
people being able to go from one side to
the others and to actually sit on I mean
the most powerful symbol of this of the
wall being vanquished was people being
able to sit and walk and walk on it but
then sometimes the thickness when it
comes to border walls we can see how the
thickness is increases and then we we
sort of force to wonder what kind of
legal regime is embodied within the
thickness and I think at first it was
very tempting when I when I when I say
at first I mean when I first encountered
this idea it was very tempting to think
that a little bit too too much like Oh
tightrope walkers that the the thickness
was this very liberating liberated world
were that solo and the sort of
architectural scheme could not really
think in advance could not it really
convinced but very quickly I realized
it was indeed maybe the the world that
the law could not conceive and as such
could could easily become the the space
of total right lessness and I think this
example of of twelve Eritrean people
trying to cross from the from from Egypt
to Israel and being trapped for over a
week in 2012 in the thickness between
those two between between the Egyptian
sort of metallization of the border and
the Israeli one and receiving receiving
close to know I it whatsoever was to me
a very potent symbol of how of the
absolute righteousness of the other the
thickness of the line and that leads me
to that leads me to how we can
conceptualize this this particular space
between two walls which is the space of
the corridor that's why you dis chapters
and so the space of the corridor is
quite interesting also because it is an
architectural invention very much so
with that without wanting necessarily to
to make it a Western Western invention
because I think that would be profoundly
inaccurate but talking talking about it
within the Western realms I think we can
see how we went from one paradigm from
one paradigm where a corridor would
would have no use whatsoever to to the
colonial to the paradigm of the colonial
and Beaulieu residency where the
corridor quickly become a space for the
servants to be able to operate within
the house without being really seen and
and to operate almost from within the
walls which I so we can already see how
the creator has a sort of political
implication to it and then obviously
obviously pushed to its extreme the
curator is a very convenient way to
organize
particularly political program such as
psychiatric hospital or the prison and
and it's it very much
regulates regulates this or this
political organization but I think what
I found the most powerful in this in
looking at this particular typology was
the work of Temple Grandin's that you
may or may not know was a doctor
teaching at University of Colorado and
who thanks to her autistic condition
says that she she is able to to be much
more understanding the behavior of
cattle when confronted to the sort of
imminent death of the of the
slaughterhouses and as such she designed
and in the most sort of architectural
way as you can see she designed a
purchase that would that consists in
leading leading cattle to their
unavoidable death with that without them
being being too stressed and
understanding too much what what is
about to happen so I think that's that's
extremely expressive when we when we
come to talk about the corridor and the
corridor having the function you know I
was talking architecture as the
disciplines that organizes bodies in
space obviously the corridor could could
difficult Lee could could barely be more
expressive in that in trying to lead
usually too late bodies from point A to
point B and of point Bay or point B to a
point a but many corridors also are only
able to lead from point A to point B B
in that case being the avoid unavoidable
industrial death of the animal and
without making too much of a literal or
literal connection but but noticing how
not seeing how many corridors as I say
are being used for the capacity to to
drive bodies to organize bodies in space
through following lines and sometimes
only from A to B I cannot make I cannot
I cannot not make the connection with
the numerous couriers of the of the
apartheid state in Palestine and weirdly
I started with a wall and then I sort of
stretched strategy width to obtain the
crater but if somehow we sort of go back
to we we restrained with the width of
the the width of the corridor and what
what this whole width what this whole
thickness of the line sort of makes me
go to is notion of environment the fact
of being walled off and in particular
through this Easter Eastern European
myth of of the mass on Manuel who as as
in many myths something deeply up
happens where he needs to in its to bury
he's on his own wife in the in the
monasteries that he's designing in order
for the moon asteroid to to stay to stay
to stand still and and so he is and and
the screams I mean depends on the
version because it's a myth so there's
no obviously this is not like a one
version but I always feel this version
of the text with with a woman being
being buried in the wall and the sort of
very expressive the very expressive
dimension of it is particularly strong
in term in architectural terms with the
walls quizzes hard
and and so in merriment drives me to the
third object of the third component the
third architectural component of of this
presentation which is a key as as
environment and and imprisonment is in
my opinion comparable for that matter
and and I'm trying to again I mean I
mean just like for the wall and the
corridor I'm trying to sort of go back
to the most basic dimension of water
what a key what a key is and I and I and
I think of I mean I I mean obviously to
to go to the key we need to we need to
go to the door first and to analyze how
a door is pretty much a wall that allows
the porosity of this wall to be to be
operable but then a door rarely comes
without its key so I'm particularly
interested in in looking at it and and I
sort of promised myself that I will I
will use this this Belgium comic books
that some of you might be quite familiar
with that actually is not is not really
some things that I is not even something
I found myself but just to show you how
sometimes silly things like that can be
can be can can be operative it was a few
please this is this is actually a strips
that Bruno Latour uses to explain as a
sort of technical approaches at the door
in which the door consists but not in
not in a very political not in a very
political manner but so to sort of
appropriate this for myself and I need
to I need to go to a slide that I often
use which is a film by Ray Anderson with
living - perhaps
before going to the key to to explain a
little bit more about how I perceive the
immigrants political violence of
architecture through this time and
examples that does not even require a
wall to be a bird if so a sort of small
shelter a small roof a small shed in a
in a very you know very heavy rain and
and we can see how this house this space
have already houses architecture has
already rich the sort of critical point
where the amount of bodies it can it can
host in and and the sort of protection
that it that is function rich is this
critical condition where if an
additional body would come to would come
to seek shelter under this roof this
this additional body would be likely to
be excluded or all that would be a
conflict between bodies to to know which
which one or gets to stay so to speak so
with the presence of this architecture
or in a certain we are in a condition
where somebody's get I have a social
status whereas they get protected by
architecture and somebody's do not an
architecture does that because we
thought without the shed then
everybody's in the rain and it's it's a
different condition so I think what I'm
trying to say is also when we create a
wall or when we create a roof we create
both side of it we create the site that
is protected in that case and the site
that is excluded from it and here I'm
sort of using the most sort of mundane
and and somehow not to not to crucial
dimension of it just to explain it first
but obviously we realize that most of
the walls that surround us do not really
materialize an order in which some
people gets to be protected because they
were here first
and some people get to be excluded
because you know they came a little bit
too late but most of the walls that
surround us very much
crystallized other political order
and men many of them the particular
order of private property
and and that's where the key the key
come in obviously because in this in
this in this condition you don't really
need a key whereas in this condition you
do need a key and the key is very much
the object that the object in which is
contained this protocol of who gets to
be who gets to be sort of served by
architecture and who gets to be excluded
by it and and there's something almost
ceremonially charged in in giving a keys
this way to to the bodies that are
deemed politically to deserve to deserve
it
quite jumping here sorry but I think
what I find particularly interesting as
well is how that being said and and
private private property being sort of
put as an existing system that the key
sort of very much Express we can see as
well I mean as you'll see in just a
minute why why this comes in as well in
at this moment of my research but we can
see as well how there are other
protocols that are in a certain declares
the key as completely obsolete by by
various forces of manifesting state
violence and I I found I found this
moment of the of the 2013 sort of
shutdown of the entire city of Boston
Surrey when after the attacks of the
marathon particularly interesting or
architectural II in how or in a certain
everybody who sort of always always
considers themselves as being protected
by architecture having the keys of their
own houses are being ordered to stay
within their house and and the walls the
walls that were once perceived as being
perceived as being protective of
themselves our walls
rules that prevent any escape from from
them and and in in my own current
research about the French state of
emergency I think the most the most the
most extreme forms forms of violence at
the state emergency allowed were much
less so the deployment I mean here in
the US of course but the deployment of
military in the streets of big cities of
France and much more the invisible eyes
dance was a very spectacular dimension
of things the ones yet you may you may
have seen yourself and quite on the
opposite the most extreme forms were to
be found in in the invisible eyes
housing of the many thousands of people
who were we were erroneously suspected
of of any criminal activity and we were
we were at 99 percent Muslim and and I
see in those I see in those destroy in
those destroy doors the manifestation
that just the colonial state in this in
this in this example he's also able to
make the key become obsolete when when
it decided to unleash its violence on a
particular particular people sorry
so that leads me to the part that as you
can see I'm pretty nervous because I
wanted as you can see I'm pretty nervous
and now I'm even more so because I'm
reaching and reaching the manifestos
that I told you that I was I was nervous
about so but this time I this is also
why I brought it this time for once and
therefore I'll be able to
and apparently leave a lot of time for
for the conversations that follow so
that's perfect
all right when they'll come to us to
design and optimize their prisons or
even lure us into thinking that we could
somehow make better conditions of life
for those who have been forcefully
surrounded by walls we we will actively
non practice architecture in telling
them that we'll only sleep when we will
have abolished all prisons when they'll
come to us saying that we need we need
to use our skills as architects to
participate to transform the deadly
colonial border industrial complex to
make it more humane we will instead use
our skills to make evidence all the way
through which architecture cons
constitutes one of the most effective
weapons of this complex when they'll
come to us with manuals of how to unfold
deadly police and military violence on
the bodies explains through an
architectural language we will retaliate
with the same language to describe to
doulas how women who have been
forcefully surrounded by walls can
safely give birth in an environment of
death when they'll come to us with our
grants awards and cultural capital for
fetishizing and depoliticizing the many
proletarian self built neighborhoods of
the world we will talk to them about the
Algerian shanty towns of Paris during
the Revolution was a Palestinian refugee
camp of the West Bank and Gaza shows
Emma how architecture can be a weapon
against state violence as long as
architects accept not to be a part of it
when they'll come to us to be the name
and face of neo-colonial project another
operation of dispossession displacement
and destructions these guys behind words
such as renovation rehabilitation or
rehabilitation we will we will tell them
that we refuse to be a part of their
schemes that we boycott them when
they'll come to us and explained that
the predatory actions of the male's of
our offices are not as terrifying and
traumatizing as they actually are that
these are
dividuals misbehaviors and not
structures of power or that we have
simply invented the very existence of
this action we will definite
the granite Fugees to the ground when
they'll come to us telling us that the
exploitative conditions of the workers
in charge of building the Grand dream
we've been trained to imagine are not
around responsibility we will design our
ivory tower and humble the humble
ourselves learning the craft and a
fourth such such construction
necessitate when they'll come to us
telling us that everyone take their part
in developing the city that there is no
alternative that neighborhoods are meant
are meant to see their residents change
that we are not responsible we will call
we will call out their speculative and
racist racist and classist project and
turn the know against them to manifest
the right for the right to housing for
all when they'll come to us asking us to
be asking us to built in occupied
territory and tell us that history books
will only retain the quality of our
design not the violation of
international legislations those
constitute we will instead build schools
and cultural buildings in the camps of
those we were made refugees for lies by
them
when they'll come to us telling us that
the wall is an architecture of security
deployed against those we terrorize
calling them terrorists we will reply
that the wall is an architecture of
apartheid and we will take our part of
the imaginative efforts that envision a
future when they no longer hold any
dominant power when they'll come to us
to design architecture foreign by the
white seas may label bourgeois bodies of
the world we will instead conceived
boundless world that refused to presume
what a body is and can do we will talk
to them about the joy of intensively
living as a body rather than being
contained into one like a mess is there
we will stare at them and tell them
blue-eyed architect I defy you who
crowned you during what night did you H
did you exchange compass for dagger and
then more calmly like Madeleine gains we
will say all men are sisters and I will
end with this poem by Madeleine games
that is my favorite poem there simply
could not have been a woman we would
have said left side right side then
stuck to it for a woman it is a question
of at least seven sides at least one for
every you such subtlety contributes to
the soul to the subtle difference one
thing men even realized desire unlike
them all men are mortal women do not die
this makes all the difference although
some women having been brought bitten by
sheer syllogistic brown have a time
pretended most women do not look like
themselves although many women do assume
the form of women some are men other gas
electricity then still others are in
this range indistinct roots every time
indistinguishable sorry often being
constructed of living material women are
a volatile force in society and as such
dangerous thank you very much
[Applause]
so much I mean I think the manifesto is
a very tough act to follow in terms if
you've been asking the first question
but I think it was really incredibly
generous and fascinating to actually
hear you not just talk about your
current research could actually give us
a cross-section through a lot of things
you've been thinking about for quite
some time and maybe to start the
discussion one thing I've always wanted
to know is kind of what made you shift
from being an architect of buildings to
someone who is the Phenom b-list walking
that line but you talked about that is
kind of trying to question the
discipline and and push it to be more
ethical or to question what we make and
what we shouldn't make well having a
poor side of balance I would say that
I'm probably promoting the Phenom list
more than I'm building I'm not sure I
think it happened quite organically and
I'm also not making it a definitive
thing either but perhaps perhaps more
than like the shift from between from
being like an architect in the in the
way of someone who design things to to
someone who would articulate various
critic I think it was more maybe
something that I'm able to more to
articulate a little bit more is how to
completely not completely actually never
completely but to to deliberately exist
discipline itself and to very much go
looking at at at works that have so much
to do with with with what it is we are
responsible as their architect for and
and so going going to speak to people
who've been thinking of the political
dimension of loathe we've been doing
some work on
gender in feminist studies in
post-colonial studies and to go to go at
it in a very forgetting somehow to that
I mean forgetting a little bit the sort
of position that architects usually
occupy which is usually quite literally
a sort of dominant position I mean
looking down at trans look it down in
the world this way and there in its
lines and but also not really forgetting
that we're we are for worse or better
for the worst of the better we are we
are spatial spatial not even thinkers
but people who see the world spatially
and this is something that we sort of
take for granted without realizing that
many other disciplines don't see this
wedding so the sort of sort of the
intention between between the magazine
for example was very much to be able to
bridge two to two from the world of
architecture to very much get all those
voices may have never said anything
about architecture proper but we define
other incredibly helpful and useful
dimension that that resonates with it
but also to give this spatial
perspective to many political struggles
that did not necessarily think of it
before
thanks that was really fascinating
answer to I think it's a question that
I'm sure there are plenty more of the
audience can we turn the lights on as
well
thank you very much
the the manifesto is maybe by this sort
of way it's written
maybe linguistically it's it's very
reactionary by by just you pose the
situation and then a reaction do you
think that if you would write it or if
you would consider something that is
only propositional would it be possible
or would it actually kind of flipped
things around completely or it's just
another way of looking at things I think
as much as I agree with you it is it is
very much a reaction in each time I
think for me that's the only sort of
within the sort of political struggle in
which I for which I stand in solidarity
I and to which I'm sometimes part of is
the there needs to be this sort of world
this dismantlement that is that needs to
happen but I think the risk would be to
as I said earlier with what we're trying
to choose this year with the magazine
the risk would be to only dedicate all
our efforts in in sort of showing how
these violence operates because it is
very it is a much easier as exercise to
- then - to very much promote various
various things that are being proposed
against it
and when I say propose I don't
necessarily mean as a replacement I mean
for me it's not it's much less than a
matter of replacing the system by
systems and being being always fighting
the violence of it and so so that's why
this year we're trying to very much to
focus on this on various dimension of
these reactions indeed but I think I
think this is not I don't
I don't I don't really conceive with
this particular agenda I don't
particularly conceive any any sort of
propositions that would not come first
from from an analysis of what what's
around us in a nut rage of at what's
around us I have two things the first
one is a short comment and the second
one's the question the first one is when
you talk about the wall I can't help but
thinking about the best mule I which is
for those who don't know is the kind of
French literature
I'd say about the wall crossing wall a
man with the kind of magical power of
being able to cross and go through walls
so that's that's one thing that can't
help thinking about I don't know how it
articulates but the second one is a
question so your manifesto was quite
powerful for several reasons but it kind
of tends to for me go from the political
to the ethical and manage I mentioned
the word ethics and I was wondering
first you know who is that we that we
were talking about so are you kind of
asking all our architects to kind of
sign up to your manifesto and in that
sense do you think then that the
profession should go aim for a kind of
ethical well not manifesto but being
kind of ethically regulated just like
the medical profession is for instance
is there a need for an ethic ethical
framework in architecture so when it
comes to the past meal hi I think it's
very clear that it's a key basically
it's like whoever owns a key has the
ability to go through walls
I think the I mean to go back to a sort
of canonical texts in relation to that
would be to go back to a advisement
homeland and this is interview of of
this Brigadier General of the Israeli
army telling that it doesn't really care
about the fact that there is going to be
like this huge territorial wall set up
as long as he's able to go through with
his business trips and to intervene in
the West Bank and then retrieve retrieve
itself so I think that's very much what
the key is trying to epitomize the fact
that some bodies have the ability to go
through walls and some do not and and
obviously the prison is the most obvious
example of the an extreme extremely
violent example of that when it comes to
ethics it's it's for me ethics is a is a
is a very valid principle but it is
I absolutely separated from the world of
of the moral so I don't I don't
necessarily presume that in any given
group of people including an entire
profession people would sort of have as
would have seen similar premises about
how to perceive both the world and their
perception enough to determine an entire
an entire ethical system I mean there
might be if it's variable to do so then
you know I mean that's what Rafael's
Barry and the architect designers
planners for social responsibility have
been doing they've been they have been
pushing in the US and Canada for for
either architects to take a pledge or
the obvious sort of national order of
Architects to say that architects will
will never design confinement cells and
execution chambers and and I very much I
mean I I comment that so much that I
wanted to integrate it here but I also
think for me is a sort of and this might
be an ethical thing I mean because we
maybe we all agree that we should we
don't want to do that but then
I would go further and say why what
about banks what about factories what
about what about condominium like I
think there's many many things that I
would like to add to that pledge that do
not necessarily be everybody's sort of
part of everybody's ethical system but
that's what that's where politics comes
in and this is what makes me understand
that not everybody would stand the same
position but but then considering those
who do not think of that as political
adversaries and so I don't I don't
personally I mean this we is not a we as
it's not a corporate as we it's not an
we architects is just it's just we
political we that that that some of us
can decide to embody and some of us will
might not decide to do so so maybe I'm
picking up a conversation with left
years ago but I'm running the school of
architecture through the three lenses
you you produce today because Kuhn of
architecture as a wall that keeps the
wall that may be porous maybe not the
school of architecture as a corridor
that takes a human being and and
transforms it into an architect and
that's irreversible once you've kind of
gone through it that's it and as a place
that you've I don't need a key to get in
or a key to get out and I just wonder
what you think today about the school of
architecture and it is it one of those
three elements is it all is it none what
and what it what should it be
yeah I don't really know because I
almost think that as I see the wall but
maybe the corridor and the key are or at
least the corridor is maybe I think I
was much more dumb about it and looking
at it in a very sort of material
physical way so I don't know I mean I I
feel like my my sort of relationship to
is call off architecture is so widely
unequal because I was a student in some
of them I was I taught in one of them so
that's not even that much and I'm sort
of any every now and then I'm in setting
foot in some of them but so I I'm not
quite sure I'm able to articulate to
articulate something so powerful here
except saying that in general but it's
not it's not about it's not about school
of architecture per se it's just about
an education system in general and is I
think as much as much as we should try
all of us with all our functions being
administrative teaching students
whatever we should all try to make it a
sort of place where radical things can
happen I think I think it's also
completely normal that because of the
way those institution exists there's
they tend to they tend to embody and
reinforce the status quo and the
dominant order so I think we should we
should place in schools as much as we
can as much as we are allowed and as
much as we are able to to give agency
based on our based on our rules but
there's only so much we can do
unfortunately I'm a great a buyer of the
magazine I didn't know you were in
charge of it it's a really short
question because when I studied here
somebody told me keys and signs are
basic cop out for bad architecture so if
you design architecture property you
shouldn't need keys and you know signs
of like the exit sign over there so my
question is actually do you consider
this approach why she don't take this
wrong way but do you think yourself as a
good architect yeah but I mean before
before considering myself like a good or
bad architect I should consider myself
like an architect which I'm not even
sure I do even though I tend not to when
I'm in front of architects and then when
there's no hockey taking the rooms then
I tend to if that makes sense and I sort
of like this
I sort of like I've been beside besides
a sort of jokey aspect to it I actually
like forcing architects to sort of get
out of there get out of their little
world but also representing that world
in other in other places I mean a little
bit what I was saying earlier that
sometimes we we even we have skills we
don't even know like the fact of
perceiving the world in a spatial manner
is for me like something something that
we don't necessarily articulate but that
we definitely have and you see I say we
so apparently I'm evidently I'm
considering if there's room for parallel
physics yeah I mean yeah I don't I don't
know how to answer that I think I'm
probably a bad architect for not being
able to follow through the ideas that we
should really even though even though
our once we say architecture is always
violent we should keep designing anyway
but we should we should know what is
violence is about and against against
what and against whom it is being
applied but clearly not having designed
much architectures that I'm able to show
here makes me a better architect but
hopefully we all aiming towards better
so
you might be nervous but I'm conflicted
and I'm completing your use of ethics
and the role that architects should take
and what is ethics in architecture and
how far does your power as architects go
it's it's very interesting I've been
reading a lot but the ethics statements
that either institutions like the AAA
has or Revis actually trying to produce
some of the most dangerous corporations
run the world that do build
high-security prisons and torture
centers and refugee centers they
actually don't discriminate they have
very clear and thick's codes and
standards of conduct and so then the
question goes in last year we had a
really heated discussion about shoot
architects write the AIA
was asking should architects design
spaces of torture obviously no one
should designer spaces of torture right
the answer is no one now who ultimately
designed the space of torture is never
an architect right because this is this
could be a space of torture torture is
not something that is designed something
else so then the question goes in ain't
really trying to understand where do we
have some real agency right I think
sometimes we confuse when we put the
diagram of Jeremy Bentham no and the
panopticon prison there's a very clear
relationship almost with the cows of
what happens with the inhabitant and the
observer that architecture that is
surveilling even without having those
inhabitants there is a power to that
relationship that the space produces but
sometimes if a room if a square actually
it's going to be used to torture people
but not something that we design and so
for me the question then goes in what
where do we position ourselves and when
do we really stand up as a collective or
when do we stand up as a discipline to
say no versus when do we stand up and
say yes and we say yes because we as
architects like to believe that we stand
not for the quality of architecture I
the example that you put on the wall
right it's not that we actually say that
the architecture is going to stand it's
good we think that we are dangerous
enough ethereal enough that we might
take a commission and the slowly we
might be able to aim to dismantle the
structures of power that may be at play
at it and trying to understand no but
I'd really ultimately believe that as
architects we will never be able to
decide in a place is a playground or a
space of torture but there are some
things that we can create there are
spaces that we can design in a way in
which things can happen differently and
so then the question is where do we want
to play the ethical ground what our
initial questions for architects and
what are known at achill questions for
architects because a doctor will heal
anyone who comes to his emergency room
even if he's a criminal or not right and
so in a certain way the ethical code of
conduct of a doctor is not to exercise
the judgment if that person is having
the right moral compass or not it is to
actually save that life and for us is to
produce the spaces not only for the
function of the client right of the
every client but is to think that when
that evil client may disappear were then
economic structure might change we might
ultimately be able to produce a city
that is more equitable that is more
accessible that is more free so I'm
trying to say are we are we putting
ourselves website of the game by saying
we should not be designing offices
schools brothels motels because all of
them are corrupted because all of them
are ethically wrong and I agree with you
but if we remove ourselves from all the
things that are ethically wrong that I
would say is 99% of the things what are
the things that we should be doing and
so I'm giving back now as an architect
to an architect who I don't know if I'm
an architect but where do we actually
drove the line of the ethics that we
should be engaging with and the ones
that actually is for all of us as
citizens to engage with and I think
that's for me a very important question
and fix for architects versus ethics for
citizens and I think that sometimes we
conflate that and we confuse that so
help me with that
yeah but I think also ethics is
I mean what I was saying like what about
banks what about factories were about
schools it was within this within these
tactics that the architects planners
designers for social responsibility have
came up with to take a pledge but
personally my my sort of and and I think
we should always be articulating tactics
and strategy and so tactics are
something that very much is operative at
a punctual both spatial and temporal
level and strategies maybe Moses a big
picture and and my strategy is not
really to get involved much with ethics
and to get much more involved in
politics which which would also mean in
that case that and some things that I
probably felt felt to to demonstrate is
that for me architecture is not these
natural things that can be used as a
playground or as a torture site but is
in itself in itself as already something
of the torture sites contained that that
can be activated even more so in given
political conditions which is not to say
that architecture is this sort of like
almighty almighty thing either that has
is always containing bodies and bodies
can not do anything against it or
anything but I think I'm I'm I'm very
much trying to to to pull away from from
the idea that we can we can we can do
the good we can do the bad and and
architecture is just a tool to go for
one one side to the other I I think
architecture has always a certain
violence and my manifesto for
architecture would be for designing
architecture in that case - really -
really
not use the skills to show something or
anything but very much to design
architecture is to not shy away from
these violence but just be being able to
reorient it towards toward that was that
we are fighting so that makes that makes
it indeed like a sort of reactionary
practice but that's that's the one that
I sort of
want to articulate and think it says
think of it as useful to articulate
thanks Lee about that was very
interesting lecture I just want to maybe
make one sort of suggestion with regards
to the manifesto and afterwards ask you
a question
the first one I guess looks to the idea
of the architect as as a worker and how
many of the issues that you raised in
your manifesto about the architect being
complicit in these dubious practices
around the world comes down to the fact
that many of the architects and I'm not
talking about the stark attacks but the
everyday you know assistance and the
part twos and just graduated also having
to put dinner on a table pay bills and a
way to perhaps counter this and maybe
this can be in addition to your
manifesto and actually I think everybody
festos you contain this idea and that is
a universal unconditional basic income
basic income because I think then what
do you have your means of survival your
basic needs
guaranteed can you sit down but stand up
and say no so that's why the first part
of the question and I sort of encourage
everyone to look into it go talk to all
your friends about the idea of a basic
income because yeah it's a good one
second question is should we abolish the
corridor short sweet
now once again I think I'm I'm not I'm
not abolishing the wall even it's it's
just it's just let's let's no let's know
what this typology does how it operates
what it crystallizes and then and then
let's let's let's embrace nice let's
embrace that and let's make it useful in
the sort of political visions that we
that we have that by the way if your
political vision is very much in line
with with the dominant order you have
nothing to think about you just need to
design it in sort of in a very natural
way and it will it will I mean 99%
chances it will it will very much serve
the dominant order so it is very much
the having to think about what it does
is very much to be able to reorient it
against other bodies other things that
then the one that are usually targeted
by those so that's that's my take on
architecture whether it's wall roof
corridors all those also the inventions
of and and so yeah and and for the basic
income I don't know we should talk later
perhaps I'm not sure it me okay
first of all I'm gonna go say that I'm
against ethics I think the function of
ethics is to replace politics ethics is
kind of a as far as I'm concerned a
category that has been obsolete in
social sciences since the mid 19th
century and you should just kind of get
it over with and assume except that it
has been replaced by the concept of
ideology so I don't think FX is useful
as a category to examine the
architectural position the useful way of
looking at it and I think your metaphor
of the wall is fine here is that there
are material conflicts in society and
architecture plays a part in the
articulation ISM usually on the side of
those who can pay
who is she commands so I mean I think
we're all generally in agreement here I
just want to make a kind of a Marxist
Marxist foot on the ground against FX I
hate that word I really I'm really
sympathetic with a lot of what you'll
present it I also have a lot of problems
with a lot of it I feel that there's a
kind of an excessive fetishization of
foreign still going on and too much like
architect realization of politics if we
frame it with in many minion q ality as
opposed to kind of a polarization of
architecture I know it's difficult to
see where one ends and the other begins
sometimes my feeling is that there's too
much form here the I could make the
exact opposite argument about the
corridor using it for example the kind
of the historical example of
distribution systems in housing over
20th century and specifically how
there's kind of a brunoise fear of
social housing is really kind of
condemned
on the space which is the distribution
gallery which is kind of a producer of
working-class community and the
historical development and replacement
of social housing with private
development tends towards the
replacement of the gallery or the
corridor with vertical distribution a
kind of a proliferation of the vertical
distribution obviously tending towards
technological device of the lift that
takes the middle-class person directly
from the garage to the apartment so I
think looking through form itself is not
enough and I think it is also kind of an
answer to what life was kind of raising
when I also sympathize the latest
possession here I think that the
fetishization of architectural form is
on the negative side is also not good
and I do believe that our opposition to
power structures is not through
architectural agencies to political
agency I don't believe in architectural
agency as a kind of as a form of
political agency and just to finalize
you've made the explicit point that the
two sides of the wall are not the same
with your again metaphor of the bus-stop
wonder in the right it's what is being
protected from the other then why are
you a phenom bolused why are you walking
the tightrope
isn't that like precisely the position
of not picking design is it kind of
petty bourgeois liberal affectation
going on there you're done
sorry no but I mean I agree with what
most of what you said except that I've
never I really don't think I've used a
single metaphor in this entire
presentation so a lot of people in this
crowd probably know I'm obsessive cattle
okay and kind of like a discovered a
little bit more about why I am so the
Temple Grandin's pen that you showed I'm
also obsessed with that and what I like
about that pen is that it's a structure
that then kind of how to say influences
the body of the cattle know it is the
structure to to kind of project a
certain emotion and sort of feeling
within the animal as a means of
domesticating and constructing an animal
and constructing a body essentially and
what I recently discovered why I am so
obsessed with cattle and cattle pens is
I discovered that I've descended from
terrorists essentially in Malaysia in
the 1950s and that there were a series
of fences and walls constructed around
the entire population to protect us from
these terrorists so what I've noticed
right is that this was a period of
psychological warfare in Malaysia in the
1950s essentially and the wall that was
constructed has entered the body of
these people and this is a war this is
these walls are mostly forgotten by kind
of contextual history today so the wall
has entered the body of the person is a
psychological constantly domesticated
generation and it I have inherited this
wall inside me it's not a question it's
just a comment it's fascinating thank
you very much and I actually actually
know someone who works exactly on this
period of time
please yeah and the British is a British
state of emergency I was there sir yeah
but perhaps some just because you
offered me to add a little bit more on
Temple Grandin I think I that was not
very part of what I was trying to say so
I did not say it but what I find
fascinating it is in her schemes is just
whether the animals should have a chance
to realise what it's about to happen it
should we give the chance to the animal
even if it's never gonna work I mean
that's pretty much what bullfighting is
about right it's like let's give a
chance even though we're killing it at
the end or not I mean I don't have any
answer to these questions but I find I
find the short cuts that consists in
saying that she invented like a humane
and a and you don't like the word ethics
I don't like the word humane more a more
humane way of working with
slaughterhouses which from from a very
sort of immediate point of view is true
but I think there's there something
there is that it's quite interesting to
dig a little bit more as well yeah when
you mentioned the word humane it's great
that you mentioned it because the
Malayan emergency in these kind of
detention camps were marketed as the
humane form of warfare at the time it is
the best casein is known today as the
best case scenario for you made warfare
yeah absolutely
so you know when you talk about prisons
that is something that is in our
existing political and economic context
and when you look at like emerging
alternatives like restorative justice or
Truth and Reconciliation
these are indigenous practices that you
know are kind of just need a space for
circles to be formed but I'm just
wondering if you've looked at like what
is the role of architecture with
supporting alternatives like or sort of
justice restorative practices to its
reconciliation or if you really need to
wait for larger cultural political and
economic will before the accurate the
architecting starts to step in yeah
that's a great question I haven't really
looked at it and my sort of most
poignant example of
of this sort of true alternative when
you say alternative I was afraid because
I said that was usual like you know
bracelet or whatever carceral technology
but indeed exactly the truce or
reconciliation or any kind of form of
radical I mean how crazy is Truth and
Reconciliation right it's like as within
a society to decide to go to go through
that way of dealing with dealing with
with trauma and and for me but the most
the most sort of poignant example comes
into my research on on connect in new
caledonia and in particular particular
events that happen in 1998 were 10 years
after one connect indigenous connect
activists killed number one and number
two people from the provisional
government of Kenickie assassinated
because they he just sign the accords
with the French as sort of peace Peace
Accords that ended the interaction and
that definitely did not ended
colonialism and so it took 10 years for
the tribe of the tribe of the both
tribes of the two people who were
assassinated and the tribe of the of the
killer who also was killed right after
to come to a ceremonial I mean what's
connect people from lakitu of
reconciliation and it is incredibly
ritualized it is as emotionally charged
as as it should be so to speak and
meaning it is sincere it's not just the
performativity of reconciliation and the
only problem we saw with all that is
that it's happening it was happening
outside in inner prairie so the
architecture was very much absent from
from this so indeed I don't have any
sort of input on on what what if space
of the kind would look like but it is it
is indeed a very very important and
interesting question
I hope to have more answers for on that
note I think Leopold earlier gave
seminar to marine insisting critical
thinking students after that he wrote
this manifesto he presents it tonight
and then did lecture and answer all our
questions so I think you probably
deserves a drink so I hope all of you
will join us upstairs in the front
members room to continue the
conversation and thank you very much
thank you
[Applause]
