myself first my name is the body missile
against here teach here I consider
myself a friend but I'm here as a guest
this event is the second da the third in
the series called this thing called
theory which started in now it's back at
university in 2000 and with a big
international conference this thing
called theory was the title of of the
conference we produce two publications
coming from it I'm speaking in the
plural because the work was developed
with our inverness who together with me
behind this afternoon event
unfortunately the ring cannot be here
today and with other three colleagues
propose teaching and doing page news at
the expected
we had many speakers I guess we are here
also because many of the speakers and
their contributors to the publication
we're from from the annually and we felt
that the conference in the two
publications were far from covering
the idea what seer in architecture is
today and how we talked about it and we
decided to continue a conversation it is
more smaller I hope more productive
former in particular this year they
happened to almost coincides not flush
with the PSD seminars of the knights
colleges students and Ally of the ph.d
program and so we've become part of this
three-day event revolving around
research in architecture keeps the in
architecture and in particular the work
of questioning and rising water
what she do this is the official version
the real version of the story is that
mark Aziz who doesn't need productions
gave a wonderful paper he knows address
at the conference we started to
introduce the issue of betrayal in
architecture in in the relationship
between architecture and its theory and
again another hallucination which
continues in the seminar here last year
in the relation with architecture sorry
with serious philosophy and has become
now in a way again the he knows over the
starting point for this
reprisal my very short papers or
publications and we've instead more time
for a discussion because we consider
this as a collective work improper so I
hope you leave not just fabulous but
participants beyond any any historical
fact Larry please sir to talk to us with
us I have to do my duty officers
representative or Phra the inter a is
the the architectural Humanities
Research Association which has started
and I'm doing the job of the chair which
enough of the steering group this is a
one-shot from the website we are free
and they're very cool we are absolutely
no money if you could see from the now
very aged the design of the website but
it still works out even if it's not very
sexy please join if you know the guns
out costs nothing just click and there's
a lot of information support of our
event publications and the conversations
have been in different formats this is a
sort of the splinter event Sergio will
talk about the proper length which is
the animal conference we have meetings
which support scholars don't find more
financially because we you have no money
impossible other ways with resources the
moments of larger exchanges are the
international conferences and you can
see the next one will be there usually
November after you go back to the
session they will be nine havilland of
late reception who's organizing Israel
will give you more details the following
one in nineteen will be at the
University of Dundee
while in spring we have the PhD student
symposia student for PhD students but
also other scholars where we invite
senior scholars or our members of the
steering group to to share and comment
they're becoming bigger and bigger this
year it's after University no sinky and
it's in collaboration with hnu european
doctor history network because they are
having daily international conference in
coming just in the days after the PhD
suppose
just a ferry ride it also hope you
people go to bones
so Leslie that the program for the next
Madison symposium there's been proposals
for from Manchester card Athena Castle I
don't know each one of you will have
female spring next next year sorry I
made a mistake will be spring 19 please
do send proposals if you want to have
further exchanges the publication this
will be the next there are two for more
so-called suits the selection makers
from the conference's are published in
route which Siri which series which is
completely any
edited by Jonathan Hale these are the
six verse most recent works
architectural feminist is the latest
book from from the conferencing line in
Stockholm another we call is the journal
architectural cultures which is more
agile and as an online presence and can
include also films and visual materials
beasts and interactive materials besides
the more conventional academic as and
every year publishes an issue linked to
the theme of the conference while other
are proposed by the editors of guest
editors and I invite you to submit
proposals you find both on the Taylor &
Francis websites because Foxley group
series in the journal are now published
by Taylor & Francis we have I think
that's pretty much what I wanted to pass
down as information just a little bit of
background being the group was born I
keep saying 12 but it's more years ago I
think he's more 15 now to really call
attention to the presence of the
humanities here in particular in
architecture in the architectural
discourse and that was on the occasion
of one of the research then called the
research academic excellence was not by
research excellence framework those
moment of evaluation or research many of
the things we do we write we produce we
think of course cross boundaries in the
arts and humanities such as the idea of
a group of architectural historians and
theorists to very clearly say you know
we want to be assessed for that to be
present with our work within
architecture and the built environment
because that's what we address so that
was really the beginning of of the group
and that's one of the things that
continues to do why it's international
it addresses the issue of devaluation of
research mainly the UK as you probably
now this will happen
in 2022 for war produced up to 2021 we
are one of the bodies which can
recommend reviewers and experts for for
the assessment and this year we have a
voice because Jonathan Hale is one of
the experts dictionary of the panel
which for us is not an achievement but
an important achievement for Jonathan
but it's an important than knowledge
notice that that we exist in
architecture so that's my Oren [ __ ]
number one not two for a beta number two
which is go through the program very
quickly though we are part of this
beautifully designed I don't know who
take the poster yellow losing about the
PhD se√±or
she got to the next and some ice but
just to see what we are going to do this
afternoon
yesterday okay that's in production next
this is the Fleur which will probably
write in you've seen moving of the
background of what we've done so far and
where the ideal double-crossing standard
strong from betrayal
we'll talk about this later I'm not
going to be over face we'll talk about
sit under the speaker's we'll start with
mark Aziz this is the biography from the
a a website mark I don't think we need
to introduce mark as it's because
masterminding maybe because of who maybe
don't want to know if all this we will
be inspired that you can't teased
betrayed mark so sensors here you
introduce yourself by me sir Joe it's a
fantastic itinerary between practice and
history in theory from first Brazil rush
and then polenta academically
unfortunately about me my name is Sergio
I'm currently an assistant professor of
architecture needs to inferior to you
iPhone in the Netherlands I have been
there for the past four years ever since
I completed my PhD at UCLA prior to that
that's what that user is referring to
prior to that I was a practicing
architect in the nails so I went away I
came
at to you we I am also one one of the
founders of the crew toriel research
collectivist or fledging group that
tries to think about quert our practices
but also apply them to new types of
activations I am also the chair for HRAs
next conference which will be in
November at the window
just also supposed to introduce shall I
sit here I think my time I did my PhD
here mark
I'm currently I moved to the space
actually to to teach their interpreter
there for Christians very I have also I
came from a background of practice I've
been I practice many years before I
actually decided to take this path
[Music]
expensive kind of sitting there is the
also the architecture of the Uni Burmese
and completely sure of radical
philosophy and his research chapters for
receivers of collections of landscape
architecture politics and critical
theory to architecture against political
less than agency mystical theory
he's published numerous nested in
journals which include naturally finally
geographies volunteer and he teaches
here in the private school but also that
[Music]
there are not magical that's me my
background is in architecture
very architectural scenery but I do come
from architecture so I'm interested in
how many different other practices and
other disciplines affect the
architectural I would say love it maybe
too much at art practices because I
think they open up a series of issues
sometimes architects I reached afraid or
embarrassed to address anyway I've done
this series of work in violence events
the crisis of modern age means kind of
cities it can't could fall for
encounters as another I'm currently
literally about to hand in the
manuscript of the following ones and
also those ways to rethink architectural
fix up a series of key terms again in
the relationship
between architecture and receive an
interesting irrational way together
withering myrna's and mr. mayor I remain
alone so we warm the distinct of cereal
conference the purpose that magnet
suppliers and also and at the moment
mainly tutorial for architectural
history which is determining hm and for
the German market
these are the respondents are not doing
you'll be able to connect long distance
during also spectrum in architecture
originally then moved practice of theory
but in a wider way we designed apology
philosophy visual art media cultures as
well
she started with Cambridge and here and
she won the scholarship event was one of
the finally sort of PhD analysis
she is also co-editor of the Journal of
architecture founding director space
media rational and desert teaches here
at the grammar school and even inspected
University
[Music]
I
[Music]
my technique University
the university of milan germany and as
an architect I'd like to write almost
name
variety based on major problem in
practice and at the moment I am research
postgraduate fellow with the University
of Surrey
[Music]
let's make will or I said he chaired the
PC bullying and theorist first of all
I'm not a part of Texas wait sensei else
to teach that the
coming very close to the end of my
thesis
and you will give us our time ask
difficult questions or invite the same
because there's you might have to do
miss the drinking couldn't even early
and he will talk about the conference
now and and then I don't I think of
people you want to discuss some of the
issues so just a few minutes system
briefly
the conference
so like you should know by now my name
is Sergio like I said before I'm an
assistant professor of architecture is
too inferior to you I in the oven and
like I said before as well I'm the chair
for the upcoming conference which will
be November this year so it's titled
smartness beyond or between this course
and practice and so the conference in
Eindhoven will critically investigate
smart systems in architecture and
urbanism the now so commonly hyped smart
cities and smart buildings since
increasingly it seems that the word
smart has been thrown around to justify
pretty much anything and everything so
that the term smart has become sort of a
catch-all term to indicate the advent of
a some sort of charge technology and
shift that has been propelled by the
promise of a safer more convenient and a
more efficient form of living but
particularly and I say this in all
earnest particularly in my university
there has been this sort of almost
techno optimism that has been flooding
in through our halls everyone wants to
believe that smart seats is the next big
thing and no one really stops to
consider but is it really the next big
thing and what does it mean if it needs
it is the next big thing so that's what
this conference is also a little bit
about is to not only get married but
amenities do but also provide criticism
where criticisms do which seems to be
some sort of election equality
current discourse on smart cities I'll
just give you this very simple example
that if you google smart see this you
only come you only comes up with sort of
these generic images there's nothing
specific and yet everyone agrees that
it's it's a way that this shaping space
currently and will be shaping space for
the upcoming decade decades sorry
so to help us discuss this increasingly
pressing issue we rely on rather
distinguished scientific committee who
have also some of them have agreed to be
keynote speakers in idle or have already
agreed to be keynote speakers and I know
perhaps you know some of them perhaps
you know all of them we're going to
introduce them now you can check them on
our website but Geeta Mehta and what
Michael will be keynote speakers you
know and to establish the sort of
meaningful connections because we had
cover sessions before then we've had a
call for papers we will have about 14 or
15 somatic sessions you can also find
out about all of them on our website but
in order to establish meaningful
connections between them we have
determined a few themes or defined a few
themes which like I said have served to
organize this 14
sessions so these are themes and
sub-themes that we feel that could
somehow provide some sort of framework
to start discussing or start creating a
conversation about the qualities and the
difficulties provided by smart systems
in architecture and urbanism so again if
you go on our website you'll be able to
see everything about it
so naturally now as I mentioned submit
any type of abstract but that doesn't
mean that you cannot participate in the
conferences in June so in about two or
three weeks we will announce all the
papers that have been accepted and we'll
also open up the registration for the
conference so if you are interested and
feel that you would benefit from
learning a little bit more participate
in the discussion about smart systems in
architecture urbanism I would invite you
to of course come to Eindhoven and if
that's not really a possibility for one
reason or another like there is I
mentioned there's always the
publications that will come after this
so there will be a selection of papers
that can be further developed into the
volume the published wall or the edited
volume by rockledge and there will also
be a special issue of hrs journal
architecture and culture anyway like
I've mentioned our website you'll find
all the necessary information sometimes
also even
Sara information so please check it out
and I hope to see you 9 open
introduces 2d trails
okay I'm I'm not intending to give a
normal lecture I'm going to it'll be
restricted to really just a small amount
of time as a consequence I'm going to
have to be very brief very sort of
dogmatic etc but before I start I mean
some of the ideas for this originated in
a very large conference that Belgrade on
deconstructed deconstruction and
architecture and I'd continue to like to
thank Ben our Schumi and madame Derrida
for their strong support
just now very usefully someone used the
phrase smart architecture smart cities
etc and that kind of automatically
introduces us to I mean the problem with
the polyvalence of words I was thinking
while he was saying smart cities I mean
how would you distinguish between a
smart city and a stupid city I mean I
wouldn't remotely pretend to know and
what's more I don't think anyone does so
if you see the word smart I mean an
alarm bell or to go off in your head
okay let me kind of continue I'm going
to suggest in the course of these are
other scattered remarks that one way of
looking at theory is to see it as a form
of betrayal and that term betrayal in my
usage has an entirely positive sense I
it's good to betray but they want to
kind of come at it in a somewhat kind of
in the right way
the first point I'd like to make is that
nothing amazed me more as a child than
the way adults valued things they
variously called principals acting in a
principled way it seemed to me even at
that point the you know someone might
act and you could look at the
consequences and see if it was a good
idea calling it a principled position
didn't seem to add or detract from it
but you couldn't understand why all
these people especially at school wanted
to teach you of the value of principles
and of being principled and especially
of being loyal it was though then there
was a kind of that's a Christian stroke
cold war terror that people might be not
quite loyal and the good thing was to
insist always that people were loyal and
principled I think I was in a very small
minority I mean as far as the
Christianity was concerned the only
remotely interesting character in the
New Testament seen to be Judas
you know Judas had about him elements of
smartness
whyever he did it we we shall know but
somehow you can tell from the story that
he didn't do it for the 20 pieces of
silver he did it for something else
so that's why the 20 pieces of silver
appear there almost what you might call
a kind of you know secondary addition to
try and grab the story into he wanted
nothing more than 20 pieces of silver by
contrast in the school let me just give
one example there was an enormous fund
of loyalty and admiration for the
religious figure of Martin Luther Luther
was presented not only as correct in
religious terms school being Protestant
but above all a kind of person of
indomitable principled and rectitude
priests and school teachers would like
read out accounts of Martin Luther as if
they were reading from the Bible
especially the appearance of Luther at
the diet of summoned into the presence
of
Emperor
where he finally turns down any
compromise
and says famously here I stand I can do
no other
it's tannish Indus Anderson everyone a
lot of people had tears in their eyes
honest I mean this seemed to be such a
sublime representation of principle I as
a nasty little boy who is thinking why
not I mean nothing you could do I mean
by contrast a more intellectual figure
like Erasmus is thinking well actually
if you consider the number of people are
going to die in a religious conflict
let's try and get some kind of
compromise going of course
defeated
but in the meantime the Rasmus invented
the concept which I still think hasn't
had last it is time or VAT has never
really been at an ocean in Greece of a
dia fora which was things over which we
don't have to disagree things which we
can be indifferent about now this kind
of mounting loyalism you might have
thought given the school given the
religion given the politics it supported
you could say it was very much on the
right wing
but at university hectic as he went into
the left the the discourse was even more
powerful of loyalty principle whatever
people you admired in his musician is
Merkel principled people who you who
betrayed who were thought to be just
awful
revisionists all sorts of scum and they
were quite dreadful
well what is it that they were supposed
to have been loyal to what is the object
that you're loyal to when you're being
loyal once you start examining it
doesn't look too good
presumably in a way loyalty disloyalty
is in respect to something called
auto-doc see whether it's Orthodox
Christianity or Orthodox Marxism
but what are they so before we get on to
the virtues of betraying let's just
think for a moment about the idea of
Orthodoxy there is a wonderful book on
orthodoxy by the Catholic theologian and
writer GK Chesterton he says orthodoxy
is the biggest intellectual adventure
you could possibly have because you're
inventing all the time I mean sitting at
the center of orthodoxy is someone just
how can we put it making it up as they
go along and surely that's true
I mean just very briefly consider the
early centuries of Christianity here you
have this kind of minor rural teacher
preacher Jesus of Nazareth who attracts
a certain following nothing else than is
executed for being a nuisance you'd have
thought that would have been me and
pretty much the end of the story nothing
major has been put on the table some
people say maybe he's a son of God and
he has a certain family lineage which
suggests that that could be possibly
some of the family of David but really
you know once he's taken down from the
cross you'd have thought that's
basically gonna be after all it happened
to lots of other people
and then something happens I mean what
happens it basically simple now one
obvious way of connecting this to kind
of socialist historiography is to take
the case of Alain Badiou who writes a
very intelligent book on the relation of
Jesus were not really much about Jesus
but basically simple you can see you
don't know whether to call the book a
parable it is a sort of parable in which
simple is basically a signed part of
Lenin that communism is invented by
Lenin you know does Marx teacher writer
whatever but it's only in the hands of
Lenin the kind of organizational basis
and theories of it are projected now in
a sense that really does bear comparison
Lewis and bull
simples letters I think one of the most
astonishing intellectual achievements
really in Western culture they're quite
brilliant they're characterized by
having not the slightest interest in
Jesus Jesus now Jesus Christ I mean
doesn't mention Jesus hardly at all and
then as he says only because of the
resurrection only because of the bit
which is you know to most people
completely unbelievable he's not
interested in in a berating Jesus
teaching which was basically a sort of
quasi radical rural chat don't be nice
to people
then hit widows you know whatever but
listen Paul you know invents it and then
you know it's not for three hundred and
something years that what you might call
the beginnings of an orthodox view of
God arises in the Council of Nicaea
which is so philosophically
unsatisfactory its formulation of God as
three persons in one God the Father God
the Son God the Holy Ghost in this
second remember what the term is now in
Greek but you know have this curious
being which can be you know get one and
you get three it's extraordinary
Athenian philosophers at the time when
they heard about the results of the
Nicaea discussions would fall about with
laughter the philosophical ineptitude of
these Christians I mean come on do you
know what they've said now you know it's
three people who are you know I mean
none of them would have been given you
know a place at any school in Athens
teaching philosophy
Cheston goes on to say you know as it
were orthodoxy has to be recreated every
day it's made out of new stuff it
elaborates itself kind of theologically
but then also in sort of proto legal
terms it has to create every day that my
point in saying this is forget things
like heresy as being novel every day
it's orthodoxy or let's put it another
way there never is orthodoxy in the
sense that someone tells you if I say
what is Orthodox Christianity there
isn't anywhere you can go and look and
if it pretends to be
it's just theologically done it'll be
like I've been looking at the other side
like those books on you know Marx for
those without much time they're all
wrong it's I mean they're not just you
know awful they're wrong so orthodoxy is
cull is endlessly spliced together
according to the demands of today
of course this theologian say
Christianity is still relevant
there's only invented yesterday I mean a
pope who knew that was a Benedict
any Marxists are the ones who actually
approve of Pope Benedict is actually
kind of understanding what's going on
anyway so you can't in the literal sense
betray orthodoxy or rather orthodoxy is
Auto betrayal I mean perhaps that's the
better way of putting it
so you can't really betray in the sense
that it's usually involved
you couldn't become heterodox but then
we know perfectly well Marx was Hekla
heterodox heterodox relative to other
marks I mean we've seen well in my
lifetime you know whole ways of
distinguishing that you know if you look
at loo alt sir he produces a Marxism
which basically excludes the young Marx
the manuscripts very 444 and the green
dresser that's fine my friend Paul Hirst
you know went one further and says
really any there are a few pages on the
factory in Das Kapital the rest has to
go because it's basically governed by a
metaphysics of labor so my point is I'm
not going to say what's wrong what's
right here I'm can say you know Orthodox
is light revisions just continue there
really in a sense doing the same thing
orthodoxy and revisionism in some sense
rearranging the textual possibilities of
a nerve and then applying it as if
it was suddenly kind of liked
Trude but obviously there's more to kind
of betrayal than just a certain kind of
endless discursive condition it has a
certain aggression about it
it is in some sense kind of like
destructive it is there to destroy the
Orthodox in the sense of representing
the Orthodox as the real true whatever
it doesn't have to be in any sense
against the idea of truth
it has to be against the idea of any
discourse having a kind of permanent
position of truth relative to others
so there is this kind of aggression and
the aggression is directed towards
denying some ontological or
epistemological split between Orthodoxy
and heterodoxy or between the Orthodox
and the revision now let's turn more
openly to the question of theory it
seems to me that is a permanent
condition of theory that theory
makes one kind of wager and only one
wager which is that it will argue
whatever you want to call it argue
reason whatever and this was said to me
by poor Hurst the deal is that where the
chips land that's how it is you know for
the moment you you kind of have to
accept that's which where you are now in
order to kind of make this a bit more
explicit I think of yourselves in
relation to certain discourses we its
characteristic of us that we all arrive
like in the middle of a discourse
suddenly our attention is captured we we
kind of come into it
and it takes a good while to sort of
work out the basic landmarks the basic
landscape of this discourse when we will
come more confident
you know we can talk about it all of it
but you can begin to see it doesn't all
add up and you could begin to see as you
get to know something in more detail
that most of the so-called like
formulations of it are extremely
problematic think of the way in which in
many ways Marx is reduced to about 10 or
15 cliched quotations
you know they're they're not true as an
adequate representation of what Marx
talked and argued but the holder of is
not itself consistent
undoubtedly it's why mark says yes we
Tom exist so the wish
to in some sense attack I mean I'm
emitting its kind of aggression to kind
of think is you committed only to the
idea that when you thought something
that's it I mean not that's finished on
the contrary it starts again this
evening but for that moment it's what
you've sword in the consequence and the
consequence of this ideas never really
provide us with anything there are
things to be disintegrated there are
things to be degenerated I mean I often
say you know the purpose of an
architectural school is to stamp out
ideas which i think is true but actually
that's task of intellectual life as well
you you kind of you do what Hegel calls
it he says in for modernity the the talk
we have is of the criticism and
ceaseless ruination of everything the
ruination of ideas in a sense the
ruination of ideas is actually a more
accurate way of what we normally call an
intellectual life every morning you have
to get up and destroy a deeply admired
loved concept
that's you know it's it's a difficult
job as somebody's got to do it and you
know we should take responsibility for
being irresponsible what we are not
doing is putting together like an
edifice that will tell people what to do
mark orthodoxy whatever that - can only
be settled by argument now these are fly
you know not just Christianity Marxism
but do everything it's why an
intellectual is indeed an unreliable
object it's not just that they are these
delinquent
[Music]
Wreckers the other side of course is
theory in a way as seduction it's the
other half of the theory has betrayal
and of course you're all completely used
to the idea that seduction and betrayal
are two faces of the same coin
one reason for saying this and then I'll
stop at you because you know I don't
in a sense need to work it all out in
terms of architecture but I think it's
it's worth just saying that I mean I'm
opposed to the idea of philosophy
getting involved with architecture
because then architecture starts sanding
sillas offal automatic a kind of more
conservative
I think the function of architectural
theory in many ways is to get philosophy
of the back of architecture
but this can't lead to kind of
architectural prescriptions like a smart
city
I want to kind of recall some of these
problems through a particular memory of
going to New York to speak at the
architect's kind of know what you call
it the Memorial meeting after the death
of Jerry down there you expect many you
know expected speakers my weekly Peter
Eisenman etc etc I thought it was a
rather mean-spirited affair
a lot of people said they'd been drawn
very strongly by their dad's ideas but
then they worked out that he didn't
really understand architecture well of
course he didn't kind of garam
philosopher I mean he undoubtedly
preferred 18th century houses and you
know all the rest of the stuff that
flops but it's like and out yet
the question I raised really was was
that it wasn't a question of
architectural comfort
philosophical comprehension but my
experience here led me to the following
kind of formulation which seems to me
even now quite obscure
I was probably a point appointed here
simply on the grounds I knew Derry down
very well and it was a big kind of
popularity of Derrida in architecture
but when I'm teaching there I realize
that very few people in the room are
actually following what for a moment
I'll called the argument they're
reacting to Derrida are very positively
in
in a sense in an emotional sense they
find the wrecking very affecting
that's not to be translated into like an
argument or a set a point instead of
says this against the idea of
foundational origins or whatever it's
that his words seemed to do something
and what they did was seemed to suddenly
I mean I had talked to many people about
this like would suddenly like expand the
space in which they could sink
not by intellectual conviction but in a
sense through effective effective
subjective transformation
that undoubtedly you could put under the
heading of seduction but it was very
much I think the experience fine art
students and lesser but still
nonetheless of architectural students
that there was what you might call a
real but intuitive response and this is
not the moment to degrade you know
degrade intuition and so there it was
I'll just end you know with a note that
seems to me to bear on some of this as
you may know the aging Picasso who was
seriously troubled by the sort of death
felt in his sixties at the time had come
to deal with some of the old masters
let's imagine in because his mind that
he realized he was not only a great old
master but perhaps had a real inkling
that he was the last great master
I think particularly of the sketches
which he did which are now to be found
in Barcelona the sketches on that hugely
admired painting in Las Meninas
Velazquez in the project furiously
Picasso attacks the painting he produces
about 12 sketches each of which like
investigate the space of Las Meninas and
push it a bit further
no one need doubt the aggression that's
involved but the other side of it is not
only by the end has he produced work
which is infinitely fine but he has made
Velasquez greater than Velasquez had
beaten I mean tiller somewhere agrees
with the idea that you can literally
transform a painting through another
painting and why shouldn't you so its
aggressive it's a betrayal
but in a sense it has an access to a
sort of transit or achill I don't know
what you'd call it kind of greatness I
mean I'm not about talking about
greatness here
to the majestic powers of vel√°zquez but
now having been refocused in this
intense relation of Picasso Velazquez
this question is now it is full what has
fallen away is all the art historical
kind of detailed Spain in the 16th 17th
century whatever this is you know just
me and you and the effect is quite
astonishing
he has betrayed the laugh quest
and in betraying him he is able to
create space for vel√°zquez such that no
one else had ever been able to do I mean
I think the point of what I'm saying is
quite clear I mean betrayal in that
sense is a good thing okay thank you
thank you
[Music]
[Music]
I'm not sure how I can it's quite
intimidating to speak after that I'm no
no no please say but it was such a
fantastic tuck yeah and I mean I think I
was specifically taken by the fact that
ideas are things that can be
disintegrated and I think there's
something about that that will resonate
I think what I have to say today so I
have no slides what I'm presenting is
more kind of my my reaction to this to
the double cross link to the betrayal
and what I want to do is I want to draw
attention to one of the acts of betray
that I think is often debated in
architecture theory and that is the the
so-called death of theory or the end of
theory because we know this idea that
Furyk and I can be traced back to either
the diminution importance of the grand
narratives that used to mobilize many
discourses in the 20th century or in a
more colloquial way it is also a sign of
certain frustration in regards to the
efficacy of intellectual work what is
that we do or simply a disbelief that
cure that theory can contribute
significantly to what really matters at
any given moment so for example you
might recall someone I might go speak
saying very what's interesting but now
we have to work for you might also
recall the rise of do tanks or make
thanks from the 90s on
so indeed within and beyond architecture
many have more on the end of theory this
debate has haunted architecture massive
it will be a ghost since the eighties or
even you can even trace that back but
today in a word English the left seems
to be losing all the battles some have
recently argued that architecture is in
an a theoretical phase or that
architecture theory has no political
impact for as well Ventura de Sousa
Santos has suggested Theory confronts
its audience with strong questions but
provides only weak answers the future of
architecture theory from this lens
appears rather uncertain it seems to me
that this idea that architecture theory
can die implies trading theory as a body
a body that can live or die that can be
even resurrected that becomes allergic
to the grand narratives or that can be
even be healed or get better at the art
gallery bookshops okay this is my
cynicism but but nevertheless this
brings me back to the question of the
question of the practice of the Furies
and the content of theoretical
propositions the idea that Eureka has an
end implies that there's a unified solid
and enclosed corpus of writings
relevance to architecture or a unified
form of theoretical inquiry so called a
Canon I believe that to think theory
along these lines is only of course the
tremenda to theoretical engagements for
me fear is not a thing it is instead a
process of interrogating the present for
me theory does not live or die instead
it can emerge take hold and become
irrelevant but I really want to stress
the relevance of theory
in fact it is precisely the relevance
that Hans theory that I would like to
embrace this idea that fear is not a
thing but instead a commitment to the
present for me was best articulated by
Foucault when he stated and I quote the
critical interrogation of the present is
an attitude an ethos a philosophical
life in which the critique of what we
are is that one at the same and at the
same time the historical analysis of us
and an experiment with the possibility
of doing beyond them it's the end of the
quote this proposition for me is
fascinating because it allow us to get
away from the awkward coupling that
architecture normally keeps between
history and theory to engage in theory
along these lines is not to do history
or do theory for history and theory or
histories of theories but instead it is
to be concerned with the present as John
your Nachman argue in the closing issue
of assemblage in 2000 and and you might
remember that when when assemblers went
assemblers Journal clothes that was
another someone else declared that that
was the end of another theory but anyhow
she she suggested something that I think
it kind of resonates with this she said
and I'm quoting there can be no history
without Theory there can be no theory
without history history without theory
is just one thing after the other theory
with our history is hubris
so if the role of the Pharisees to
discern the relevant histories that
illuminate the present the practice of
theory is not only to situate to
contextualize and not to name the
present but more importantly it is a
practice that calls also for
constituting the present in the first
place
but if this is the case we also have to
understand the nature of the relation
between the practice of engaging in
theoretical investigations and the
present of course the relation is very
difficult to capture for me it can only
be understood as is a process and I'm
taking here Michael Hart's suggestion
that to engage in theory is to engage in
a process a process of becoming
so again if theory is not a thing a
singular body not an enclosed corpus of
writing but a process and a collection
of theoretical propositions that are
constituted in relation to a certain
present and that can become irrelevant
then again what is that we do when we
engage in theoretical speculations to
reflect further on this I would like to
consider the practice of theoretical
inquiry as being liquid a liquid cannot
live or die but it can be contained
dispersed or it can evaporate
of course I'm total and worried that
using this metaphor risks of course
being reductive but I would like to
indulge in in this for a moment because
it allows me to synthesize my thoughts
in regards to the content and practice
of theoretical inquiry so what is liquid
liquid is never stable it evaporates it
separates it is formless but liquid also
has a force and I'm very interested in
this as it flows and occupies our
different containers it has a capacity
to disturb to shape to the stabilized
and even to destroy for me to think
about theoretical inquiry as liquid is
to think precisely about its
transformative force transformative
insofar as it can be stabilized the
present and it is not only shape a shape
by its container it can also redefine
its container it exercises pressure back
but how as an entry point to think about
theory as liquid begins with a
suggestion that the product of
theoretical reflection is not an end in
itself it is not stable it is not a stay
we reach and cultivate in other words it
is not to maintain the heydays that
animated theory in the late 60s instead
I want to think that fury just as liquid
can evaporate and recondense in other
configurations and Here I am
specifically refuting the architectural
theory canon while many use these even
as means to legitimize what we do as
theories or to get a job perhaps I will
leave theoretical investigation is not
about extending this Canon or
complimenting it but it is about
confronting the present about mobilizing
the texts and histories that are
relevant to understand how the present
is constituted another point I want to
make with the use of the metaphor is how
leaky liquid can be easily contaminated
I think this is interesting in relation
to theory because I would like to think
that architecture theory can also be
contaminated by other discourses beyond
architecture but that architecture
theory can also act as a pollutant agent
by also contaminating other discourses
I wanted to to bring to recall an
example that actually happen here at the
a a at an event that mark organized some
years ago where he invited both
advisement
chips Kipnis to speak here
there was an exchange after following
following a LDLs presentation there lies
my presentation
Kipnis respond somehow interrupted in
his ways and he was he questioned the
relevance of what today we know as
forensic architecture he questioned I
advised man in relationship to his
contribution to the Canon and the
discourse of architecture for me that
the question in relationship to this
specific material of social specific
body of work entirely misunderstood
Kipnis entirely misunderstood the
possibility to think architecture
architectural II beyond the
architectural established canon an
associate legitimatize fragment parts of
advancement so I agree with what I
advised man was trying to do by allowing
the practices and techniques of
architecture to escape it's apparent
disciplinary boundaries in a very thing
in a very productive and urgent way
anyhow the last point I want to make by
using the metaphor is that just as
liquid is amorphous it is formless
theoretical propositions are also
difficult to contain in relation to the
volatility and precarity of the present
and this is perhaps one of the
contradictions of thinking along this
way to contain the relevance of
theoretical inquiry is not easy it
requires a militant attitude to avoid is
dissipation and evaporation yet at the
same time to contain a theoretical
proposition is to exercise pressure back
to the sides to which it speaks by
bringing clarity to however present
political reality has changed and how it
is changing
for this reasons is from a link in
architecture theory should not be
confused with an anything-goes scenario
the practice of the Furious is never a
value free attitude rather the very
opposite it is instead called to resist
the passive flows of the now the move
and evaporation of the contemporary
events it is not about naming tendencies
but about making legible the precarity
of the present I believe it is for the
theoretician for her or him to
articulate a theory that flows with its
sound force and not a theory that lets
flow overcome itself to bring about a
theory that matters in the present that
constitutes and destroys of course for
this the theories requires an aggressive
political attitude another example I
wanted to to to bring this to kind of
like illuminate this a little bit it is
the approach of an Argentinian group
called citizeness they are a collective
this is a group that was very active
between 2001 and 2003 in a period of
very intense economic and political
upheaval in Argentina this was a time
where regular citizens form popular
assemblies where the unemployed we can
be civil and when when the workers took
over centers of production but what make
this collective interesting is that in
the middle of these events they quickly
realize that in order to be effective
the role of the intellectual had to
change then they call for a very
specific type of intellectual practice
that they refer to as the mate and
researcher they describe this as follows
and I'm quoting the militant researcher
tries to generate a capacity for
struggles to read themselves and
consequently to recapture and
disseminate the advances and productions
of other social practices for these
reasons theories perhaps must also be
able to give eligibility and a forum to
interpret common struggles but this can
only work if the disciplinary boundaries
disappear or are mobilized the moment
English different discourses and
practices intersect in attempting to map
how common struggles today if there is
if there's perhaps something I want to
share today is precisely that it's
precisely that architecture must be to a
certain extent intersectional and
perhaps you know like I'm using a term
that we know we're aware is emerging but
but I think the the discourse on
intersectionality is one that wants to
be appropriated it must be militantly
contained and it should resonate in the
making of the present that matters
architecture theories might be thought
out both as a protic and a vehicle of
intersections that constitute and
illuminate any particular present over
one another and it is for the theorists
to make legible different discourses
phenomena forces and practices that
contact one another and especially it is
for the Furies to embrace the entire
Jena t of practicing at theory that
intersects I thought I think that the
collectives it was Yanis understood this
very well when they argue that and I'm
quoting militant research works neither
from its sound set of knowledge about
the world nor from how things ought to
be and yen as I said there is nothing
new about intersectionality yet perhaps
is only more recently that architecture
has been urged to address this more
directly in response to new liberal
conditions for me this all speaks about
the need to continuously ask what are
the present collective struggles
what are we fighting for or against what
other sides of struggle that we should
investigate under new liberal conditions
of hyper individualizing processes and
practices perhaps the greatest challenge
of practicing a form of Julia
inquiry is to ship the questions from
the I the you and the years to the we
the us and ours
thank you
things
[Music]
they start well i found particularly
fascinating the teases more cousins of
theory as a form of betrayal i mean but
i have a kind of a question because i
have to say
rather than considering the concept of
betrayal itself I would consider that of
accusation of betrayal so my counter
question now is who is going to accuse
you accuse you of betrayal
I mean you proposed a kind of already
quite an answer to this question that is
you said that they also somehow
undergoes a kind of auto betrayal right
so basically in to simplify if I if I'm
not wrong you said that you kind of
accuse yourself of betrayal so this
would probably in let's say imply a
strong critique of intentionality of the
concept of intentionality otherwise it
might suggest let's say another another
reference that goes to the concept of
becoming shielder is a concept that hid
arise from a sort of serious
acknowledgement of schizophrenia as a
condition of capitalism right so
therefore in order to avoid aporia's can
we say that the act of auto betrayal is
a sophisticated way to sustain critical
thinking
from well maybe you're right that's it
when you say who accuses you of betrayal
I mean I think probably everyone in the
room will acknowledge we accuse our
servants of the trail every day it's
good guilt I mean we we suffer it and it
would be a good I mean I think guilt is
an incredibly bad ingredient in politics
I mean we live in a period where the
sort of degeneration of humanism they're
largely consists in the tactic of making
people feel guilty if you try and make
people feel guilty
yeah they feel guilty for a while and
then they get fed up in the gang angry
I mean I think guilt is his disaster in
the field of politics
I definitely discover to try and get
people to apologize for ills committed
in the 18th century or something it
seems you know unbelievably
counterproductive but that doesn't
really I think I mean maybe you could
find another way of putting the question
I mean that doesn't answer your question
I know well you're not supposed to
answer I know it might exceed your
argument
could I make a intervention coming as
what you might call coming from an
orthodox theoretical position you might
call it it's extremely tempting for me
to play the role of the accuser to talk
about the betrayals of theory capital T
theory that occur within the
architectural institution and within
architectural discourse happily to a
certain extent that possibility has been
foreclosed by this event already
claiming the positive value of betrayal
within the text hedid marks presentation
so rather than disgust betrayal as a
question of like the truth and betraying
the truth I think it's helpful to think
about betrayal in terms of the subjects
it involves who is betrayed who is the
object who is betrayed and who they are
betrayed for as a question of seduction
who is the object of seduction and how
does betrayal work in the story of Don
Juan the admission of betrayal is
actually the moment of seduction when
Don Juan says to Tania Hannah that I
killed the commander her former husband
that's the moment of seduction that's
when he actually wins her heart in the
story so I think to pick up on the
gambling metaphor
one of the subjects is clearly the
architectural institution here
architecture with a capital A and even
concrete
architectural institution the game of
theory the wager the round of play has
an act of betrayal or as a kind of
remaking in the moment of the context
for the institution and for the uses of
theory is a positive narrative told by
that institution the story of betrayal
in this case is told by the house and
the houses real message is why don't we
play another round
that's not a question so much as it's a
an attempt to help maneuver the adoption
of the trail as a positive interpret or
explore the different meaning or second
precious dragon issue of the liquid this
liquid is is through pressuring and
force brakes and will suggest this
mission the complexion of the trail so
it seems that there needs to be almost
an announcement or
we for single is the thing in itself
movies needs to be a constant practice
and we die in office till we might wind
up doing it but then there are also
modern solving approach or this and
knowledge meant which is probably
something else I don't know if that's
the moment where the process stops and
then a kind of goes back into or out
aside and therefore becomes
transformative as if it could be split
in two different bubbles for
accumulation to another building artisan
in that position and recently
I don't want to explicit sometimes
analyses make you converse but yeah no I
think two new easy to say
for this happy couple raise a anomaly
because how do we speak
[Music]
they smell anymore they think that
simple remark that you were talking
about destiny Nets like babies wanna be
out there like the Medina's or or or
what ah so he's doing again for for
molasses these nice you don't have a
distinction
we can finish and it's only
so therefore it actually begins
is the secret rates and at the very
moment yeah I think we should be tracing
cell phone because last Medina's comes
back with a different in a different
life
and I think that's kind of like
that you wish which have been coming to
me in a way this is a theory I'm not and
we got a thing is that a piece of art
it's a way when these pieces of our
husbands
being on the house
nation
in retrospect to sell language we will
just for war but he'll survive
and I think it's also business
this console
glancing back we have our history
I'm going to do is something else
the person yet
I mean can I just give an example I mean
which breast it concerns the end of the
play by the German dramatist books now
hold on Tom's death in the play friends
of danto continuously warning him that
Rob's Pierre is speaking against him
organizing against him unless he goes to
the assembly and speaks it's gonna get
quite dangerous
Danton sits there absolutely confident
in his reputation as the great
revolutionary would not demean himself
to deal with this nasty little lawyer
Rob's Pierre prefers the company of his
friends and of his lover
as we know I mean Rob's fear had him
arrested and he was tried and
immediately sentenced to death by
guillotine he's taken their hand I mean
it's an entirely fixed trial but I
supposed to cover he's executed and his
lover distraught to his grief holds up
the Pyxis head out of the basket kisses
it and as the crowd say down with Dan
long the counter-revolutionary she lifts
it up and she says vivre Lavoie now
Irene it's an extraordinary moment what
what are you what are you to make of it
there is Dan Tong who alone tried
essentially prosecuted the king and had
him executed
is this the betrayal of those beliefs by
saying we've noir
or is it like a theoretical advance the
G has clearly distinguished between two
things one the tersely kings and we
might crown as we might execute them and
other Kings which exist in the minds of
lovers I mean you know it may be in
amorous discourse that royalty will find
their last refuge or in the minds of
children there is a symbolic function
you know which we could call King which
has nothing to do with the institution
of monarchy so is is she guilty of
betrayal or is she has she made a
conceptual advance for
it's incredibly beautiful whichever way
you look at it
[Music]
number two is ABC and I think the
thinking in architecture and watch me
not section does that well yeah I mean
out a bit don't worry I mean after a
year of difficulties at the AAA it's a
bit like defending with a hey you know
you try to explain why you loves this
place and then they say yeah but how
many of you see what the fees are it's
disgusting
yeah it's disgusting yeah and I hear the
teachers aren't much good right not
fantastic
so I read long live the a a somehow has
something about viva la voix about it
even though one must say it
does this mean I'm very good at
portraying or I'm no good at betraying
and in a case what would be the
difference
I mean you know it certainly means
there's not a lot of plain speaking but
I think I think it's interesting how
like no matter whether that responsive
of this actively train it seems like
people whatever happened up in the attic
it had already exhausted itself like if
it's not it's minimalist as an earthen
even
the story comes up a particular instance
has to renew itself
and I think that for us work where it
transplant but it can also begin to to
disappear like where these and anything
this is something perhaps that
architecture needs to do more
I think it's you're like no like I'm I
consider myself up like young enter any
police feel that it's so fix on them so
we don't we keep on that you can I sing
this is very kind of like body of
knowledge we have we done realizing that
it has already overcome itself like that
we I don't know I think if we have been
the comments that mark when they were
saying at the beginning of the way which
our policy it has to be constantly it's
all that
it has to be constantly produce and
reproduce it speaks about that Michael
O'Hanlon the limits to to capture and
same time it's a material already has it
the classic piece of
I guess we should bet once it transforms
if it's in black but I feel like we know
matter how many times the area folder
Possible's
what we are in institution we'll bring
it back there anything that's a problem
perhaps that we need to face and get rid
of because otherwise yeah
one theme that both presentations had in
common was the interdisciplinary
character of theory whether it's
philosophy and theory theory as a
mechanism for getting rid of philosophy
in some sense or for integrating it or
for contamination in both directions
it seems clearly that the ambiguity of
architecture theory rather than just
theory or architect theory within the
architectural institution depends upon
this interdisciplinary ambiguity so
theory only gets rid of philosophy in a
sense by incorporating philosophy
betraying it in a sense betraying
architecture by using philosophy but
then betraying philosophy in favor of
architecture I think this this ambiguity
is is structural and functional for the
role of theory in architecture and
that's what I'm trying to get at when I
say that the theme of betrayal is first
of all an admission and a project rather
than an accusation or a crime and it's
the guilt of theory that it that in the
architectural institution that is its
most kind of charming and seductive
feature
yeah and people survive when is
English momentum
she does its job
you have served
but how can we see our to take Charlie
romance that
perhaps enough to draw it also becomes
[Music]
the reference
in every police
thinking of those idea
from the moment in which they have to be
disappear so finals of a perhaps vastly
superior
[Music]
the ad was betrayed
disappears
in order to be to see architectural
features of the first sniper huh
Oh
because you're saying it seems the
return
when I say
our participation over the disciplines
there's always this exchange but when
you probably set the balance one unless
the other so I thought this would be is
stirring about your an ounce
about the Luas you know unless it's all
the water
the water the don't separate once
they're together they the hen stored
centrally and they become something else
and I thought this what you were trying
to say yeah
we traced father would you want
dancing that is perhaps
normally there
we might miss you repeating
my point of my question here
is
because we talk
recent interventions the discussion is
about the eternal architecture will be
thrown out or philosophical betrayal
help you identify what's what what's our
village
what would an architectural series
without philosophy develops other types
of inputs what would the philosophical
theory get up as far as like we need to
[Music]
I think
to the driver after that are consistent
with an aggravated well sorry
perhaps over
several to not allow them to say I mean
I think we can complete our debate
rather we can do so at these different
practices
and issues what
I found that this is
from there it's very interesting how we
draw someone we learn from so many
backgrounds look
danger actually is being used to think
about issues that will be on remember
and I think this is perhaps thank you
for I feel like we are
Marisa's in our tumblr is little
nevertheless
today
it's relevant though they are using a
particular things
there are new state buildings to
investigate certain problems there are
mapping things
you see much of the uses they use
techniques and are incredibly
architectural
speak of something that
- Boston accent eventually artificial or
not and I think that was forgiveness you
know question is do something wrong
and what we do as our family relations
begin stood there
else they used to be used by other
disciplines
we're making a slight change to the
program but since I didn't show you the
problem okay so we're gonna go first
with the gradual own towards big data
and and then down to the Spencer's and
me and then we ask again and we also
join the moderation so there's gonna be
dreams thank you
okay so hi again before I begin I just
want to think of course today and also
Doreen although she's not here for their
kind invitation
cuz I'm very glad to sort of try to
start some sort of conversation about
what I'm doing or the transgression that
I'm dipping my toes and perhaps not so
much in terms of theory perhaps more in
terms of history but maybe we can
discuss it but this is a bit of a
transgression that I'm dipping my toes
in and even as I test it out to
establish some sort of framework for a
big research project we are doing about
looking at architecture exhibitions
particularly taxonomy of architecture
exhibitions so theory and practice
thinking and doing are inevitably
intertwined the construction of most if
not all theories would argue finds its
basis on observations observations of
practice to generate insights and
underlying ideas the question that I
posed to you today is what if our
observations have been even if
wittingly obscured have been distorted
for biased how could we see the forest
when all we have been looking at are the
individual trees our textual theory must
once again transgress and go beyond its
confines to find inspiration in other
fields to reclaim any sort of
faithfulness in its task of making sense
of design practice or as if one
mentioned making sense of our present
condition specifically I would argue
that we must appropriate the techniques
the processes the systems the algorithms
developed within the field of data
science so as to enable a new way of
seeing architecture and with it enable
us a new way of thinking about
architecture I am NOT the first in the
humanities to find this particular
transgression to be interesting or
productive in fact I take inspiration in
the work of the Italian literary
theorist Franco Moretti who founded the
Stanford literary literary lab in order
to approach literature with the
quantitive methods first developed
within data Sciences to this new set of
tools observations and eventually
theories he has called computational
criticism so when his book graphs maps
trees abstracts models for literary
history was first published in 2005 it
was met with great controversy since in
that book he argued quite erratically as
it was mentioned on the books on jacket
cover that literature scholars and I
quote should stop reading books and
start counting graphing and mapping them
instead what Moretti was proposing was
to replace the traditional close reading
associated with literary criticism and
theory with a form of distant reading in
which the underlying patterns the
underlying trends of literature could be
considered in their entirety through the
use of bar charts maps and timelines so
his suggestion has shaken up the Academy
since it meant that there was a shift in
the type of analysis being conducted as
Moretti proposed much more of a
mathematical analysis of data rather
than a content analysis of that data so
in a certain sense its approach to
theory would make the old McLuhan maxim
more
probably than ever since the medium
would be indeed the message so despite
its claims to objectivity over the
conventional subjectivity of critical
analysis ultimately the point about
Moretti's computational criticism as his
critics identified was not that it gets
everything right but then it opens up a
fascinating new territory for discussion
most importantly moretta claims that his
approach allows for questioning of the
literary canon and the processes through
which it is constructed in short how
fury makes sense of practice perhaps
something for discussing afterwards
similarly to architecture literature's
canon has been defined by a select group
of examples which as a result has
allowed the narrow distorting slice of
history to pass for the total picture
what is being criticized then is the
basic premise in close reading criticism
that the few representative objects can
stand in for an entire class or genre or
in architectural terms can stand in for
entire style movement or considering
this criticism of the fallacy inherent
to selective construction of a Canon
within architecture zone historiography
establishes a connection to the work of
another Italian also another Marxist
thinker for that matter who equally
criticize the shortcomings of singular
constructions of history in developing
theory and criticism
Manfred Letta food is critique on
architectures operative criticism has
been widely discussed so I will not go
very much into detail here today except
to note that the fully associated this
selective construction of history with
singular narratives that serve little
more than to validate contemporary
positions of Modern architects and that
the suppression of and I quote
conflicting layers of detail involved in
any architectural project resulted in an
illusion of a seamless unified past used
to promote an equally monolithic future
end of quote
I would also note that in response to
them to the then prevailing operative
criticism the fully also proposed a much
more inclusive discussion of
architectural practice resulting in an
alternative critical method where
singular history was displaced by
revelation and
also an acceptance of history's own
internal contradictions and plurality
stressing its dialectical sides and
exalting it for what it really was
as such the foodie was advocating for
architecture theory and criticism to
adopt methodological innovations with
new models for analysis in order to move
toward a program of research conducted
within the modern university in short it
needed to develop consistently
systematic methods of analysis that
could provide broader perspectives into
architectures own body precisely what I
believe computational criticism has the
potential to achieve today so naturally
the the close reading of singular
architectural objects or architects
makes it all the more difficult to
uncover let alone consider architectures
internal contradictions and plurality as
well as provide any type of competing
readings of its practices what Moretti
has proposed instead was to
instrumentalize the techniques of data
analytics to develop the critical method
of distant reading as I've previously
mentioned so this two-part process
begins with the acquisition of data that
can be measured and compared which then
is subject to a process of the liberty
reduction and abstraction in preparation
for analysis in this manner distant
reading allows for the original data to
be recombined to be reproached on units
that are either much smaller or much
larger than the observed objects in
architecture this could refer to on one
end architectural elements architectural
materials or typological topologies of
space on the other end about shared
ideas trends or inherent or observable
systems once a unit of analysis is
defined at whatever scale deemed
appropriate it is then possible to and I
quote follow its metamorphosis in a
variety of environments or in a variety
of objects ultimately distant reading
allows for an understanding albeit
abstracted and reduced of the entirety
of a given production via literary or
architectural raising the question of
what the architectural Canon would look
like if we would consider if we could
consider all that was being produced
kind of insights could be drawn what
kind of theories could be thought of
when observations are not constrained by
a small subset of surrogate objects
could we finally develop a theory that
addresses not just the exceptional but
also the generic one in which
representative elements can be done away
with one that doesn't reflect
architecture as any given scholar
theorist or architect would like it to
be but one that allows us to understand
and make sense of what architecture
actually is one that closes the gap
between doing and thinking so the
appropriation of these quantitative
tools and methods to architectural
history and theory and Critias is not of
course without its difficulties nor
without its controversies however and
like Moretti I would not argue for a
complete replacement of close reading
but rather complementing it with distant
readings I do not believe that these two
methods to be mutually exclusive but
rather that both have their own
strengths their own weaknesses that can
be instrumentalized to provide a
different perspective into architectural
practice but also to provide a different
perspective into what we've been
discussing as history or theory this is
a position that I share with the new
media or actually digital culture
theorists left mano village who since
2007 has been developing new methods
based on computational and visualization
or visualization tools to produce new
understandings of art history and theory
as one of its takes in our I quote he's
not interested in choosing between
humanistic versus scientific goals and
methodology or even subordinating one to
another
end of quote but he's instead interested
in combining both in the studies of
cultures so combining the focus on the
particular and the interpretation in the
past form that is found in within the
humanities and the focus on the general
the formal models and eventually
predicting the future from the sciences
for that man of which much like Moretti
has founded the lab he's founded the
cultural analytics lab originally named
the software studies initiative for not
only conducting research but more
importantly for developing new methods
and tools that could be used by
researchers in the humanities and
humanistic Social Sciences without any
the technical background so basically
what I'm trying to say is that cultural
analytics is to manage what
computational criticism is to moretti so
a set of tools a set of methods and
practices that allows for the
large-scale analysis of cultural
material however as I have previously
mentioned a manner which is cultural
analytics are closer to an evolution
rather than to a revolution of methods
since they combine the novel ability of
utilizing large cultural datasets with a
more conventional use of close reading
analysis and interpretation nevertheless
I believe that this combination
introduces a much needed point of
discussion and if I'm being a bit cheeky
an inevitable development for
architectural theory since by first
looking at large architectural data sets
there is the distinct possibility to
identify a much more using torrez's
words faithfully representative sample
and have a better understanding of what
that larger set includes in this way it
is possible to not only identify
individual cases particularly worthy of
analysis and this could be either due to
their representativeness of the entire
set or that their deviation from the
norm but also what manner of each
describes as content islands that is
types of coherent content with
particular characteristics or aesthetic
qualities that are shared in only
moderate numbers so in this way excuse
me in this way these new methods of
computational analysis can do justice to
the variability and diversity of
cultural artifacts and processes rather
than focusing merely on the typical and
on the most let's say popular and this
has been precisely the approach that we
have tentatively deployed in beginning
to understand the taxonomy of
architecture exhibitions an analysis
born out of the observation that while
recently architectural exhibitions have
experienced a surge of both popular and
critical interest the current discussion
remains surprisingly incomplete by
failing to adequately identify address
and even theorize how the devices
through which the knowledge production
of the medium is being constructed since
our objective was to consider not simply
a few exceptional and singular
exhibitions but rather as much as fast
in their totality starting with 400
exhibitions that were originally
organized at the Netherlands
architecture Institute but then scaling
up to also include the exhibitions from
the MoMA in New York the CCI in Montreal
and also the Dom in Frankfurt so this
leads to about 12,000 or so 1,200
exhibitions so what we really needed was
some sort of robust set of tools and
methods that could engage with the
totality of the material and at the same
time assist in uncovering and
identifying different types within this
material so we've been experimenting
with combining the large-scale
computational analysis a king two manner
which is cultural analytics with a
particular form of qualitative close
reading furthermore in this first
analysis we attempted to also further
develop certain tools for what manner
which has described as a wide data in
contrast to long that and what he means
with the wide data is when you are able
to establish a number of variables that
can be used to describe a large set of
cultural artifacts so basically the
easiest way to put it is that instead of
just assigning the conventional types of
tags or variables so time geographical
location style you are able to break it
down into much more
much more varied levels of information
which then allows you to look and
potentially find the sort of content
islands but well the reason why I bring
this up is that such why that approach
presented an opportunity to rethink
fundamental assumptions about in our
case architectural exhibitions so it
rather than merely classifying them
using this sort of very much used
tried-and-true conventional markers time
geographical location media genre style
what's that sort of thing there would be
endless other dimensions it could be
equally considered so in this first
exercise we approach it only by the
level or the type of medium that the
architectural exhibitions were
displaying and we've sort of dug into it
to really look at how in this case
architectural drawings were being used
to represent architecture within the
gallery in any case with this why data
analysis we we are able not only to find
new similarities new affinities and
clusters in the universe of
architectural exhibitions but also in
every it has helped us to question our
common sense view of things where
certain dimensions are taken for granted
ultimately this is arguably the most
visible expression of the transgression
being operated by appropriating big data
and computational techniques in
understanding architecture in exhibition
or in other forms since this has ineptly
made us question how we think how we see
and ultimately how we act upon our
knowledge everything changes when one
becomes able to see the forest for the
trees
thank you
just maybe to outside
okay so I don't have a visual
presentation it's just me talking I'm
afraid so
just reflecting on some of the things
that have been said already I suppose it
might be or might not be useful for me
to say that like will I'm not an
architect and just get it out of the way
because usually say that at some point
but also I'm not an architectural
theorist but rather critical theorist of
architecture which also then involves
the rather sort of meta task of being a
critical theorist of architectural
theories and that's kind of what I'm
doing here okay so the title the
enigmatic perhaps title of this is
withdrawn or they're not so strange
disappearance of the subject of
architecture and this talk is about how
theory is betrayed in flat and
object-oriented ontology and the
mobilisation of these in architecture
and it's also about how we can get this
betrayal in turn to betray itself and
specifically how we can get it to betray
its relationship to to capitalism that
it never explicitly speaks of in what
goes today by the name of architectural
Theory the question of subjectification
that is of the shaping habituation
acculturation and modulation of the
subject has fallen out of favor
only really in feminist theories of
architectural production and experiences
it still afforded any real serious
consideration even here however there is
typically a reluctance if not an
outright hostility to address this
question in specifically Marxian terms
as distinct from Foucault daeun or
delusion ones to the Marx in terms of a
critical theory of late capitalism under
the object-oriented terms of present
fascinations in theory the subject fails
even to qualify as an object of
attention likewise in the currencies of
new materialism and ontological flatness
it counts for little if anything the
affirmative agenda assumed by
architecture since its post critical
turn back in the 90s is well served by
this situation since it effectively
undermines the very ground on which any
negation of its current operations might
be based
so I'm going to say something now about
the the new MU in architectural theory
which i think of represented by flat and
object-oriented ontology z-- objects or
oriented ontology z' for obvious reasons
typically abbreviated 200 syrian
architecture today is as often as not
not theory but it's Betrayal
non theory ante theory the real work of
theory or the real work of real theory
consequently consists in making this an
theory betray its own betrayal a
double-cross the focus of this work the
work that I'm about to undertake falls
here on a discussion about flat ontology
and object-oriented ontology and
architecture if it was held between Todd
Gannon Graham Harman David Roy and Tom
whips wisdom and published in log 33 for
2015 and appeared under the title the
object turn a conversation now while
this particular piece that I'm focusing
on stands for a particular turn in
architectural theory one from Delors
Harmon from flows to objects it also
stands to represent a more long-standing
betrayal of theory in which both of
these turns are complicit this larger
betrayal and I've already said and
written a great deal about this has its
first stirrings perhaps as early as the
the 70s and then 80s in things like
learning from Las Vegas and balam's Los
Angeles the for ecologies but the more
decisive shift towards the pragmatic
closed critical projective occur in the
mid occurs in the mid-90s and this ship
denounces practices of theory in and of
architecture that are based on
linguistic semiotic and representational
models and these are chastised and
integrated principally for their
association with and servicing of
critical theory because of the negative
and destructive effect of the latter and
for their incapacity to be in capacity
to be inventive positive and focused on
the news so from here on in theory in
architecture is called upon from some
quarters at least to be affirmative and
novel to speak about moods feelings
effects and immediate experience rather
than of ideas meanings concepts and
critical reflection
so if this turn starts with a call to
ditch Derrida and embrace Delors
Duluth's himself is now displaced by
this latest turn which goes as I've said
from flows to objects from relations to
the relay tower as Graham Hartmann puts
this so in the essay the sorry the piece
I'm referring to here as Todd Gannon
says here he says of the ubiquity of
Delors in the 90s a few decades past
that training all of us feel a certain
frustration with the discursive status
quo in our fields and a desire to strike
up new conversations end of quote
and he also says as many thinkers
associated with ooo have pointed out
so-called philosophies of becoming such
as Delors is seem more interested in
flows intensities and the processes
operating beneath or beyond things than
in the things themselves so just let the
weight of the unabashed introduction of
that term just sinking the things in
themselves or invert things themselves
according to architect Tom whips wisdom
we're just done for the moment at least
with continuous variation
interconnection and networks this just
isn't according to him this just isn't
the way the world works
boundaries are back edges and boundaries
he says are beginning to develop insides
and outsides are appearing
close and smoothness then are so mm
livin right all that de leur ting
discourse all the folding and smoothing
and continuous variation has according
to Todd Gannon run its course not
because it's deficient so there wasn't a
kind of theoretical argument against the
de leurs Ian turn but the the premise of
this is just because we have to have new
ideas now is the time for things it
seems and things in themselves as wisdom
remarks after a long period of focus on
fluidity and connectivity a new formal
lexicon is in order
chunks joints gaps parts interspecies
contour knipfing a misalignment
patchiness low-res nesting embedding
interior interior tea and above all
mystery are terms that resonate for me
so architectural a theory it appears in
such pieces and the one I'm referring to
here is hardly unique to the output of
paradigm pushing publications such as
log or ad as a never-ending series of
exhaustion's
when everything's been mined and its
initial luster of and the initial lustre
of its treasures worn off it's time to
seek out new seems new quarrys when the
novel becomes the normal new novels have
to be invented and these are to be found
now in series of things things in
themselves outside of relation or
correlation
first from Derrida to dealers now from
dealers to Harman Brian Harman I'm going
to come back to that kind of chasing day
she about chasing the novel but I think
there's something more substantial that
I want to comment on about this turn two
things in themselves and I don't want to
do I don't want to kind of dismiss these
ideas merely on the basis of their their
interest in fashion ability there is in
fact something more substantial worth
addressing about these non theories I've
set myself a bit of a difficult task in
in in that I kind of need to explain to
you what flat ontology is and I can't
pretend I'm going to do it neutrally in
order to then kind of say what I think
is problematic about it in issues for
architecture so Harlan says that flat
ontology means that any entity can
potentially be taken seriously rather
than some privileged entity the human
subject comes to mind
he says sticking its nose in under every
tent and trying to constitute a full
half of reality as in most western
philosophies since Descartes think of
how ridiculous it is that we set up the
basic opposition in philosophy between
the mind and the world end of quote
and it then he goes on say flat ontology
should be praised for shaking up this
stale modern scenario so flat and
ontological object-oriented ontology z'
in common with the the broader movement
of speculative realism are against the
correlationism they see as originating
in can't if not their cart and everyone
after at least up to Heidegger
I'm going to start a bit more about what
that correlationism means so flat
ontology is about casting aside the the
whole question of the subject in
relation to the object which I you know
I think has pretty clear issues for
architecture so so casting aside the
whole question of the subject in
relation to the object of the
correlation in County in terms between
Newman are things in themselves and
phenomena so the things as these are
perceived by the transcendental subject
so the subject is dethroned brought down
from its privileged position of
occupying a full half of the equation
between subject and object its relegated
to the position of being an object among
all the other objects in a great chain
of being but a great chain of being
that's now reforged with horizontal
rather than vertical links
so some polemical propositions about all
of this from me firstly the
disappearance of the subject in theory
is a betrayal of theory secondly theory
is negative linguistic conceptual and
dialectic or it is nothing
and third theory is a theory of the
subject or it is nothing in these
propositions they were informed by a
number of perspectives but I'm
particularly following the philosopher
Andrew Cole contemporary philosopher
especially interested in Hegel I'm
following him in locating the origins of
theory and us as such the origins of
theory as dialectical in Hegel in Cole's
the birth of theory he writes and so
this might be useful because it's you
know we can all have lots of definitions
of theory but let's have one to work
with on and against if we want to so he
says by theory I mean above all the move
away from for love of philosophy within
philosophy itself even as Hegel retained
counts idea of philosophy he completely
broke it apart from within placing
inside the modern academic discipline a
figure a form of thought sorry a figure
a form of thought that is decidedly
medieval and indelibly linguistic
dialectic end of quote
and what Hegel breaks apart in can
through this indelibly linguistic form
of dialectical thought is cants concept
of the subject Hegel writes coal
rejected cants view of the subject
deep within which lies the logical a
priori categories that sort and present
experience as a representation no amount
of history no contingency of situations
can alter counts transcendental subject
always hardwired
to present experience by dint of the
categories yet Hegel continues coal yet
Hegel yanked out the wires and cross
them so Hegel's insistence on the
linguistic and the conceptual is echoed
there's coal points out in a definition
of Theory offered by Frederick Jameson
so this is what Jameson says theory
begins to supplant philosophy and other
disciplines as well at the moment it is
realized that thought is linguistic or
material and that concepts cannot exist
independently of their linguistic
expression and as Hegel himself says it
is in language that we are conceptually
productive so Hegel's concern with the
contingency of history and the
historical situation to the making of
the subject is of course what lays the
groundwork for Marx and Marx's
historical conception of
subjectification which is mediated by
specific historical conditions of
capitalism whereas he says in the green
dresser objects are produced for
subjects so capitalism makes commodities
to be brought but also subjects are
produced for objects so there's a
reciprocal worker subjectification and
going on there there happens because of
commodity capitalism's so bad - - flat
ontology x' object-oriented ontology x'
so if I'm saying that these are not
theories then what are they
I propose that these are arguments for
capitalism
and this is what I want them to betray
themselves as or am i equally well say
that these ontology czar correlates of
capitalism the first correlate Carol at
one is that the new is just a rather old
marketing device which were all very
familiar with the fetish of the new in
all marketing campaigns the fetish of
the new which always displaces itself
with the new new and so on so there's a
kind of marketing of
the people proposing these theories and
marketing of their own identities on the
academic stage a marketing of the
journals in which their pieces appear a
marketing of the institution's to which
they're affiliated through this constant
invocation of the new which is just a
kind of might appear to have something
to do with the avant-garde but as people
in this room know better than me this is
itself a kind of highly problematic
notion about the relationship between
the avant-garde and and the new so
correlate to the flatness of ontology
just is the flatness of general
equivalents on and through which
capitalism operates it might appear that
this kind of flatness represents a kind
of rejection of human hubris or of
architectural hubris is that we stop
thinking of ourselves as important and
say you know who are we to say we're
more important than a chair or a glass
of water and it might also imply that
you know it has something to do with the
disappearance of social hierarchies or
an advocacy of the disappearance of
social hierarchies this is not
international at all
there isn't any Democratic impulse
behind its antipathy towards hierarchies
so Harman says in this same piece we
live in an era that is just as pious
about democracy and equality as an
earlier era was about God I've come to
think that both sides in this dispute
missed the point what is really
important in history what is really
important in history is neither human
individuals nor human collectives but
non-human objects and let's also note
that Harman is quite clear he's not
particularly interested in thinking
about power because he thinks it's a
kind of worn-out topic of conversation
and that doesn't consider it especially
important
so there's no egalitarian political
impulse behind flat ontology x' or
object-oriented ontology is in fact the
political what's actually happened and
this is kind of political in itself is
that the political has been taken out of
circulation as an object that we can
phenomenally and conceptually address
objects must now just be objects and
correspondingly architecture just is
architecture architecture just is things
architecture is what it is it kind of
collapses into a tautology and I'd say
this is kind of like how capitalism
operates because capitalism is at one
level of system of general equivalence
that flattens out everything into a
single ontology that affords no special
place of privilege to the subject yes it
kind of makes commodities of a saw no
special place of privilege to the the
skills or the products of our labors and
you know this goes back or takes me back
at least two to simul in his famous
essay of 1903 the metropolis and mental
life who says this is something that's
quoted by Tafari
all things float with equal specific
gravity in the constantly moving stream
of money
Koral at 3:00
flat ontology x' and object-oriented
ontology czar also correlates of
capitalism because they impute a mystery
and a lure and these are Harmons terms
and those echoed by his his fans in
architecture like Tom whisk am a mystery
and allure its objects in and of
themselves so we can never know objects
so they have a kind of mysterious allure
so wisdom speaks echoing Harmons
vocabulary of the ambition and need to
keep architecture from losing its
mystery as a thing in itself so
capitalism also makes the appearance of
objects mysterious it endowed them with
a mystical allure and this is just
called more conventionally commodity
fetishism the affirmation of the
mysterious allure of the object is
itself pure mystification and obscures
as its phantasmagoric effect what is
obscured for example is the movement you
know so that the transportation them the
mining of materials that architecture
involves the conditions of labor under
which material it is extracted and
transported and shaped and formed the
conditions of labor under which
architecture itself is organized the
ends to which architecture is put even
the labor of the concepts through which
it is framed promoted and consumed are
all obscured by simply saying that
architecture is a mysterious alluring
object so these are not actually flat
ontology x' they're only made to appear
as such through a theoretical gloss and
and this is more problematic than ever I
think I think it's especially urging to
address
and kind of address this issue and delve
into what might seem to some extent that
kind of minor concern about a few people
having a conversation in an
architectural magazine especially
because conversely there are so many
figures and initiatives in architecture
now they're trying to actually
acknowledge labor in architecture so
people like the architectural lobby like
the architectural workers in the UK okay
that's the end thank you thank you
before it gets too late and I get too
emotional I want to assign everybody the
speakers first of all responding guests
and the audience and they end up really
problem for the hospitality it's
wonderful
mental gymnastics so in case I forget
the nature as I forgot the problem I
just wanted to send you and at this
moment I think that I could just show
you my my images and then go home in bar
instead with a few movement sentences
but pieces of sentences for mark and and
from doubt so allow me to do that and
also to try and pull together some some
threads mark started with a Hegel's idea
of three pieces and the ceaseless
illumination of ideas as that which
theory does and the null point was an
intellectual is an unreliable object
this could be functionality claims to be
Internet intellectually the role of
theory is to get philosophy of the back
of architecture and then to move on to a
couple of points just made by dark dark
forces called theory is that means away
from philosophy within philosophy itself
which I would like to foreign
appropriation and paraphrases
architecture theorem architectures and
move away a market actually in
architecture which is in a way a trope
what I'm trying to say
to architecture and the couple pictures
the practices of the razor and the
ambiguity they perform in in
architecture but I started with with a
question I think in relation to the idea
of of double-crossing so what happens
when architecture is critical of itself
and critical of its critics is an
appropriate it's coded representations
and I'm thinking of plant section manner
of the sketch the drawing painting
etching but also the letter and also the
writing in architecture to undo itself
and us speak speak about architecture in
images so in other words how does
architecture double cross itself to exit
it's obvious tasks and look at itself as
if from the outside to then return to
itself but changed is this a production
of thoughts on architecture in literally
from within architecture this then the
double-crossing which is a stake here
needs to be taken very literally as a
twice crossing architecture needs to get
out of itself and critically and
transformative Lee look at itself to
then return to itself in its practice
and in this sense the crossing that is
double must be interpreted both
literally and dynamically it's a
crossing that exits transgress
transgresses breaks away from the point
of view of the established and the
conventional and then returns and it
needs to return
but what it returns to is not the same
it is a same that because of what
happened it is changed by this very
transgression performed in this double
crossing so we know theories that stem
from architecture transgress and forget
architecture to return to it in a sense
of returning to being fully architecture
not just applicable to architecture but
be in architecture but this is another
would be another story but we know even
more and perhaps better of theories that
are borrowed from outside architecture
enter its porous boundaries are
appropriated by architecture they're
often misappropriated distorted
simplified adapted reduced but I would
like to argue that this very process of
adaptation and incorporation is in
itself already an architectural project
but then when is it the architecture
performs these crossings and why is it
interesting at this point and is this
theory and can we speak of a theory of
architecture or better of a theory from
architecture rather than of architecture
forgive me playing with prepositions
what I'm trying to argue is the that the
directionality and intentionality of
this exists and this return is what I
would like to address as a as a double
crossing and I would like to claim for
this the nature of project and of an
architectural project of critiques I've
theories is liquid as as Yvonne
suggested and enters the roads displaces
and and it's continuous or as Mark
suggested is it infiltrates and but it
also constantly betrays this theory
needs to stem from from architecture but
it is different it is clunky its
encumbered by practices by history by
materiality by making it needs to exert
in the sense of exhausting itself - it
needs making effort to produce this
because as it constructs this it needs
to demolish itself and even its own very
distractions are undoing and so what am
i I'm just trying to propose this by
using a couple of examples which
practice this through what I've called
erasure of course erasure is not only an
act of of removing and through examples
I want to look at moments in which
different practices of erasure in
architecture become questioning of
architecture from itself through non
linguistic but in the sense of non
verbal or non textual practices and
instead using its own languages and
encodes we need to define architecture
I'm sorry it's boring but just as a
starting point that thinking making
producing of architecture which is
critical and cell refractive practice
that may or may not be directly involved
in or productive of the construction of
physical environmental artifacts in this
sense architecture at large is to be
intended to be
the practical contingencies of
professional practice as a system of
production the two partially overlap but
they do not always coincide and so
architecture does define these also the
space for production of ideas in
relation to design to experiment with
architectural language and for
consideration of the role of
architecture in the city in any society
at large as a form of self of constant
self-questioning I want to start from
from this measure and then we we can
happily disagree and I want to look at a
moment when Aldo Rossi and we discussed
it this morning in the seminar clearly
articulates this very briefly but in a
sentence where he really puts forward
the complexity and this manifold nature
of the architectural discipline and this
is the text we we discussed which is
architecture for museums Rossi
identifies theories theories of the
project as the most important moments
accomplished and I'm quoting in the
relationship between the theoretical
view of architecture and the making of
architecture so it's not one or the
other it's that somewhere in this
relationship and he sees the thinking
the process of thinking in architecture
is one with the project of architecture
so it's subjective it's far from the
modernist method it's an architectural
theory that for rossi remains internal
to the discipline of design and produces
an autonomous this course that does not
need to recur to external disciplines
such as economy sociology linguistics of
course ross is the first one who does
ish
so what happens when we talk about
erasers and how what do they mean
again very rarely they consist of
removal or physical removal of material
they are often practices of obliteration
by adding and facing literally changing
the connotations of a face so in itself
I'm claiming that erasure is a project
never separable from a determination and
decision and interruption and also never
neutrally restricted to the sole
presence of a trace of support as it
represents it connotes or it refers to a
line and mark it's always also more than
its trace and it refers back to the
object or to the absence of the object
or to the deliberate removal of the
objects and to a wider context of its
deliberation in this sense then
architecture can perform erasure also
while remaining within the specifics of
the discipline erasure of a building's
function or erase erasure of
architectures history that reinvents the
building's memory operations of raising
of erasure become critical tools for
architectural design whose innovative
potential paradoxically resides in its
partial failure if it succeeds if it
completely raises its it fails
a brief example we are in 2003 belgian
architect live in the book identifies
and displays what he calls the seven
sins of urbanism one of these is
typology is the typology of the
modernist form follows function and one
of the statements claims that the
separation of function must be dismissed
to produce what it calls a more
attractive world made of the
nondenomination of it sort obvious what
is more attractive the statement
advocates and here is the erasure the
suppression of the notion of modernist
typology but as it does it it proposes
this fluid and recombine herbal
arrangement of what the proposition
calls the nondenomination
so there is a suppression of typology
here but we are talking about type and
its possibility intrinsic possibility or
rather potentials for real aberration
and only partial addition to if not
total indifference as well to to
function we are all familiar with the
amazingly modern in the sense of
contemporary and open way American see
had defined type in a much more critical
way than the modernist typology type is
formless it doesn't host predefined
function in it and I'm closing from
Catalonia 1825 all is more or less vague
this type is a nucleus for complexity of
spatial arrangements that are adaptable
and are accommodated but are not
generated by function and therefore the
possibility of variations in intrinsic
to ich I quote again a
18:25 like a sort of nucleus about which
are collected and to which are
coordinated in time the developments and
variations of forms to which the object
is succeptible
unquote so this idea of vagueness which
we find already in in customers type
question the very stability of form and
opens the oscillations of the multiple
and so the books manifesto when
relations relation to the attractiveness
of the nondenomination j-- of function
the modernist language of architecture
is subjected to oscillations to question
the given of function and incorporate
the unexpected and the yet unnamed it
opens possibility it continues the
following year it moves with these
defects on the idea of the architectural
type it takes is no effort practical
encyclopedia of design in building also
known for english audiences as
architects data and starts selectively
depicting to be now fit no efforts very
conveniently sandwiches museums in his
manual between churches and cemeteries
it's a foothold in reading maybe
unintentional for no efforts but we're
talking about institutions which are
also short obvious so it's interesting
to look at the museum and a museum in no
effort is identified as a container and
it's reduced to a functional diagram to
optimize shelter storage accumulation
catalog display and lysine that's the
only thing really so in the manual the
functions and the systems of relations
are defined but the architecture is not
the architecture is reduced only to
typology is broken bread broken down in
other sections of plants which do not
find correspondence and it's here that
the book produces his critique of
typology by raising but not everything
avails parts of text parts of functions
and then very interestingly having
performed this operation does almost the
reverse takes buildings which are not
museums you can probably recognize this
one and says well whether maybe this is
a museum if I change the legends
so this erasure is a drawing that cuts
through architectural topologies and
conventions removes functions but
returns forms to the possibility of the
project the adds new liquid lines and
the correction fluids and sub like
creating new contents by removing past
details
so this writing off does not scrape away
anything it adds doubts it produces
questions uncertainties of the given it
obliterates function skip spaces or the
other way around
to reoccupy them and modify them with
the possibility of the vague emptied
forms and rules would become available
once the game and liberated for a
reinvention not from scratch never from
scratch but from a design partial
amnesia
another form of erasure and this is a
true assassination and of course it's
performed by by Aldo Rossi and published
in as a cover of the forest book but
actually there's another story the
watercolor architecture assassin a is
dedicated to monthly dr. Furi and he's
becomes emblematic of the the difficult
relationship between the two and between
the project of critical architecture and
the project of history of history that
the two were
defining at the same time in the same
city in the same university in different
departments having lively arguments so
we have the foolish historical project
roses critical architectural projects
what do they do they both in different
way produce breakings the method of
history the language of architecture but
when roses image is dedicated to the
food it is a further step which is the
denunciation of crisis of architecture
from architectural responds to the
denunciation of the historian what I'm
trying to argue but I'm actually heavily
borrowing from the foodie or rather from
some previous writing by the fury is
actually this was already happening
without the fury rising this and there
is where I'm trying to point out at this
this architecture working through itself
[Music]
Rosie draws the brakes breakings of his
own architecture and they become
symptomatic of a shift in his own work
it's at this point that he moves towards
abstraction from reality of the city to
the analogical where he reduces the city
to figures to the form where he starts
using this obsessive and self
referential personal language but this
is what we know it's the editorial move
that places the roses images on the
front cover of the forest English
version of project Autopia
and so we always read this as a response
to today's let's go back just a few
years in 68 the fury publishes theories
and theories and history of architecture
where he talks about about Rossi and the
argument I think is is easy is much
more powerful here if we read it
backward Rossi talks in general about
Ross sorry the foodie talks about roses
silent architectural objects and
appreciates the merging in his work of
architectural criticism with a criticism
of the CV and this combination and I'm
imposing results from the wish to add
eared with enthusiasts to the multiple
pressures of urban reality and at the
same time to introduce image
architectural events and fragments which
might force the entire meaning of that
reality so perhaps those breakings of
the architecture Isis in a are not the
result of this later assassination
they're not performed by the fury but
they are already part of roses project
and they are performed by the city and
its forces on architecture so this
project is always already made of
architectural events and fragments there
are fragments that come from rationalist
modernist from history of architecture
from personal memories but when roses
produces projects which are urban yes
but partially fragmented they renounce
the control of the urban plan and our
local inserted in the city perform not
only a critical architectural act in the
city but essentially self-destruct the
fury reads the the plot of the projects
as a form of architectural treaty says
it says it explicitly but then means
then for a criticism perform in and by
architecture but in doing this Rossi
produces and it's quite interesting that
actually this architecture is
assassinated several times because there
are many of these sketches and drawings
and color and black and white versions
some with the dedication some without
rose's produces also critique of
criticism through a drum and built
architecture fragmented and partial he
suggests a method not a language but a
method to develop a language that is
able to address the past of the
discipline as well as the present of the
city and the past image and in doing
this produces a critical architectural
tool that is always productive of
instability first of all the instability
of architecture itself and so this
collapse is portrayed in architecture as
a scene a are not at all caused by the
forest attacks but are always and
already also genetically imprinted in
roses way to to do architecture they are
designed to operate like a surgical
instrument on a city that it's incapable
to control critical of its own language
and critically acting on the city this
architecture becomes also critical of
criticism I end with Tafari because I
have he writes architectural criticism
puts in crisis the crack the critics of
architecture on the contrary since the
traditional task of criticism is already
realized within the architectural
structures one could say that an
independently critical architecture is
the objective of destroying any critical
intervention from outside and of the
forest squad so perhaps this
architecture this self assassination
which I don't want to call suicide is
critical because in destroying
architecture it betrays therefore
denounces forms of a form of theory that
is non Treacher's
my stock before betraying myself
[Music]
got the hardcore Theory side right here
yeah just as a kind of public
announcement to begin Tafari was
mentioned by all three in this session
so that means it's open season for the
audience and for the respondents I think
okay I think Teresa's talk brought our
attention to the larger institutional
context of the question of the trail the
question of theory and also therefore
the question of criticality criticality
as Doug also talked about it being an
external question of criticism but as
Tracy talked about it as an internal
project of architecture self criticism
with a very complicated relationship
that two furry describes with external
criticism I think at this point it's
helpful to distinguish between
architecture as an institution and
architecture as a discipline and in the
project the way the project reconstructs
architecture each time anew erasing in
order to reconstruct this is an
interrogation and a critical
self-reflection on architecture as a
discipline I would argue
rather than architecture as an
institution for architecture is
incapable of questioning is its own or
his own death its own existence if it
does it's only to the extent that it's
in a sense a disciplinary problem and
not an institutional problem of course
now I'm gonna reference to fury this all
stems back to the moment in which the
architectural institution was put in
crisis in the early 20th century with
with what he calls the realization of
the plan at the point in which
architecture becomes less the subject of
planning and now the object of planning
you have to think about I think the
question of self reflexive 'ti of self
criticality within this fundamental
periodization in in this sense the
question of criticism as an external
practice critical Theory becomes at what
point can you force the betrayal what
actually happens beyond the betrayal at
what point can you cross to the
institutional level and talk about
architecture as a material production
within society that has a real class
basis a real social basis an ideological
basis and so forth
I think to connect to Sergio's yeah also
what you also refer to for Ethan it was
very interesting the way you mentioned
furry particularly I think you you were
talking about the theories plural of the
title which are not really what we think
of as architecture theory it was new
topological researches and other
technical what we would think of as more
technical theories at the time I think
the for me the interesting and and sort
of questionable point in your
presentation was the kind of
disciplinary shift that occurred between
those tools as an awe as a methodology
for history and those tools as a
methodology for the exhibition and for
curating at that point and I think this
reconnects also to the question of the
museum or architecture for the museum
the question of exhibition or of
curating draws again the critical tools
back within the architectural
institution
[Music]
the exhibition's is of course considered
the audience's and to be honest I think
the discussion that we are having today
it is not very accessible to most of our
audiences or most of the audiences that
are expected to attend an architecture
exhibition or perhaps the curators would
like to attract now the issue is also
one of what you already identified as
being internal or external and where is
the bridge between the two and I would
say in exhibitions there is always this
attempt of making that bridge that
connection between what's being
discussed within the discipline more
than even the institution of
architecture and how to draw it out to a
broader audience sometimes just by
explaining it into more common terms
right and I think that is a difficulty
of deploying the say of the whole
critical apparatus on an exhibition but
the good thing of the exhibition at the
other hand is that it allows the space
for deploying at apparatus to the
curator or whoever's organize the
exhibition we wish to do so
a bit like the story of Picasso and Las
Meninas
you appropriates something that is there
and then you actually create the space
to make whatever you think you can make
of it
you said something which I think
actually resonates across different
talks is they didn't know I don't
remember exactly the words you use but
they know typical in territorial terms
so the kind of data based approach you
showed us it allows to think of the
discipline of transformation in a
different way so there's not rather than
the same exemplary or the typical
because in the end the exemplary and the
typical can exist fun difficult of the
mass of what we would call that from the
whole by over being out there in the
rest and it's so there's always a choice
which could be a sexual curatorial
critical to proposing in the way
predigest for somebody in your scene
needs to be accessible inexplainable but
they are deal to the non typical but the
typical these are produced by the the
more of an presentational that which can
be compared so I think it reflects also
which is not only in displaying
architecture may be other curatorial
practices or or approaches to critical
analysis of literature of paintings but
a different way of also producing it so
I think I don't see it as too far from
these attempts to question technology
in functional terms as a predefined
format this wonderful world which
chimera uses which is the idea of the
oscillation is it's almost full safety
on your slides and the visualization of
the of the Dasha it's just that you know
two centuries ago they do it it could
rise about every they couldn't drop a
time but now you can not draw you
planning visualizes that in itself in a
way is this may be a response to this
this unsatisfactory approach to a
selection which we are not happy with
never we're actually I was thinking the
first part of our discussion was this
issue of authority and unorthodox and
that's this this is just another tool to
flush out but our football team I
even if only to point out to the
unorthodox what I thought was an
exemplary form of moving forward
something that was interesting leaders
this one slide I showed from our project
of what was interesting was to find out
some solutions that use architectural
drawings in a completely different way
than what we expect to see in fact that
project as we had identified what is the
student at the time called the four
pillars of architectural drawing that is
vertical that is framed that it is
groups either somatically or in
aesthetic terms and then the question is
when that doesn't happen what is he
trying to say in terms of content so
that's where I was also trying to
establish this relationship between
analyzing format in order to find out
where the common Cisco I draw back to
this idea of internal mechanisms and
external mechanism and what I was
thinking is that was talking about this
effect ontology was if if the internal
mechanism architecture is always about
pouring from other from other
disciplines other fields when the
remain being a trail and whether
sequester it becomes a more because it
feels that we're always talking about
the forum from other places then isn't
that just on what's already yeah I mean
the past some sort of answers your
question that I distinguish between a
period you know principally up until the
the early 90s where one theory and
philosophy are a fruit for Asian
architecture but also the work on the
discipline challenging itself kind of
making trouble for itself so so theory
and philosophy come kind of troubling to
the extent that's you know by the 92 P
for the South's you sustain your not
being negative and sending up pulling
everything apart you know my my cutter
perhaps Orthodox notion of theory that
that just is what theory does he pulls
things apart things which are supposedly
coherent so it's always going to be
troubling to theory but I see a kind of
strategic move on the part of some
figures you know everyone calls it
projective or most critical or some kind
of new new pragmatism to dispense with
the theories that are trouble and
therefore kind of chimed in to upset
and take series which can be affirmative
for architecture from which one extracts
from figures like the words figures the
smooth the folded which kind of firm
architecture it's kind of like topical
for the Sophocles sophisticated but
without really making trouble they they
allow it to be invented they're allowed
to be new rather mired in
certain automatic sand so that's why I
see that although there's this I'm sure
there's another term that is about to
happen but they said that the turned
from doers to to Harmon and and also
turns and alerts to that or while hiring
between these are all within certain
leaves all kind of subsets of a larger
turn to it theory that the appropriate
because it doesn't make trouble for a
logic to gloss exactions you know and
they practice you know this is he says
it he's pretty good referring to the
super dusty goblet of the nineteen
nineties and he's talking about these
decreases of
criticism I suppose be saying that
prefixing that in the Netherlands they
are just cheerleaders of a new movement
anything that does not respond to that
format is obliterated from p.m. and it's
also why I bring this type of methods to
the front because those things perhaps
become flex and yes just as equal at the
others
yeah and then also worthy of attention
potentially worthy of attention but what
what they're finally losing of what he
was saying was that he was precisely
talking about this seeming appearance of
criticism but in fact just reiterating
or affirming what this wind I'm gonna
stir the sentiment so far from the
fluids opportu great city
yeah we are certain what is being
produced which is trapped why
and I are trying insists quickly I
trying to insist on there being a
difference what this is kind of a useful
distinction to be made between criticism
and critique my particular located can
you are yeah I mean this criticism is is
about just like talking about something
that kind of cells in in a way to serve
something here
what fermented is language we have a way
of thinking and any thoughts out
and I'm making principles there I said
you made the way you have your eye
situation you were very clear to say
it's not help removing it instead and
actually and actually iteration that
entirely
that you could choose but for example
was the people own
police are doing these to a certain
extent
and we want to say in a very
subconscious way a way of thinking that
reversal
well yeah I get it thinkers half that
obviously we said more I won't say more
about what that notion of withdrawal
means which I don't think is the same as
erasure withdrawal with the politics of
that what I'm critical of being in
politics of issac withdraws from
perception it says you knowing the
denial of the correlation it says
doesn't really matter what you think
about the architecture in fact we kind
of just like withdrawal that as
ontological a withdrawal that as a
possibility that humans have a
particular relationship to architecture
which is just absurd for anything else
and it's all I'm also thinking of Andres
mom who has a really nice critique to
farming and it's all but it says okay so
you know there might be some seeming
modesty about saying well we're all just
sins amongst other things this is only
human beings can come up with capitalism
okay we have to acknowledge there is a
distinction there and it's worth kind of
maintaining that distinction because
it's kind of Lytle now more than ever to
understand that there's a relationship
between us as producers of capitalism
and everything else in the world
because there's something you mentioned
I don't know I asked both of you because
maybe it's not the same thing but when
senators started you mentioned how much
of them again misfortune you did but the
exhibition or accurately represent how
much it looks cures and how much I don't
know if you use obscured or or not for
me I use it right now and you're talking
about they find a very different say
it's the same glazing over what seems
awesome yeah but it's this idea now I
want to say what happens behind do you
know whether it's an exhibition
excavation that be excluded or and what
happened something is this Ross place
where because it's not that things stop
happening
and we you know conflict or the problem
or change whatever that may be because
they are partially or maybe partially
covered for what it doesn't mean that
they talk
so it's the probably here I mean I would
you get rid of gloss glaze color obscure
but it doesn't know you're helping me
work out you have the possibilities of
mine I kind of figuring this it's a
glass thing I because for that last
notion that thinks it's okay so deep
rich varnish but it's it's so in in
triploids it's like also we just kind of
see something mysterious and alluring
poking through but it makes sense if we
can't laugh so see but we can you know
we can talk about you know how much that
cost and what material that's made of
and where it came from and who produced
it and it's it might difficult to
describe those conditions of labor but
we can do that we can have a materialist
analysis the the objects are not
mysterious capitalism is not a
mysterious process it's mystifying but
this is creating one but then it becomes
dangerous because it doesn't address
things which are still happening and
then it doesn't mean that they don't
compromise I think this morning we're
talking about dinosaurs
from the island new jersey parking very
you know very uh we were tired and but
it's it's a matter for which if it takes
the reefs doesn't go away if i'm not
wrong the entire thing of the strike
below
started with i mean i talked about
brahaman month courses with a kind of a
reflection on the issue of the tool
because in this second section of
presentations which many times before to
which is not i mean it's not really the
same thing of object i would say it
implies a criticality of course right
and at the same time we've heard about
this kind of non anthropocentric failed
philosophy no way which i if i want me i
mean if i try to go back he showed me
trailer would say this kind of an
unnatural percenter philosophy is a way
to stay to betray of idealism of course
because the subject is no more there we
i mean and so and the issue is this one
we try to from this kind of knowledge of
eccentric theory we see look at things
from trying to look at things from the
outside
so what what do we see in architecture
even if you look if you if you bu sorry
at Architecture from the outside I think
that it is possible to do it if we go
back to the tour we can see we can say
we see tons of actors contracts
beaurocracy stuff and all the things in
our using that make sense
between these kind of negotiations are
tools tools are basically objects that
somehow they imply the certain
criticality in order to be used inside
the particular limitations so for
instance if we look at Rossi from the
outside if we read his essay from the
outside it is I mean if it fell this
morning but is it is pretty evident that
the issue of time was intended as a as a
tool because it was looking for somehow
tools in order to portray is didactic
activity in university because tools
were lacking actually and so I think
these things I do not really find a
great difference between knife earth way
of dealing with data and and somehow
national rust-eze some optional types I
think both somehow related to the issue
of the tools in architecture
right and so I think even your
presentation at the beginning server job
for really so I try to mean try to
figure out how the two powers about the
tool the issue of the tool could be good
evolved somehow I wish right but I have
a question because I don't really
understand when it seems to me that it
implies a criticality what you presented
I don't understand how which kind of
possibilities of critiques it embeds you
know and so all the things but I mean
now it's a bit confused of course
because I I mean it's hard to keep all
the things together anyway would really
kind of like to ask you about what
little bit of reflection on the tool and
how so we can somehow be related to an
act of betrayal because it seems to me
the front is presentation is emerged in
subject
at least into time this let's go back to
the time
do you think it's at all no no I don't
and I don't think that the way no
further uses it in the way Rosi use it
are not the same but even though but
even though you look at them from the
outside as we say but what does it mean
to look at it from the outside that you
can't well because because this is if
it's a functionalist typology you can
look at it on from the outside because
it's defined but if you're talking about
the time that I can't look at the time
you can see the time you can you can
look everything to lecture me because
the time doesn't exist who isn't the
type of tool specifically developed by
architecture in the 60s as a means to
reconstitute the type is an idea and
purely an idea in action at the time was
much more close to the what did you call
it the non typical so it's the enormous
mass of approximation when not a single
one gets a shoot and because of that
it's interesting but that's isn't that
the point of psychological research and
the type is that it it's an
inexhaustible resource it's a game then
you can keep playing that's the whole
point of reconstituting it's over
because it's not something you go it was
almost a child
in the moment you the moment you are
going to relation you add to it so it's
impossible to call it betrayal if you
the moment you actually try to access if
you are already changing it and
therefore you're ugly too and that is
yes well exactly this is precisely but
this is precisely the issue I think this
is precisely the issue of flight
ontology we got we went back to flat
ontology because we said that there is a
reality disease that completes out some
of the intention of the object not the
subject sorry
yeah which is the object that is alive
in itself that you can not look it up
catch completely no no no but it doesn't
have a life in itself anything it's not
a way from the scientist listen that
we're talking about the work of the
subject it's not the same thing because
you but it also comes from can we argue
over
sorry God I'm sorry audience because the
fact that we have to organize the set of
comments and questions and arguments
which we did not provide in a way I did
open the floor well maybe we can of
course teacher talking
[Applause]
