good evening everybody
thank you very much for coming welcome
to the a a those of you who are guests
and thank you to all of those who have
come from upstairs to downstairs not far
to go but it sometimes it feels like a
long way I know but I just really wanted
to I'm very brief introduction I'm
Samantha Harding I'm the interim
director of the a 1718 2017-18 and have
the real honor to welcome such amazing
guests and an almond and Rasheed mystics
I have sat in a room with them for two
minutes really this afternoon and within
two minutes had discovered that I was
you know really collided mostly around
Cedric price which was not how I
expected this conversation to begin but
there's one one project in Abu Dhabi
that Cedric did in 1976 which was
subjects of interest I think for you
both so that may not be what is going to
be talked about tonight but it just I
think partly sort of demonstrated they
can breath of their extraordinary
interest and amazing work which has come
out of ten years of of work based in
Dubai and really represented I think to
the rest of us in the world through the
brown book the amazing magazine
Beautiful magazine that I'm not going to
say anything about I'm just gonna say
how fantastic and thank you for doing it
and doing the work and coming here after
10 years to tell us some something about
that it's not for me to speak about that
but just I I think just the thing that
really struck me is that to be your
exemplars in what it means to be an
architect now which means architects
Urbanists publishers chroniclers
document tree makers
such extraordinary interdisciplinary
skills and multidisciplinary talents and
ambassadors or advisors which i think is
a really key one and I have to read this
because it's such a long title but your
Remos recent appointment advisors to the
Minister of State for culture and
diplomacy which i think is an
extraordinary fantastic and very
positive move that the designers and not
updates you call yourselves designers of
cultural solutions which i think is an
amazing also amazing discipline to start
to define and that that is something
that is is advisory at a level at such a
high level of political influence but
without being politically driven which i
think is fascinating so I hope we'll
discover all of these things and more in
terms of the themes of the work but I
just really want to say thank you for
coming and also most importantly for
staging the exhibition which we will go
and see after the lecture which is
opening in the gallery this evening
which I had a sneaky peek and it's very
beautiful so look forward to that
afterwards and also I want to I'm gonna
hand over to Vanessa Norwood who really
is the reason why you are here
absolutely nothing for me to do with me
I just happened to be in the room at the
right moment thank goodness but Vanessa
who has worked with you to bring the
show here and and also I'm just very
delighted to say Vanessa is now moving
on to greater bigger and even bigger and
even greater things and so thank you for
coming this evening and to wish you
every very best wish and you don't need
good luck you've just proven that you
just will go on to do amazing stuff so
just yes want to say hooray and thank
you very much for all of your work
[Applause]
coming introduced thank you thank you
I'll be really brief actually because
Sam said that in a very articulate way
is really I feel very privileged
actually that this is is in a way that
the last show at the a was yours because
I think there's sort of spirit with
which you bring to brown book and
cultural engineering is one of humanity
and generosity and the idea that
architecture can be used as a catalyst
for positive change is really important
and just being in the gallery today and
seeing all the kind of images of the
Middle East and diaspora and that idea
that that I've written it down but I I
don't need to look really that the
fluidity of movement across borders and
identity cultural identity can kind of
be the same thing that it's possible to
know who you are and to move across
borders it's something we're struggling
with ourselves in this country at the
moment so it's so nice to have the sort
of the positivity and I know they're
going to be doing great things
so I also in this sort of little mini
love-in wants to say a big thank you to
both for your positivity and energy and
thanks to Sam of course it's a it's an
honor and privilege to be to be able to
present our work but I'd like to I
haven't been extended the same courtesy
as Cedric price when he is too spoken
give a lecture but but I'm very grateful
to be here so just to begin I'd like to
thank the a and everybody that's
participated I'd like to thank you the
NASA of course for our hard work
including our team Farah Fatima Amira
and Leila and the veteran team that
actually made this exhibition possible
so what I'd like to do is in the next 30
to 40 minutes present a series of topics
but really try to show you how we've
been practicing in a city like to buy
and talk about the architecture theory
which is a really important topic and
and and body of work that we try to
embody and try to ask ourselves the
bigger questions and then finally I'd
like to talk about
practice in the way we've been
practicing in the city such as Dubai
which somebody said that we have a lot
of information about you but we really
don't know much about you and I think
that kind of summarizes what what what
people perceive Dubai to be so that's
how I'll break down the presentation and
and then later on we can take it could
take some questions
so immediately when you try to figure
that's not okay there we go so just to
start off I think to define the BI is
very difficult but but I think the word
would be that it is a city of
contradiction it is born into
globalization in the global south and it
is it is quite unique as part of that
region but Dubai is is an important city
in the region as a force for tolerance
for progressiveness and in particular
all the the challenges of sustainability
and intellectual development that the
region is facing and so what I would I'd
like to just briefly walk you through as
a historic development of Dubai yeah so
so the of course for those that are
familiar with the by its it it is an old
city that was born out of the creek
where it was separated by this
waterfront this cavity of water that
separated two parts of the city Shin
Davao which is about the bay and Dara
and and that's at a precedence to the to
the pearl divers which was the biggest
trade in that area so a lot of people
and a lot of the tree that happens
within that area was was factored around
pearl diving and and the pearl industry
but that slowly started to decay because
of the Japanese pearl in culture which
became a huge export and boom and so in
that transition period there was the oil
boom that happened within the city so
really shifting from the pearl industry
to an oil exporter and the population
back then was the population of about
20,000 and today we're a population of
2.1 million in
in a duration of about forty years and
and equally the city moved from being
from the 1960s of having one single
building to 120,000 so this is the kind
of planning measure that the body is
seeking and I mean this was an older
master plan there's a lot of revisions
but more or less this is how the city's
been evolving in a very interesting way
so I'll just continued some pictures of
course Atlantis for those that are
familiar to on the Palm Island this is
type of architecture that's being
developed in the city budget Arab which
was very symbolic in Dubai as a seven
star hotel and of course Sheikh Zayed
Road which is a kind of landmark visual
and photograph of the city so that that
is a very interesting that's a kind of a
summary of where the buy is in the city
that we're practicing in but what I want
to draw context to is is how the city
was planned and measured so this was a
picture taken in the 1930s 40s so you
can see the the the right side of the
image so that's Dara and this is about
about Dubai and you had about three
story four-story buildings made out of
coral and I Mason it was very unique
architectural II and so this was in the
cost between the transition of pearl
diving and the oil boom and so what
happened is they needed to factor how
would the city be planned in a more
progressive and modern way and so the
introduction of John Harris John Harris
is an architect I graduated from the AAA
in 1930s out safe forties and he he his
first projects happened in Hong Kong and
he was a pow2 ston Hong Kong and
transitioned back into London where he
set up his practice was renowned and
participated in the law a lot of global
global competition in the RIBA which
then led him to do a lot of projects
within the ban so I'm gonna give you a
bit of perspective so this was the first
master plan by John Harris
so if you look at those data areas I
spoke briefly about them and the shin
dava which is about the belly area and
then the expansive master plan that that
John Harris attempted to develop so it's
really a piece if I'm covering all the
points so it's a departure from what the
urban fabric was and and that that
development continued in 71 which was
there was a second revision so you can
see that that the planning measures and
you can see the streetscape that started
to be introduced within the urban fabric
which led to a second version of his
master plan which created this linear
planning measure beyond the creek and
really creating these zones for specific
activities and so so yeah but we had
about 22,000 historic buildings really
unique and architecture and typology and
there were traditional ways of
maintaining them there were streets that
had forms of urban memory there were
small shops that were there and so once
this modern master plan came into place
it shaped the urban fabric into into
what it is today
so so that's the kind of precedence that
that's where and so when you think about
development in the context of the bar we
we start to question what our role is as
practitioners and within the urban
fabric and participating in the urban
field and so what what we try to think
about is what are the roles between
architecture proper and architectural
theory how can we participate in a city
such as Dubai without necessarily
building and how do we look at the built
environment and participate to drive up
forms of memory nostalgia and iterating
this form of architecture so this was a
project done by a Anastas in Palestine
really highly conceptual and looking at
3d printing and looking at using lime by
material and and these studies are
really interesting so for practitioners
such as us and I would imagine for a lot
of students that that think about what
they're going to do after they graduate
today
enter a architectural practice or did
they set up their own or or how do they
think about participating within the
built environment so these are questions
that we we asked ourselves as well and
so that drives me to a second and very
important point which is tacit knowledge
and for those that are familiar with
Richardson it's work on the
craftsmanship he argues a lot about the
tacit knowledge process where there are
these forms of iterations and and how do
you take things from the past and
introduce them into something that's
more progressive so all of these broad
questions on on how knowledge is
iterated and reiterated to something
progressive and so this was a pavilion
that was installed in Kochi in Kerala in
India done by Dutch architects to try to
work with the local craftsmen and
looking at the power material and
looking at volumes and massing and how
it can be a space for an exhibition of
sorts but really driving that
experimental notion and that really
interests us and and makes us think
about what that term tacit knowledge
means in trying to take things of
tradition and moving it forward so here
and so I would say in the 60s and 70s of
course in the 50s as well there was a
lot of experimentation we had the Kenzo
tange gate proposed a project in Tokyo
Bay really highly conceptual never
realised but these are the thought
processes of proposing something to be
built or maybe unbuilt but but really
thinking of things in a in an
experimental way this kind of in-between
between architecture theory and
architecture proper and on the right you
have the Mexicali project by Christopher
Alexander again really highly conceptual
working with local craftsmen thinking
about theory thinking about path
established publications a pattern
language and so forth and on the bottom
there were two really renowned
architects Jeff fort Oakland and fetch
energy who really experimented with this
topic as well really thinking highly
conceptual of course they both realize
multiple projects but it's really it's
really interesting their thought process
which we don't see much
of today so so we draw a lot of
inspiration from from from this type of
thought process so now what I'd like to
do is walk you through three examples of
projects that we've been looking at in
the field of the built environment and
they're not necessarily case studies or
solutions of how do you reiterate
traditions of architecture how do you
continue legacy or how do you build
something new but really trying to think
on that that body of work of theory and
and so so this was an exhibition that
we've what it began as a study to really
look at looking at urban areas looking
at landscape architecture and the topic
of landscape architecture and so the I
don't know if anyone's familiar with the
felid system but it is a dying craft
where irrigation was was a really
important part of the of the urban well
rural and and village landscape where
these water channels really irrigated in
quadrants plantations and so parks are
not native to the Gulf area plantations
are and so when you start to think about
something something of that sort there's
a lot of architects that practice within
the Gulf areas and they think or how do
we address civic space how do we look at
landscaping and things are sometimes
plotted from outside within and they
imagine a beautiful garden but within
the Gulf it's it's it's very foreign so
we really looked at that spirit and we
visited a couple of towns including
Ramon hat where these places still exist
and so the fella is a very simple
waterway that channels through a
specific land and there's a science to
it where water inventory and rations are
studied against rains so there would be
awadhi who would be in charge of this
specific village and then he would study
water rationing and how that water would
be distributed to different households
and so in Ramon this continues to live
on so it started with in the plantation
he had peripheral housing and now you
have
buildings three four five stories that
have integrated the ferritin this was a
really interesting that that this is
that this continues in armand so this
this began our study and trying to think
about how we can adapt this this this
form of landscape architecture yeah so
we so we really thought about site
specificity we we looked at for instance
this is a place called fellow generis
and this one where the fellow to walk
goes through and a a natural plantation
occurred and so they and then they they
created this waterway where people could
come in and bathe or cool off from the
sun and traditionally it was used for
for for watering their cameras and so
forth and so it's interesting that this
continued then and you have young
children swimming about and and and so
we collaborated with an architecture
practice based out of India called case
design who needs to work closely with
studio Mumbai and we started to question
this theory so I'll show you how we took
the study and moved it forward so this
was a so we were invited to the London
Design Biennale under a theme two years
ago to look at the topic of utopia and
no better topic than looking at the way
sees the fellows the Landscape
Architecture component of the way cities
and greenery of course and that's and so
we started to create these study models
and so this was and this was a a model
based out of this waterway and to show
people that that these things can exist
and these are the three different models
that this is a very site-specific area
so we looked at the town in Vermont the
model in the middle and we just mimicked
how the fellas would would would
continue to water the city uninterrupted
and towards the end if you look at that
mountainous area that is how the
aquifers were channeled into the city
and I would go into a regulated area
where the wali or the leader would would
regulate the water challenge system and
then arrogate the different cities so
this was a very interesting study this
is another site specific
model so this is a mosque and so
traditionally the waterways the water
would not be part of the mosque it would
pass through and so for ablution and and
for for prayer rituals you would go in
here and and perform your evolutions and
then go into the prayer hall and then
you would have this and these are just
studies to create that awareness and so
that drove us to think about things that
are not site-specific and try to think
about how we can integrate this into
something that's more modern and so this
is a proposed Park within Dubai so we
looked at how the Fallot can be
integrated how the waterways because
there are floodplains and how that
floodplain would be uninterrupted so
every three weeks you would float a
specific plane and then we would have
these small architectural interventions
that allow people to use for civic
spaces and so forth this was a
residential concept that we proposed I
mean a case design we worked closely
with them some and trying to think about
how you can integrate that create a
boundary wall continue the waterway but
make it a bit more modern
so again and then finally we we worked
with our kazuma I don't know if anyone's
familiar with EPFL out of Lausanne Ecole
Polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne but
they have a small gallery called our key
zoom and they published a book about the
exhibition and the study that we've done
and and I was distributed but but I
think the question that we should ask is
why why do this what is the process and
what is the purpose and the whole
purpose is to try to allow practitioners
that visit the exhibition students for
us to continue this the legacy of this
knowledge understand the science behind
it how you can build a closed loop water
system relying on rain which is now
where we constantly think about
integrating a complex water system in
particular like the Lord but the water
tables are high but rain is available
and how do you put a planet these
aquifers in a more sustainable way
so this is one example of a study that
we've done the second one is is a a a
site-specific project in a place called
Hutta so so that's Dubai over there
hatas where that red dot is it's in the
mountainous area between Armand and and
and Dubai and it's the few it's it's
it's one of the few places that's as
part of Dubai that has uninfluenced it
is a mountainous range with with unique
architecture and using stone and Adobe
and and Earth material so this so what
we did this we bought a plot of land for
very cheap in that side and we began the
study into thinking about how we can
iterate this type of architecture into
something that's a bit more modern so
this was a study that we did about the
site so we so really mimicking the top
part of the architecture so if you look
at that some in some are stones some are
made of earth and how do you replicate
that in a very small plot of land so we
looked at these five different houses
summer bedrooms and we're living rooms
from our studies but really trying to
channel channel that study through to
create a discussion more the first and
foremost so then we invited a few
architects summer former students of GSD
and we invited Sam again from India to
to look at how we can build in a more
sustainable and more native way but we
failed miserably so that was so that was
the earth and I'll give you a couple of
reasons why why that happened so the
earth is is a clay bed and we thought
that we can use it and compact the earth
and so all of these in a sense Technic
rats came in and they said oh this is
how you should do it this is the
compaction method and this is how the
wall would stand and so we built it and
it failed miserably and so a lot of the
neighbor over there are are of course
locals from Hatton eat that that have
been building for generations
you have of Rani's that are talented in
in masonry work Palestine
and you have a couple of our monies as
well and and so when we started this
process we started to to bring these
people we had a lot of documents and
publications and and all of these
different studies and they started to
laugh at us and they said this is this
reward will know this world will never
stand and the reason why they said that
is is a compacted earth or rammed earth
is a process that is not native because
of humidity because of the soil because
of the material and they said the local
way of constructing is that there'll be
architecture and so when we ask the
local craftsmen or the local builders
and they said yes this is of course the
technique and they had a specific
technique and so this brought about a an
interesting dimension of how the world
skills labor first of all the skills
labor Reece kills them and then discuss
them again in a very interesting way and
we try to think we try to take this I
know there's a lot of arguments and
talking about top-down approaches but
this is this we only learned on-site and
and and and every time we attempted to
build using sustainable materials it
turned out to be much more expensive and
so brick so that the economic
development of building such a site
forced us to use conventional methods
and procurement methods rather than
trying to look at the original way of
building using earth and and and stone
because of that so so that led us to an
exhibition really studying this and
building a narrative out of it talking
about how we how we what is the
difference between actually building
on-site learning from from from from the
people that have been building on-site
and trying to develop this so again all
of these studies on earth material we
did a couple of sections we did the
study of the land the area we did a few
sections and the exhibition was was
Halden in the next in abu-dhabi
looking at how you can do compaction and
so we showed the kids and and
participants on the face
around Earth and and such a a a a luring
material that we always think
orth material or around the earth can be
sustainable and and practical but the
reality of it is it's much more complex
and so so again this is a very typical
way of approaching a is a site and and
creating all of these problems in
complexing it to allow to allow for a
broader narrative and discussion on
labour and and so forth and the final
the final part is is is really what
takes most of our time and most of our
effort is is how do you look at cities
and how cities evolve and really
archiving and documenting societies
architecture architects and cities and
in a more progressive way so yeah so we
we we founded a magazine about ten years
ago I hadn't I called brown book really
looking at three major topics looking at
people and the way the way they practice
within within their cities or work
within their cities or live within their
cities architecture and architects and
the third thing is the topic of of
cities neighborhoods and so forth so ten
years on we've we've covered about 200
cities across the Middle East we have
covered we have interviewed over 500
people 100 architects and architecture
sites looking at topics such as urban
memory which is which is a very
important topic in close close to close
to what we believe in and looking at
societies how they've evolved and how
their their their relationship to that
to that area or their cities so these
I'm going to walk you through a couple
of examples so this was a publication we
did about the Iranian community in Los
Angeles so and and how that identity has
evolved how they continue to bring their
identity into into the west coast and
how it continues so this is a very
interesting topic because we realized
that a lot of progressive Iranians tend
to influence their cousin's family
members friends back home
and looking at the culture and identity
and and different shops and that have
been there and so this is a interesting
study of how we look at societies
another one looks at the doral living so
really really looking at rural life
which has become popular of course
around the world but really how it's how
it's something that's unique in the
Middle East that is a really stories
that are untold so skiing in so we did
the ski guide looking at skiing
destinations in Algeria in Lebanon we
did a huge site in Saudi as well of of
snow so it's really interesting looking
at this topic in in a more
unconventional way and finally just very
typically looking at a city such as
Algeria and looking at the Algerians are
looking at Algiers and looking at the
music culture and looking at languages
and dialects and and really unpacking
the topic broadly beyond the magazine we
also work on specific publications again
looking at the Middle Eastern community
either globally or its influence so the
one on the left is a publication that we
did collaboratively with the serpentine
gallery and camp who are artists and
they've done an artist and residency
over two years to document a building on
a Jew Arad that was a Middle Eastern
cultural center and they had these
wonderful documentation and paper and
looking at how performing arts really
developed and on the right we worked on
a publication with it was more like a
supplement but looking at the Oscar
Niemeyer's Foundation as work where
Oscar Niemeyer's participated in Abu
Dhabi he came up with the first master
plan of the Louvre but not that of the
Lulu Island the development which is
connected to side the art and this was
in the 70s and 80s so this is these are
really untold stories so we went through
the archives really looked at the the
study measures of that topic and and so
so that was an interesting point of
research so if you were here on the 25th
I would be me and I will be giving a
talk about the development of shares
ayat
and Abu Dhabi and all of these
progressive kind of architects have
participated in this field and last but
not least I hope this place
I don't know how place yeah so oh sorry
no okay so so I'm very grateful to
Vanessa and I'm very grateful today for
allowing us to continue this exhibition
but it started so it's a ten years on we
were invited by the Vitra Design Museum
to exhibit retrospectively all the work
that we've done in in Brown book looking
at topics of architecture looking at
topics of societies and looking at
topics of cities and so we we had a year
on we really looked at all of the
information that we had package that
looked at the different important topics
and we we worked on a broad exhibition
really looking at at how the identity of
the Middle East is really shifting or
how the identity of the region has
shifted over the past decade and a very
important topic is is is migration and
immigration and how people are flowing
and how identity transcends borders and
so we looked at the and once you get a
chance to go to the exhibition you see
more information but really looking at
the Syrian community in Santiago we're
looking at the Yemenis in Singapore
these are really interesting and
invaluable topics that tend to influence
the identity of the region and we worked
on study models made of clay that Xena
worked on and looked at at how
architecture and modern approaches
towards architecture beyond
post-modernism to see how that's been
influenced so we did the series of
studies which Fatma sell our curated and
selected and Xena Xena worked on the
models really looking at different
details on how architecture influences
the region and then last but not least
our cities so we really looked at third
tier cities and how they're evolving
with the globalization development and
so that's the section over there and
with that I will end the presentation
I give you three examples of how we've
been practicing our within the field of
the built environment but really
thinking about in a city such as Dubai
which is this beacon of hope for the
region and is an important place for
tolerance how do we participate without
necessarily adding to to the built
environment how do we participate beyond
design-build how do we look at theories
and how do we look at the
rehabilitations in a very important way
and so this is we don't pose solutions
but we try to create these problems and
understandings of these different topics
and try to investigate them in a more
broader sense so and last but not least
I'll keep this playing while I'll answer
questions but the last thing is we also
recently launched Brown book tour TV
which looks at topics of of architecture
cities and and people so we've produced
about 50 videos that's on the website so
you can go to brown book tour TV and
look at different people and
architecture and different parts of the
region in a more interesting way and
I'll end with that and I'll end with
questions
I'm sorry hehe oh thank thank you thank
you so much both of you for for coming I
have I have a quick question I'm not
allowed to start is one thing that I
really love about brown Birkin which you
showed in the photo is all the kind of
inserts and it's like these worlds
within worlds Jewish make it such a
delight to open and I love the idea of
the brown but guide to skiing is that a
deliberate obviously that's the kind of
design choice to do that where does that
come from and it makes it really special
and magazine I think it's I think it
comes down to the topic of magazines and
you I think it's very important that
magazines have that continuity on the
shelf life and so you can always go back
to it as a reference I think periodicals
have this disposability which which
we're trying to avoid to have that
longevity of the shelf life and so if
somebody talks to you about snow or
skiing and they say oh I remember this
topic and I can always go back to it so
always building that Ark - and it's one
night what should be reversible sorry
does anyone have a question hi I'm from
the region and what I found very
interesting was the fell edge and seeing
the village the way that you put it in
that concept design but then how do we
translate that into a reality because
it's beautiful the way you've the way
you put it in order and the design so
how can we see that in in reality like I
think that's a very important question
because we don't end up putting it with
the way the system works is there's a
broad brief becomes a RFP and it goes
through a competition and then
practitioners such as auto foods
baguette Foster's end up detailing it
and so a lot of these architects is
where we should put our effort into to
try to influence the next people that
participate in the built environment to
try to make them aware of these topics
because if we don't know about them how
would how do we expect them to know
about it so it's very important to first
of all build that awareness and build
scenarios that are plausible and
I think first is building up the
knowledge and then from that there it
goes on forward yeah
that's wondering do you see the approach
to architecture in someone like Dubai
changing because it is very it's not
really distinctive to Dubai but can you
see a change happening in in terms of
the detailing of new buildings I well I
think there is there's a there's a
perpetual way of urbanization that's
happening around the world and it's
built on economic measures rather than
static Enis
and I think buildings are built out of
excel sheets before they get detailed as
as a as a design for purpose and so I
think in a broader sense of course you
have again I gave you these statistics
about the population growth so first and
foremost people need housing affordable
housing and the only way is to create
all of the supply which the city is
doing but I think there will be a level
of appreciation towards more some form
of critical regionalism that a lot of
the architects but it's it's more it's
more it's comparable to Singapore it's
comparable to these places fast quick
affordable architecture that that's the
pattern
yes yes appreciatively efficiently don't
break anything
[Applause]
