okay good evening everybody
good evening good evening good evening
welcome to the a a on Saturday night
which is quite an unusual evening to be
at the AAA I have to say and really
delightful really delightful and
fantastic to see such a crowd and not
unsurprising I should say we have such
an extraordinary esteemed guest this
evening so just thrilled that everybody
could make it but I just want to say one
reason why Alberto LSE is here is thanks
to first of all Chris Pearce a head of
our global visiting schools who has
together with Tom Kovac and Patrick
Schumacher put together the very first
LSE aerospace you called it a learning
platform whatever that is but I think
that's a workshop and in fact it's a 15
day 15 day working workshop which took
place in December over Christmas with 15
students am i right 15 students who
worked flat out and we've just come from
the final presentation of those projects
six groups which was just phenomenal
work to have been produced in in 15 days
just spectacular so I really want to
thank those three Chris Tom and Patrick
for that work incredible Enterprise and
all the students that worked just
incredibly hard and produced very
beautiful things truly beautiful things
so now I must thank Alberta for agreeing
to come and visit also coming to agree
to see the students work which I think
we all enjoyed we laughed a lot which
must have been a good sign there's very
I'm gonna say very little there is there
is very little what can one say about
LSE it's a household name it's been a
household name since 1921 I think this
room would not be so packed if we didn't
all know that and
Alberto has is the third generation of
that family and to keep producing
extraordinary objects for our homes and
places of work and is known as the
godfather of design so there's not
really much else one can say first that
but I want to I'm gonna quote to you
before you even speak so I just want
because I think it's important just to
remind ourselves why you are the
godfather of design because you said a
true design work must move people convey
emotions bring back memories surprise
and go against common thinking I have
the very modest ambition to think that
the AAA has also tried to think about
those things in relation to architecture
so I'm really delighted to be able to
welcome you Alberto I hand it to you
thank you
[Applause]
so the idea is to tell you something
about this very typical phenomenon of
Italian Italian industrial culture which
is called the Italian design factories
by using as an example an example that I
very well know my company the one of my
company first of all what our Italian
design factories you may see there about
50 to 60 companies midway between
industry and craftsmanship in the area
of 100 kilometers around Milano with
very few exceptions almost all board in
the after war years
excuse me and putting design excellence
at the top of the activity here you see
the red zone is indication of the size
inter in the quantitative terms of this
phenomenon of Italian design factories
as you see it is very little compared to
the total of the furniture industry in
Italy this is the title of an exhibition
I had the Trianon in Milano trying to
tell the story of this phenomenon of
Italian design factories
and since I have a little voice I prefer
that you read instead of talking me
instead of me talking these very few
sentences I just want to put out that I
see a very clear difference between the
way of the using and understanding
design of Italian design factories on
one side and the way of using design by
mass production industry on the other
side and I will try to better explain
one problem can be the problem given by
marketing I feel that mass production
industry is today more and more driven
by marketing and design is considered by
mass production by mass production
industries consider is considered just
one of the tools as the disposition of
marketing and of Technology this is a
trial and attempt to describe the
characteristic of Italian design factor
is product
where I try to justify the transgression
of voles which is typical of Italian
design not only design some examples of
the Italian design factories production
that you maybe know already know and
here we start with the history of the
company part of the Alessi family work
in the company at the end of the century
the place like art alley Katta Ville is
a very little lake not 100 kilometers
north of Milano close to Swiss borders
to the to your right you may see this
narrow valley which is called ballet
stone is named Val Astana there in Val
Estonia around 300 years ago about 200
years ago started the tradition of
manufacturing small objects in wood and
metal for the kitchen and for the house
here you see pictures of the valley
today very traditional conservative
place some local products and products
ballast toner is also today the biggest
producer of wooden Pinocchio's in spite
of China
and my two grandfather's they both came
from this traditional ballast tone to
the left hand you see the father of my
mother Alfonso Bialetti who was the
inventor of the process design and then
the producer of the first espresso maker
the thirty silver series then the father
of my father Giovanni Elise in 1921
founded the Alessi company here you see
pictures of the company same place where
we are today some early products of the
20s a design in the meaning that we gave
today to the term I started in Allison
with my father Carl in the thirties he
designed many Elysee products during ten
years period here you see my father very
proud and happy with his last quarter
for Alesi the tea and coffee sat called
the Bombay 1945 still in production
today then during the fifties right
after the World War Second World War and
my father abandoned his design activity
he became general manager policy and he
started calling outside designers and
architects to come and have a
collaboration with Alessi we consider
this period the very start the official
start of the phenomena battalion design
factor we've seen stood together with my
father many of his colleagues young
entrepreneur coming out from the wall
they had to rebuild the catalogues of
the
and they started asking calling of site
designers to give a stronger aesthetic
characteristic to their product here you
see some of the very early products of
the 50s which are still in production
today to the left the cocktail shaker
design in 1957 by Missoni and Marjorie
which which is still in production today
this is me at the very beginning burner
community fat meaning that my destiny
was clear since the beginning being the
first of my generation I had the
responsibility to hand the company this
was my very first the very first
operation I manage I'm not a designer at
all but I'm a design manager and I like
to work with designers better to say I
like to be a mediator between the
designers on one side and the market on
the other side and the very first
operation I'd manager beginning 70s I
had the idea to to use the machines a
policy to produce instead of this I was
considering very boring trays balls food
baskets bread baskets and so instead of
that stuff to desert to produce we are
art objects meaning object with no
function apart from the aesthetic
function and conceived by artists not by
designer by not by architect but by
artist these were the very first four
art multiples of my collection the idea
was to offer the possibility to get to
public to the market to get an original
art object to a very reason
reasonable price instead of being made
in one piece by the hands of the creator
made in unnumbered pieces made by
machines the idea what the fury of the
art multiplied art it was a very utopian
approach and it was clear when I
presented the operation the first
collection in 1971 after a few months it
was clear that it was a big fiasco
complete flop people showed no interest
at all in my to add multiples so so that
my father stopped me to continue with
the collection I had many other startup
and artists working with me for example
the Spanish master Salvador Dali he made
a very nice project this is the drawing
of a Salvador Dali he is a project for a
lessee was was called okay until the
swamp problem the topology negative
later on I understood he was maybe
joking with me but then I was too young
and I took everything seriously can
from the Spanish master here you see
dolly explaining to the very young
Albert the importance of hooks actually
the multiple of multiple of Dolly was in
part was made by a big comp
gold-plated and each tooth of the comb
where was a welded an enormous who
stainless steel hook for the fish to the
Salman by the way the object was
becoming very dangerous to handle but it
was the original concept by dolly as I
said and luckily my father stopped me to
continue with the collection so I was
not able to to make alive the natural
day that he was not able my father was
not able to stop me before I both fifty
thousand of those hooks to be safe I
started buying the the hoops from would
you say nozzle of Norway we still have
the hooks in
[Music]
following the 70s I became more serious
and I started working with some of the
great Italian design my closest people
was very important for a list not only
so not only because they design very
successful products for the company but
also because because with a strong
personality and with a strong I cannot
use the word philosophy because it is
too much the way the way of thinking
they left an important mark within the
overall practice of the LSE company not
only of the LSE company also of the
other colleagues of the Italian design
factories the first of these masses was
at the resorts us some of his products
for relationship the second was rehearse
after Sutton was German but actually
living and working in Milano since the
fifties he is considered part of Italian
design history supper design the first
espresso maker for ELISA the first
Alicia espresso makers in 1979 and he
also designed the first Alicia kettle
this cattle has a nice nice an
interesting story to be thought because
it is very typical of the practices of
it have an Italian design in factory
like Elysee well supper when I asked him
to design the cattle suppressor okay I
will do it but it's not enough for me to
design a beautiful cattle I need to do
something more I want to produce
multi-sensorial kettle I mean a captain
appealing to different human senses not
only to the eye not only to the touch
and in particular he wanted his cattle
to be able to produce a melody once the
water was boiling to produce a melody
instead of the very noisy sound that I
produced while producing normal kettles
on the market
he wanted his cattle to produce a melody
not only melody but a melody in itself a
melody could remain thus after his a
childhood in Germany he was living in
the village in year stood garden there
was a river passing by and sometimes
both passing on the river and the boat
was producing a kind of music that
supper wanted to be able to reproduce
with the cattle to be to be shot after
one year of work my technicians proved
to be not to be able to manufacture a
cattle produce you the melody supper
water so I was obliged to put the
project to the side until one more year
after that one of supper sisters living
in Germany found out in the Black Forest
craftsman producing a chorused now I
don't know if you know what a Provost is
I brought one with me it's a pipe with
with inside the Tongass gold-plated
which is producing the perfect la note
[Music]
after long discussions with this krasna
you know German are a bit hard to change
but in me and see in order that we
producing a nice melody which was not
precisely the melody of the childhood of
soccer I think the end he too he
accepted the compromise we were able to
continue with the production and and the
product was and still easily see this
point I never I kind of stand and I need
to make you a demonstration because
maybe you don't believe what I say
so imagine that the waterboy
[Music]
like oh they play together
[Music]
[Applause]
together with supper
we also generated the the the fur very
first collection of pots and pans the
idea and the seventies beginning 80s was
to to combine the designer with very
good cooks European cooks what we did
and here you see one of the inventors
the creators of the nouvelle cuisine in
France the idea was to put together
experts in design and expert in cooking
to create an excellent service but I
must say the idea proved not to be so
good because on one side of the designer
speak has a fantastic designer he didn't
know anything about cooking on the other
side the cooks of course excellent
couldn't know anything about design so I
had to travel until endlessly between
the two sides in order to mediate but at
the end with in 1986 we were able to to
produce and to present the collection
[Music]
the third limit milanese my store was a
Killa castiglione I am again in the surf
still in the seventies and the fourth
are the Sangamon Dini Alessandra Nandini
is not only designer designing things
for us he is also in a way the historian
of the company he wrote the first book
on the history of Alessi
in 1979 he organizes exhibitions like
this one in Munich few years ago
Alessandra is also the designer I
usually ask to work with me on the more
risky project like in this case on the
ELISA phone the ELISA is the new
saxophone but the serious budget it
works very well especially for jazz it
is all made by hand with the help of two
to specialists of the saxophones and
it's only a bit too expensive by far the
most expensive saxophone on the market
because it is all made by hand well
Alexander mendini
has always been proud of the fact of
being considered as a designer designing
things that do not sell meaning having a
taste which is too sophisticated for
human normal human beings what is in
part true except that a few to 25 years
ago he without help
he designed at one of the Elizabeth
cellar ever energy energy is a portrait
of his fiancee of the period
and after after ten years she was born
in 94
after 10 years she was sick sick sick
sick so we decided to give her a
boyfriend
and Alice and opiate Evangeline Sandow
and also is also across - they do the
same job but in a different way and
Santo M cancer also in several different
variations in limited edition
yeah it is during the era we started
being more and more clear to me the
difference between the practices of an
Italian design factory like Elysee and
the mass production industry which are
much more serious also the number of
designers and architects I started
working with became bigger and bigger I
must say that as you probably know
Italian design in Italy designed is a
son of architecture almost without
exception all good examples of Italian
design were designed by architects
practicing design may be more than
architecture but they were architects so
for example every decade I start working
with maybe 100 different is the new
designers and architects but at the end
of the period when I look back I realize
that these 10 years were marked by a few
of them for reasons that I i know only
in parts so for example 80s were market
by three designers one was the athlete a
Leonardo go soon Aldo was obsessed with
the idea of coffee makers will coffee
related objects and here then three
different products of mass production
coffee makers for Alicia
this is the last that Aldo died in 1997
this is the last project for Elise it is
a cubed pot which can be considered he
is the last of Mars to the functional
motto form follows function because as
you see it's the ideal pot for cooking
cubed Tomatoes but it works well if you
find the luck in finding the dried
tomatoes tell you it's perfect
the second is the American Arco Michael
Graves Michael created number one vessel
of a policy in 1985 and the third was a
Philippe Starck the French Philippe
Starck here you see a picture of
Philippe while I started working with
him middle 80s and a picture today
which shows that in that cell design is
a very antsy profession
maybe with the help of some computer
stock stock is not only a very good
design in my opinion he is also very
good in finding names for his products
for example this what you see there is a
cheese grater combined with the cheese
container inside and the name is mr.
boom as I said Italian design factory's
a kind of research can be considered the
research workshops in the field of
applied arts of today of design and our
role is to practice an endless mediation
between us on one side the most
interesting expression of worldwide
creativity in photo design on the other
hand to mediate that with people dreams
with the so-called marketplace we do not
believe that design is just a tool for
marketing and technology has do
industrial mass production in the mass
production industry so have design is a
new form of art and poetry and very
typical about times actually Italian
design strata didn't demand anything in
that in that meaning because we can be
seen as the last ring of a much longer
historical chain of movements sharing
the same basic belief first of all being
the Arts and Crafts movement middle 1800
John Morris John William Morris John
Ruskin
another Inc being the Deutsche Welle
bundler founded by architect Muta's
Osama new tasers or the Vanara state
beginning 1900 with Joseph Hoffman
[Music]
column and Moser and Dagobah pay between
others or the Glasgow School of Art
founded by McIntosh all the Bauer German
Bauhaus in the twenties some of our
colleagues of the Italian design
factories I'm sure you know many of
these examples
we this is one of the model makers we of
course I used to work to several protein
a year we go to the stage of prototypes
then we do a lot of thinking about the
project and a selection those what you
see here about the clutches which are
now in the Alexa Museum they've never
been produced here the project is are
the two bracelets this was a real
product another example of the practices
of Italian design factories was this
project middle 90s done by another
Italian design maestro in Samara the
idea of in Samara was that Alice in
order to prove our social sensibility of
eco sensibility we should present and
produce a manufacturer vase made with
plastic but recycled plastic bottles so
I try to do that follow me he is a
concept but after after a while it was
clear I became clear that at the end the
final production cost was too high
collecting the bottle cleaning drying
capting according to the to the drawing
event summary at the end the production
costs were too high for the market so I
convinced insert to do one a limited
collection of 99 in a box and to that
the real product should be only the
instruction booklet what we did we
published the instruction booklet
which is
that's a very reasonable least a price
you can find a [ __ ] loving sub in
Somali explaining and guiding you to
self manufacture always together with
booklet there is a big labor that you
see there which at the end of your
sandwich
[Music]
as you see sometimes it's not that easy
to deal with these Italian designers
some nape the guys we are still
independent it is capitalism from Napoli
the Napolitan coffee maker or Massimo
Moratti from Milano Bob venturi from
Philadelphia as I said architecture is
very importance of Italian design also
figure design a kettle felipito 92 or
the Mario Botta normal fast
Andreea brand then the 90s the 90s
market a complete different attitude
because I felt a responsibility not only
to work with a bigger star of the system
but we to open the doors of alyssa to
the younger generations so we did and we
started working with the very young
people around that even less than 30
this is the King Kong do lot of an onion
20 we knew became very successful with
this icon with sugar dosa the foods bore
our Nutcracker the pet of a gas light
you understand what it is
a very successful by the way this
the other pole of the 1990s and also
appreciated within the LEC cattle by a
completely different approach for
example of Justin Morrison who has a
wine collection within our catalogue or
run our ad on a girl coats what are we
doing today
today the Alessi if I may say lines of
development our main are for one the
so-called pure architects meaning
architects not having done industrial
design before that we started to contact
and trying to understand whether they
are both interested and interesting in
doing also product design this was the
last survey that we have done beginning
2000 we invited 23 architects from all
over the world asking to all of them to
design a tea and coffee set but to be
produced in a very limited edition of 99
the purpose for this search was only to
understand whether between the 23 there
were there was somebody able and easier
to do was industrial design so we did
from each of them the tea and coffee set
which was made by hand made in in
sterling silver
except you eat hua who his set was in
porcelain some of these 23 at the end
proved to be interested in doing
industrial designs so we started
developing also products for our
industrial but I
it is the case for example of Tom or Tom
Kubik who designed these this container
for honestly for at least been
manufactured by elesif honestly all this
bottle opener
it was the case of Cali computer system
who design a complete table set
porcelain glasses and cutlery it is the
case of will al saud with this
Peppermill this was he is a limited
edition said it was the case of jaha she
designed this vase in stainless steel
with Parmesan greater also stainless
steel one of the most successful within
this last group is David Chipperfield
who designed this limited edition set
but then a complete table set from
normal products which is very successful
in the market David also designed a
folding chair for ELISA Portugal Spanish
Navarre about the big a new Guardian and
three of Dutch us to abandon their fear
is also designing things for mass
production output normal industrial
production rely on its design for
example this electric water kettle or
the Italian folks us
all this under Bandini
out some tongue
this is another example of the research
into the area of architecture that we
periodically manage we did we were asked
by the town of Beijing in China and by
the Design Institute to combine
collaboration
focusing on the potential of the Chinese
design so we did together with them in a
way the opposite of what usually happens
usually you say we make cities designed
in Italy and produce in China we wanted
to do the other way out designing it in
China and manufacture in Italy violation
so we did we asked we selected eight
Chinese architects to each of them we
asked to design an airport for Alicia
which shouldn't be manufactured in Italy
buyers
[Music]
this population was also not successful
at all these have a tag that proved not
to be able to do industrial design as
you may see from the picture sometimes
adapters they exist not for now maybe in
the future another way of development or
what we call all the designers meaning
designers with them we have a long
tradition of work together already like
Stefan Java Nonie all the Brazilian for
telecom banner or the French public or
the Japanese now tofu Quezada
[Music]
let's see this is a small field of the
factory doesn't work import our Patricio
kiala Paul Daniel Liebeskind omeka
leader look the Kelleher design our last
maka Express coffeemaker two years ago
all the Dutch designer Marcel wonders of
Mario tree monkey and Italian architect
another rucola it's the same or before
third the line of developer cooks I have
a passion for cooks so I continue
collaborating with them it was the case
of Alain Ducasse he came to us a few
years ago proposing a pot for cooking
pasta in a different way of the Italian
boil the water then we put the pasta his
idea was to put the pasta direct-drive
into the pot and then to cook like a bit
like a risotto and together with all the
ingredients of your sauce a plan was
Italian a queenly pot it is he was
saying and I may say it works well the
taste of the pasta is very different but
not bad at all except we don't sell in
Italy there are cultural
for reasons which make that in Italy
shops do not want to present such to
metallic receipt worked together with
the chocolatier participe army for a
collection of object for patisserie
another twist Michelin star chef Kenya
around the theme of the leg and the last
of cooks being cassava we'll design
together with a friend the designer
small collection of containers salad
balls and balls in general the fourth
fourth line is a made by what we call
the new designers meaning young people
that we introduce every year two three
four people in our catalog
diesel this also was young years ago
this is Magnussen
another ability ff2 above the line
well the borderline is is you know is a
theory that I developed a few years ago
trying to explain to the rest of the
family of my family the characteristic
of the work are not the practices of the
Italian design factory like Elysee the
bottom line is that an Italian design
company like Elysee is working very
close to the border line dividing the
air as possible from the era of not
possible there are possible be
represented by new project that people
find out customers will be ready to
understand to like to love maybe to buy
and the era of not possible then we
presented by new pods that people will
not be able to understand so they will
be never able to learn and of course to
buy
you can see with your eyes and by sure
you cannot understand where it is with
the marketing mixers you can only feel
that's my finger you can only feel with
some quality which argument what it is
but less and let's use by mass
production industry the practice I mean
to make use of you own accessibility
intuition and also to accept to and a
bit more risk knowing if it's that much
but actually interesting what they do
they have to work as far as possible
from the but their life is no way to
work as far as possible for me but by
the way step by step we are all
producing same product or totally master
that they tend to be uniform eyes copied
each other and and without any poetry
and they say oh very little points to
little point you are living and working
the bottom line then you
of course it's enough to move a little
bit you away and you is before into the
not possible
back on the other hand if you succeed in
the developing a new project like we did
with coffee maker of Catalan life then
you give a kind of little micro monopod
which maybe it doesn't last forever
well that can be very beneficial for the
company then to chat slow then adjust
why I have a very positive vision of the
dance but underline the fallpipe is the
only way to see well of their life is is
to do just when I would ask for the
microsecond I am falling to do not
possible for micro synchronize seated on
their back it is today but what it is
satisfied that it is very important to
improve my feeling my senses
so this is why I do not talk in such a
negative way
we are which is which helps understand
we have it could be it is based on the
purpose of the formula
this war evaluation and surely not the
evaluation made of the design which is
24 times 5 fantasy but users which
apparently led America actually in a
severe drought top is Haiti's when we
which when a new project it is 18 it
means that we will sell 100,000 pieces
area
and the history area is at around twelve
twelve as a school is a few thousand to
three thousand pieces a year and since I
do not believe in mathematics to three
thousand kids a year maybe maybe 1,000
maybe five hundred and that it is a very
very dangerous process for the company
but I also had to add to add that the
formula doesn't guide as it only gives
us the information then we are free to
decide to go on with the project but I
believe in I continue something I hide
the formula but I continue and 20 years
ago we started working with the
collaborating with other companies in
that way we started developing project
for them in product areas completely
different from the areas of Alesi where
Alice would never go so for example we
have a collection of around 20 projects
watches developed with the Japanese the
producer cycle we have a collection
small collection of tasks writing pens
with another japanese' Mitsubishi we
have created two cordless telephones one
for Siemens and another for Italian
Telecom
the most important project in this area
was is it manually she developed with
three different partners the Swiss law
often for ceramic finish are as for
faucets and Italian in the for furniture
a kitchen it's a project Paris and
Almondine it yes also at the project
with the Fiat which was only the makeup
of an existing car and some interiors
one of our we have a 15 of 16 flagship
in around the world
this is the rest of the family all
better was the rest were many years ago
you may see also car when do I say Carlo
I ever seen today very interesting
project made by the students into the
area of a travel solving SATs this is an
era where Alessi has a long history we
started with a little--yeah at the time
of my father I mean designing and
producing tools for service of food and
beverage in airplane and recently in the
past years we have done a project with
GWAR for Qantas with the mark newsn we
did this project with Mac News and more
recently two years ago with Delta this
was Qantas
ten years ago only cutlery and with the
one with Delta was much more important
it was a complete collection of
porcelain last drinking glasses cutlery
other object for serving
[Music]
that's all
[Applause]
I did only thing we're gonna say a few
words but no no it doesn't in whatsit
thank you so much on your vote thank you
very much I will that's my best thing
for my one-year thanks just really
delight thank you sir no one else that
we just adore Whittle now I think no
questions just thank you so much Alberto
fascinating talk and day and again just
amazing for you to launch the new the
new program for LSE aerospace so we look
at a look forward to new 30,000 feet
above the air designing thank you very
much and thanks for coming
[Applause]
