thank you so much for this perfect
introduction because it touches attached
on so many points that I want to talk
about and we didn't even agree
beforehand how to make the introduction
last week a Titan of design dies ingo
maurer wonderful human being really
outside of any labels another one of
these not Mavericks in particular but
just people that just walked by their
own beat and their own drum and in the
open in the near times there was a
phrase and actually the reporter called
me apparently an art critic a few years
ago critiqued an exhibition of his work
and said that Ingo Mehra's work was too
cute and too desperate to please and I
got really angry when I heard that
because if anything Ingo was the
experimenter in chief he always
experimented and experimentation is the
opposite of trying to please in most
cases so when when I realized that I was
gonna be here today to talk about
experimental methods I thought it's so
apt to have just gotten mad about that
comment on Ingo and to just have tried
to rethink from scratch what
experimenting is another interesting
accent that they've attached on is this
dichotomy or it's not even a dichotomy
this kind of fail Falls problem of the
differentiation between art and design
it's very different to work in Europe
and to work in the United States I come
from Europe where we talk about politics
all the time just like we talk about
football it's normal to talk about it
sometimes it's enraging but it is
discourse that is necessary to the life
of a family to the life of a
neighborhood to the life of citizenry in
the United States it's considered rude
to speak about politics at the dinner
table and it's something that I had to
really think about now MoMA is a very
political place we do respond to what
happens in the world in our own way as
curators by showing the work of artists
that really rip that respond to what is
going on and we
shy away from it but it's harder to do
in design somehow you can get away with
a lot of political discourse when you're
a curator of painting and sculpture said
or performance you don't get away with
it with design I remember when I started
a MoMA
twenty-five years ago coming from Italy
and one of the first object that I
proposed for acquisition was a Beretta
gun because I had found out that a New
York Police Department was using it and
I was a proud Italian I'm like okay I
don't like guns particularly but hey
that's a real masterpiece of design so I
proposed it for acquisition and I was
told we do not acquire firearms or
weapons of any kind and I said I'm sorry
there's so many weapons in the
collection of painting and sculpture I
was told in design your choir the real
thing what you see is what you get
acquiring the gun means condoning the
killing that comes from it and I was
really stunned by this impossibility to
lift oneself from the object from the
immediate response that a design object
can have in the world and that's in a
way defined so much of my career at MoMA
and that's why today I'm talking about
experimental methods because every time
I got a rejection based on any of these
different points that we discussed I
would find a way to sneak around it and
I decided to take three of these
examples today to talk about the
experimental methods that we all have to
devise when we really want to do
something and we cannot do it within the
framework that is allowed to us
what you see there is a beautiful piece
by Alessandro mendini from the 1970s he
was called la soo there at the baths and
he was really a way to show a world
burning you know the world is burning
right now well not only literally in
California but all over the world in
many different ways and I thought that
the Adagio is a period that recalls the
seventies is not completely wrong when I
heard a few years ago of the 3d printed
gun which by the way is in the
collection of the Victorian Albert so my
colleagues are here tonight I remember
that feeling really stunned feeling
stand by the fact almost betrayed by the
fact that an object of design more over
advanced technology that I was so
interested in additive manufacturing 3d
printing could go towards such evil
direction
I was almost stunned that something
could go so wrong something of design
something so positive and constructive
could go so wrong but about five minutes
later I got mad at myself for having had
that feeling like Pollyanna what do you
think of course anything we do can be
used one way or the other and out of
that reaction out of that knee-jerk
reaction and the counter reaction I
decided to propose a project to
understand violence in the contemporary
world using what I know which is design
as a lens to analyze it so I started
putting together this kind of between
quotes and laughing on it mood board of
violence and design that went from ant
farm to mendini to make an angel'
antonioni and all the way to done in ray
be to kind of understand how to modulate
my feelings about it I put together a
checklist and I also teamed up with one
of my favorite partners in crime Jamie R
hunt and who who knows who is like
really my better half because everything
that I don't have he has and we put
together a wonderful proposal we
presented it at MoMA in the big
exhibitions committee meeting and it was
summarily dismissed as not a possible
exhibition why there was no moralism in
that rejection but there was an
aesthetic judgment that used the canons
of art and therefore dismissed
altogether the exhibition as a viable
exhibition for the Museum of Modern Art
it was not designed because it didn't
present the kind of like Sonny modernist
positive design form follows function
that we were used to it at the same time
it was not completely art so Gemma and I
looked at each other you know in some
cases when you get a rejection you shelf
the idea until a better time happens or
is you just trash it all together but in
some other cases you feel it is urgent
and we did feel it was urgent so we did
what anybody would do so as not to ask
permission or money out of anyone else
we started a wordpress site we decided
to go ahead anyway we couldn't have the
galleries well says who that curators
only need to have three-dimensional
galleries we can have web sites we can
have videos we can have public programs
we can have many other formats to make
our point known so we decided to have
this website and we started calling in
favors we made a list of objects of
design and when I say design I mean it
really widely so also architecture
branding in some cases we also distorted
reality to make something that was not
really designed to fit into the category
of design and we decided to assign one
object about every week or every other
week to somebody that had some expertise
of something to say about it and you can
see here Alice of course a big friend so
we needed her we called in favors at the
beginning so Alice commented on this
amazing movie from the 1950s a video
that is entitled how to kill people by
George Nelson that explains the killing
people is a problem of design all the
way to the blue bra graffiti from the
Arab Spring where we had numata Lee
talking about it so we called in all
these favors and we always had a little
editorial cap curatorial cap and
introduction matter of fact than a
commentary by the person but then the
beautiful thing is that at the end we
asked a question and that's something
that we could not possibly have done in
the galleries you see we considered
violence also the border
you know the Ronald Reuel and Virginia's
and fratello border wall is architecture
that's been celebrated now so much
because the border has become such a hot
and contested place it wasn't even
before but even more so with Donald
Trump and also the ak-47 by China Kate
Etsy who used to be a
soldier in Sierra Leone so these were
commentaries that were really really
dense and fraud but the questions is
what really mattered so we say in the
United States when people give you
lemons you can make lemonade and that's
what we did we used the online space to
ask these questions and you have no idea
the kind of answers that we got it was
amazing the questions were what other
secretive acts carried out on behalf of
public need to be made should be made
more visible or is use the negative form
of violence or a form of compassion is
execution always ugly we're talking
about real questions and these are
questions that one needs a space to
answer or to even ask you know what
space is it is it a church is it a
dinner
it certainly usually it's not a museum
but it should be you know museums are
places where one can change gears that's
how I like to think about it if you're
in a city like New York or London you
can go into a museum to pause for a
second necessary to relax or meditate
but even just have a discussion that is
not contained within 15 minutes if
you're instead in a place that is in the
outskirts or in the middle of the
country you might want a museum to kind
of make your blood run faster so in this
particular case using the museum as a
space to ask serious questions was
important to us and sometimes we got
really serious answers I remember when
we published the serpentine ramp
redesign the redesign of the
slaughterhouse by Temple Grandin Temple
Grandin is an animal scientist that is
out in California who famously
redesigned the slaughterhouse because
she realized that cows understand that
they're going to be killed and they're
real after they release cortisol that
completely ruins them the meat and also
they get scared
it's a typical cold reasoning apparently
cold on the part of Temple Grandin who's
autistic and sometimes has these
reactions or these analysis that seem to
be cold and unsympathetic and in reality
they are she also designed a machine to
hug cows before slaughter just to make
them feel better on the
basis of these hug machines that are
that exist for autistic people on the
spectrum but besides this the person the
wrote about it is Ingrid Newkirk who was
he still is the president of beta you
know so it was a really interesting
discussion because here you have the
president of the major Association for
the protection of animals talking about
the redesign of a slaughterhouse and at
the end the question it was can we
redesign a violent act to be more humane
we got more than 150 replies it was just
amazing
instead when we published a post about
about the capital punishment in the
United States we got about four so also
an interesting analysis of what happens
in the world
another beautiful post was this is the
euthanasia a form of violence or a form
of compassion in this case the prompt
the object prompt was this speculative
work by Julie Turner Sylvanas the
euthanasia coaster that is meant to be a
roller coaster that that whose fires
become progressively tighter so they
deprive your brain of oxygen more and
more until at the end you're dead so
it's a accelerating suicide hypothesis
and one of the answers that we got was
from somebody that was talking about her
their own pain their own real deep pain
and the fact that death should not
necessarily be considered something
negative that it could be instead a much
welcomed release so not the kind of
commentary that you would find in an
exhibition or in a book exhibition book
in a museum in the end you know MoMA
decided to bring the website on to the
MoMA website and they also decided to
publish a book we closed with a post on
the lethal injection I told you we were
stretching a little bit the definition
of design here but actually we went
crazy because we wanted to talk about
the lethal about the death penalty but
we didn't want to be so direct and
Brutus to show like an electric chair we
wanted something subtler and it took us
a really long time to find something
that could work and I'm not
even sure at this point but midazolam is
the last the last chemical that can be
used in the United States for lethal
injection because all the others have
become unavailable because the company's
refused to sell them to the states for
that particular use in the end MoMA also
published a book that you see here that
was designed by shales Madani was
actually based here in London so it's
really funny what happened okay
rejection at the sense of urgency
let's try experiment away let's call in
favors the experiment works over years
and it also generates new ways of
thinking I told you that public programs
are also a space for curators and
they're one of my favorite spaces in
particular we decided to use the Oxford
style debate format and see how that
would fare and if there is really really
well in museum settings when you have
some really meaty and serious issues to
discuss so we did four of them one had
as a prompt the 3d printed gun but it
was about open source another had the
menstruation machine by Sputnik oh who
was a student here at the RCA a few
years ago and it was about designing
empathy then our good old redesign of
the slaughterhouse for a debate on
eating animals and keeping the internet
free was the last one and I'll show you
so the one about open source what's
important I learned is to really set the
motion well so when you see the 3d
printed gun you'd imagine you can have a
debate on having guns on gun ownership
but instead we decided on purpose to use
the free Internet and the open source
dilemma because the whole purpose that
Cody Wilson the consumer of the 3d
printed gun had was this libertarian
thought that anything should be
available to all through the internet
even the instructions on how to print a
3d printed gun but the beautiful thing
was the Cody Wilson was the one on the
left hand side and Rob Walker looked
like he was the crypto anarchist sorry
so it was quite beautiful it's important
also to find the two people that
disagree but not completely so it's not
a frontal crash it's a really subtle and
beautiful discussion that really dries
drives and and draws the whole audience
in for eating animals I had to ask mama
to get more security than usual
vegans are mean and they are really
dangerous so seriously we had to have
extra security but it was really great
and then the last one was beautiful it
was Internet freedom and digital privacy
will come about only through the design
of better tools for civil disobedience
and direct action and on the one hand we
had Larry Lessig one of the cofounders
of Creative Commons and on the other
side ble Coleman who's an expert that
also wrote the book on anonymous so once
again two people that are on the same
side but deferral nuances Larry Lessig
says the government sucks but still we
have it so let's legislate let's not
completely throw away the instruments
that we have for civil life together and
instead we allow was no civil
disobedience is the only way these are
meaningful discussions that remain in
people's minds and that's why at some
point actually I remember when but I am
making it look like one thing is after
the other but in truth it's been
something that's been boiling me for a
very long time because I love museums so
much and because I love also MoMA so
much I want to make the best out of it
and I want MoMA to be a good citizen too
so in 2008 when the financial crisis
happened I got really excited about the
idea of finally making it visible to all
that museums not the financial sector
culture not the industrial sector the
stimulus for people to think is what
matters to the baseline of a society the
financial sector finally had showed its
true colors so I went to the museum
director to Glenn Lowry and I said let's
start
MoMA R&D department in which we showed
that museums are the true R&D of society
and you know he said great idea but we
were all taking pay cuts not to fire
anyone so we couldn't really start a new
department at that time so we waited a
little bit but then in the end I was
able to start this moment R&D department
which is a lot of our very little deep
as I say all the time because in truth
it's half of me and a twelvemonth intern
that changes every year
but nonetheless it has become a place of
getting together and discussing topics
that are very diverse but that all
matter to people it's not only a museum
as a place to contemplate art as
important as that is it's not only a
place to come to and understand
critical position as important as that
is it's also a place where you go to
find help in the craziness of everyday
life the first-ever salon was in 12 2012
and it was about what it means to be a
curator and that was very revealing very
revealing also for our discussion today
the four speakers I had were Maria
Popova who's the founder of brain
pickings I don't know if you follow her
but she's this kind of she called she
used to call herself online
interestingness curator but then I think
she found a better title but basically
she lives in the literary world and
connects it with everybody's life and
it's quite a unique way to curate
another was and Temkin doesn't get more
curator than that she's the chief
curator of painting and sculpture at
MoMA then Jeff Jarvis a journalist and
an academic who was the first to talk
about online blogs many years ago as a
place where one can curate the news and
last but not least or Erik Hermansen
who's a pop music producer I say pop he
he pens songs for Rihanna and Beyonce
and and it's really diamonds like really
pop pop masterpieces that nonetheless do
not really change our life too much but
he knows exactly how to compose them so
every time for the salons we have four
speakers
times five and then we have some video
contributions but in this particular
case what we realize is that curators
are guides our trusted guides that's
what they are they have to earn their
medals and earn their trust and also
they need an audience it's pretty hard
to be a curator if you don't have an
audience it's a little bit like acting
in a way and we found a lot of metaphors
that helped me also experiment different
formats along the way in 2018 just to
give you another example of salon we did
AI artificial imperfection that's also
one of the secrets we take topics that
are used abused and overused in the
world at large but that have a lack of
clarity or a lack of depth and then we
invite people that are able to pick up
the conversation one step ahead of the
basic New York Times article as good as
that is the way we do so is by sending a
reading list to the people that RSVP
that's another secret that I learnt
along goes along the way these salons
are free and once again in order to get
away with doing what I want without
asking permission they are not public
programs if they were public programs at
MoMA published with people buying
tickets even for free but signing up
with event price or other I would have
to go through the bureaucracy of the
Education Department by instead making
them private which means sending the
invitation to my list of 3,500 people
and everybody who wants to be and I put
them in I maintained them private and
everybody's happy with that the
Education Department people come all the
time so once again finding the formats
that work but what happens is that we
send an invitation and when people say
yes they receive a serious reading list
really curated and what we found out is
that when you show how much work you're
putting into something people respond
they read they come and the discussion
is already that not above the element
elementary general pop culture
information so in the end we all get
something out of it and we all go away
not having any definitive answers but
being a
to frame the questions a little better
in that case the speakers were Kate
Crawford who's the founder of the AI now
Institute at NYU that explores the
ethics of AI Stephanie Dinkins who's an
artist that's been conversing with an
artificial intelligence robot for a
really long time Martin Wattenberg and
Fernanda Viegas who are great
information designers are now working
with the Google brain Institute and last
but not least read yet a debate who
talks about black in AI and black on the
world on the Internet
so it's an activist an activist society
that talks about the differences in
gender and ethnic background on the
Internet
and so on and so forth bigger data the
object taboos and more recently the one
that we did about two weeks ago was
about hair and before that plastics and
work and even white male and I have to
tell you sometimes I really lose like
ten pounds preparing the salons because
more in the United States than here
identity politics is a third rail
everything that deals with identity is
really complex but by showing a desire
to discuss it and by opening our our
hips to in Italy we say that he doesn't
really say it in English but by making
ourselves one although people really
contribute so even though there are
Italians here that are laughing and open
your hip so and it was a memorable salon
because the speakers really came through
and so did the and so did the video
contributors once again I have a budget
of fifty two thousand dollars for the
whole year and nonetheless by showing
the by wishing and by really dreaming to
do something good I get a lot of
rejections really a lot but I also get
some great yeses like when VIN bender
sent me a one-minute video about the
topic of angels you know so it really is
something wonderful now there's no
romance in being strapped and always
trying to find a way to do what you do
despite anything it's
something that one should set their life
on and it's not something that happens
to me all the time sometimes I get a
very cushy yes and a budget and then I
do my exhibition so it's not all like
this but this is what we're discussing
today so experimenting and trying to
make two broken nature you know Ava
mentioned it it was the 22nd area Nadi
Milano it happened this year it opened
in February it closed September 1st and
it seemed very timely but I had proposed
it to MoMA in 2013 and MoMA had rejected
it so even in that case interesting
because the rejection made it so that if
I had done it at MoMA maybe he would
have been too soon so lemon and lemonade
not only I didn't do it at MoMA but also
I did it in Milano at the tree and Nala
which is the place where I started my
whole career when I was a gofer for an
exhibition about the imagine city number
one number two it's the city where I
come from and my parents are still alive
so they could come and see it which is
beautiful but number three this amazing
timeliness of the Friday's for the
future kids and the whole the whole
ebullience that is happening right now
and when things have really come to a
heated point for everything that has to
do with the environmental crisis made it
quite unforgettable experience for me
it's the first time that I worked on
something that was not at MoMA in 25
years so it was quite emotional so you
see here the cover of the catalog it's
this great picture of a Swiss glacier
that's been covered in fabric to prevent
its erosion so that's where we're at and
you know we can find chockful images of
the kind of amazing conditions we have
imposed on nature and on the world and
on ourselves but this was a particularly
hope it went by itself that's great you
do it automatically yeah it's not it's
it's Mina and the catalogue was designed
by an Akula check did the whole image
but studio folder and your own Matilda
khazzani who is here also teaching this
for this quarter this
did the design of the exhibition and
studio folder did the design of the
catalogue this was the entrance of the
three an alley I suppose that many of
you have been there it's a wonderful
building and having been at MoMA for 25
years I've always learned to say that
it's great to be in an art museum which
is true 80% of the people that come to
see my shows are there to see Matisse
and Picasso and then they stumble upon
my shows and they stay there for two
hours and so it's I'm lucky to be in a
place that has different attractiveness
for people but the truth is the being in
Milano in a city that loves designed the
loves politics and that has that kind of
curiosity and maybe also lesser
competition in museums made it so that
this exhibition was flocked by people
and people were what were what my
curatorial team and I were thinking of
we said that we wanted this exhibition
to be for citizens of course it's great
to work for your own community for
designers for our cadets that's always
so rewarding but there's nothing more
rewarding than people coming and having
their minds changed after they see an
exhibition you see here the great
graphic design by an Akula check anna
does also the the image of Strelka so
you might have seen also her work before
and what we asked her was - we gave her
a list of possible acupressure points
the the ways in which we could act on
the world and on our lives in order to
have a more restorative attitude and
restorative design was one of the
keywords for the exhibition restorative
coming from the restaurant route
restaurants were found were created in
France in the 18th century as places
where you could go and eat food that was
good for your health
they thought that boo-yan was good for
their health it Boyan trick boo-yan and
at the same time have a good time in a
convivial atmosphere so all good for you
and fun at the same time and we wanted
to talk about this we wanted people to
shed the idea that design that is
responsible and sustainable and
ethically mined it has to be
Birkenstocks
by necessity nothing against Birkenstock
but that's a pretty dated image of
responsible design we wanted to show
that a restorative attitude can be had
without sacrificing sensuality
aesthetics elegance and pleasure we
wanted to show that it was a viable way
forward so Anna looked at all these
different different points and also
these different strategies and made a
whole series where they put it I'm sorry
I put it too fast but these were the
icons that she made up for us and now
I'm gonna go back quickly and show you
some views of the installation of the
exhibition there were many designers and
architects also from this city and many
some of them maybe some of you are even
in the room right now because it was an
exhibition that spanned the work of
about 250 studios and the were like more
than 300 objects ranging from coral reef
remain scaffolds to instead sculpture
and photography and this is the
curatorial team I really wanted to show
it because they were fantastic from left
to right Erika Petrillo alotta near
yours truly and Laura Moran and it was a
great ride together so these are some of
the strategies that we wanted to show
you know for this idea of restorative
design we wanted to explain to people
that recycling is not everything that
biodegradable is not the solution that
it has to be much more 360 degree change
of mentality the way felix gaeta he was
describing it a change of mentality that
really uproots the way we've been living
in the past few decades and seamlessly
in a pleasure in the pleasant way steers
us in the right direction which is
pretty much the direction that our great
grandmother's were going in that's the
funny thing also recuperating some of
the tradition and from these icons that
I showed you before we created the whole
exhibition which had a path you know you
entered with a scale that was almost
cosmic looking at the first Commission
there were four Commission which was
Neri Oxman
this experiment which who by the way
used to be here at the legendary his
she's an alumna as well I just sent her
a picture of Bedford square she would
like so this was an experiment to use
melanin at an architectural scale right
now as often happens with Mary's work
looking almost like a sculpture but in
truth containing the promise of becoming
maybe an element in a facade that can
darken when the Sun is too strong and
can actually be used for the kind of
living architecture that so many of us
are thinking of but what is wonderful is
that this project was commissioned
initially by the Mandela foundation in
Cape Town and you see here for instance
a rendering of the table mounting in
Cape Town the idea was to have a
monument that is almost like a whaling
wall with melon in the pigment that is
at the basis of so much injustice in the
world as the as the identifying
character and you entered in the room of
change the room of change used the
images of change by NASA that are in the
public domain available to everyone that
wants to use them that show that before
and after of different parts of the
world different moments in different
places before and after either
human-made or natural changes changes
that happen over three weeks or over
three centuries but just showing the
impact that the earth that the planet
has gone through and behind them the
second commissioned by accurate Georgia
loopy beautiful big visualization that
showed major changes in the history of
humankind connected with changes in the
universe and in on earth a visualization
that was quite complex to understand but
at the same time also created new
perspectives and new ways to new windows
into our species that we hadn't thought
of before
this is the superstar of the whole
exhibition a little octopus called mercy
a female octopus that is belongs to Aki
Inomata
a great Japanese designer this work was
the reconstruction of the shell of an
ammonite ammonites used to be the
ancestors of octopi of M squids and they
used to have shells which were shed
along the millennia by the octopi but
when Aki put a little shell
reconstructed in 3d next to Mercy Mercy
looked at it for a little while and then
went home instantly as if she had always
been there and it's really interesting
because I've been trying this is kind of
between us for one more week also
because it might be rejected once again
but I'm proposing this for acquisition
at MoMA and in order to make my argument
I used all possible angles including
architecture without architects the
exhibition by Rudovsky from 1964 so
let's see if it flies but it was such a
moving example of this kind of sense of
of past and present and future coming
together as moving as this also was
reliquaries by Paulo Bey a kind of
cabinet of reliquaries of the future
where perhaps we will not have any more
starfish or bath something from people
to think and pause from that cosmic
moment we moved into an idea really of
reparative design not only restorative
but literally reparative with the work
of alex code who's been 3d printing this
ceramic scaffold to replenish coral
reefs in australia all the way to
instead the speculative work by Sputnik
oh once again she's one of my favorite
designers these are nano Hana heels that
are supposedly
oh it goes by itself I'd forgot to erase
the time so that is to plant to plant
special seeds that are supposed to clean
the Fukushima grounds from radioactivity
in a few years by strutting along them
so different ways for people to think of
this replenishing and repairing some
whimsical some really serious and also
to understand what repairing is when it
comes to also traditions and people's
one thing that we don't seem to really
understand other than many people don't
seem to understand is that when we talk
about nature we're talking about
ourselves it seems like a platitude but
in truth sometimes people have to be
reminded so the whole exhibition was
attempting to do just so - always
alternate lotus leaves and seeds and
birds and and octopi with human beings
and in particular the work of cgo was
instrumental for that see Jill you might
know them already is a collective of
artists and architects that are based
where they're mostly from Lebanon but
they all have Syrian traditions in the
family some of them live in New York and
they do works that are always creating a
relationship with what's going on in
Syria you might have seen their work at
the Biennale in Venice a few years ago
and in each time they are called upon
doing a new project they take some of
the money from the Commission and they
do something that replenishes life in
Syria in this particular case that we're
talking about the Golan Heights and they
were talking also about the importance
of birds in Syrian culture and in Syrian
tradition and they installed this
beautiful scarecrow that was wearing a
talismanic garment in the tree Analia
Milano and then they made a little model
of the tree Analia and he became a
birdhouse for the Golan Heights then
they designed a beautiful book that
talked about the birds tradition and
took some of the money to start a
library for the people in the Golan
Heights for them to have a sense also
more of a sense of place their work is
always quite beautiful and very very
moving
and that's also what the exhibition was
about many people told me I infused it
that way but I didn't think that it
would come through people found it
moving even in moments where I showed
something as prosaic as the
biodegradable pregnancy test because
once again the exhibition was showing
different strategies so it's not only
about thinking big thinking cosmic it's
also about thinking about the little
details of her everyday life we had
three main goals for the exhibition a
lyrical hour and I we wanted it to be
for citizens and we wanted to make sure
that everybody that came to the
exhibition goal number one would have a
sense of the long time that we live in
you know physiologically were able to
think two or three generations ahead
maybe four if we're really good but it's
hard to think that what we're doing
today really has consequences centuries
from now we wanted to try and give that
sense
by all means necessary visualization
design or showing a little delightful
octopus didn't matter how second goal
that we had we wanted people to leave
the tree and Nala having an idea of what
they could do in everyday life hence the
ruby cap
hence the biodegradable pregnancy kit
hence also that Commission there was an
idea that we had we found the scholar at
MIT car at the dinner card that studies
linguistics in various settings from you
know bullying on the internet to also
this great cardiology experiment
apparently so many women are dying of
heart attacks because when they go to
the ER their way of describing a heart
attack is not the one that anybody is
used to usually it's guys going in and
feeling like they have elephants that
are walking on their chests and instead
women go in and said I took too many
stairs today it's our fault of not being
judging here but apparently it's
something that needed to be made public
so we coupled this doctor from from MIT
with a russian illustrator and she came
up with this great Heimlich maneuver
like poster that is meant to be
distributed in ear centers hopefully
across the world
it's
just something to show how restorative
and reparative design can go in so many
different in so many different
directions and I'm showing you this
because this big egg that you see is one
of the most famous examples it's called
capsular Mundi and it's the idea that
you can put a corpse in it and then bury
it and then the tree will grow it's so
simple and direct it's hard to even
mistake and I had this seventy plus
year-old perfect Milanese lady that was
wearing a great skirt suit and she had
the perfect bag and she was quaffed and
she had the perfect moccasin my perfect
shoes and she came to me saying oh I
told all my kids that I want to be
cremated but oh my god this is so
beautiful how do I get in touch with
them and she was very serious and when
things like this happened in exhibition
that's really why I think I'm working
proceeding in the exhibition systems and
new ways of building from the work of
David Benjamin and the living that is
trying to work on of course
mushroom mycelium yay and corn stalks
and finding ways for self assembling
materials too instead the work of former
Fantasma with this particular work aura
streams that shows that waste is not
waste but rather new materials and this
was also the fourth commissioned this
work was actually started as a
commission at the Melbourne try annual
two years ago but when I spoke with them
with Simone and Andre I was four my
Fantasma I just told them that I didn't
want them to start a new work from
scratch as if they were artists working
at another biannual or tri-annual rather
I would like designed to be taken
seriously and research design research
to proceed for years as much as
necessary and be as deep and as serious
a science so for that reason we put our
Commission money onto them continuing
this work and what they came up with
they had done from Melbourne this
fantastic perfect office furniture that
looks as if it had been designed by
techno in Italy but in reality is all we
he wastes what we wanted from them was
to continue and publish the research
material the ghastly interviews and the
scary pictures that they had taken
documenting and unveiling the horrible
background of e-waste where it ends up
being when it leaves the western
northern hemisphere and what it
generates in terms of hidden labor and
toxic conditions for so many millions of
people around the world so once again
you have the beauty of design the
traditional elegance of design that
becomes a Trojan horse for really
serious matters and that's what we
wanted another example of a new way of
buildings the algae lab at luma which is
almost like a Fab Lab for bio plastics
and for the 21st century the Atelier
plans to go around the world and teach
people to use their own local seaweeds
and as you know seaweed a proliferation
of seaweed is a byproduct of our
pollution and transform them into bio
plastics that then can be 3d printed
into the material culture the vessels
the dishes the objects of every location
I am here not showing everything there
was so much more but our third ambition
which I want to show to you right now
was that every citizen coming to the
exhibition would leave having a sense of
the fact that we live in systems this is
nothing new cybernetics was created at
the end of the 1940s architects were
thinking of cybernetic and systems in
the 1960s in reply price the fan palace
you name it but somehow this idea of
living in systems is not percolated down
enough to into the world and we wanted
people to leave having a sense of the
fact that complexity can be our friend
if we find the right tools to manage it
and also if we have enough critical
stance is to be able to know when we are
taken for a ride or not this beautiful
work is
Kate Crawford the woman that I told you
started the AI now Institute at NYU and
Ladin Jolla and it shows the whole
system that is behind an Amazon echo
both software so it shows artificial
intelligence and how it works and
hardware so it shows the embodied energy
the sourcing of the materials it's in an
incredible diagram that can be taken at
face value just because of its
incredible complexity or can be explored
both in a newspaper and online to kind
of understand localized sourcing and
mechanisms there were other systems the
word I know that forensic architecture
is gonna come tomorrow there's there was
a beautiful forensic oceanography
project the Juventus then there was
another project by Teddy Cruz in front
of Foreman about the border between
Mexico in the United States it was just
a joy to be able to find so much
material the exhibition ended with
empathy
another overused word but wonder is
quite irresistible and it showed this
ambition of interspecies existence this
ambition of being able if not to
rebalance at least to survive a little
longer empathy means being able to live
with microbes this is a Japanese anime
that is about a little boy that is able
to see and speak to microbes with
microbes and bacteria or you had Thomas
Thwaites here he of the goatman project
tired of living as a human being goes
and lives as a goat for four days and
the goats adopt him a great lesson or
empathy with angels this is the
beautiful work by Mustafa Lee Farooq in
Brooklyn the intake facility for angels
it's almost an Ellis Island for angels
and the metaphors here come and flow
like avalanches angels have no sex so
they need to be given sex not only an
identity like the old immigrants in
Ellis Island may be distorting their
names but also a sex they need to be
assigned to a place to live the whole
metaphor keeps growing Angels arrive
through the Williamsburg Bridge
and then they go to Governors Island
where they are reassigned it's quite a
beautiful project or empathy also for
boulders this is the work of a wonderful
Latin ex photographer that unfortunately
I never got to meet because I saw her
work in November one day in The New
Yorker magazine and postponed a few
weeks and when finally I tried to get in
touch with her she had just passed away
way too soon but I am in love with this
work because even before I had heard her
quoted saying that I had identify with a
boulder I could feel it
she really does and why not I mean those
of you here that know about Shinto and
know about animism know very well that
also boulders have a soul and why not
empathize with them and at the end of
the show was this bittersweet slightly
corny but quite irresistible sculpture
by Patricia Puccini that showed a love
that was transcending age transcending
species transcending gender it was
called bonobos and in the end there was
not one I had left right no it's not
true but truly I was working really as a
curator trying to also manipulate for
good the emotions and I feel that the
work succeeded I feel that I got what I
wanted besides our own exhibition that
were also international participation
because it's Adrian alley and even in
that case the prompt worked you know you
never know I've never worked on a banana
tree another before but you have an idea
and you pose it to the world and you
expect meaningful answers but you never
know and it did happen but the thing
that moved me we also had a website I
always have a website but the thing that
moved me the most is that all the kids
for Friday's for the future
chose the tree of knowledge the place to
meet when they would strike on Fridays
now that's really a sign that things
work when an exhibition is not an
exhibition or a sum of different
exhibits anymore but becomes a place and
when the message that the curator wanted
to deliver becomes adopted in such an
active way by the citizens by the
audience that is what makes us happy so
it's
menteng is good because once again
offering your hip makes it so that
people respond and they get back thank
you very much of course if you have time
I do have time when people think about
that question before we start today as
well as like what is the most difficult
question that someone has asked and and
somehow it was we was agreed that
somehow there are no difficult questions
there are just good questions and
sometimes there are questions that one
forgets but one of the most difficult
things they think we find ourselves
today and it was one of your points
within your aims at this part of the
tree in a limb and and we have finished
talking about that is how do we produce
and design spaces where empathy goes
beyond the discursive goes beyond the
illustration when I was writing the
Welcome statement for this academic year
I asked all that condemned ik stuff and
also the staff and the students to
respond to two issues one was two issues
of climate and the other one to ethics
how do we speak on behalf of the other
but what I did ask everyone to do was to
practice radical empathy and to actually
think that radical empathy is more just
an empathy no and to actually understand
that that but we really do need to start
thinking what it really means to be
empathic and and how do we produce those
spaces that allow us for that so if you
could talk a bit more but how are you
taking that issue that I see that you
are taking it further now with some of
the conversations and where do you see
the designers really working with
empathy as a subject matter that that
can also become extremely corny an
extremely tokenized
and and very distant at the same time it
tries to be very close so maybe if you
could talk a bit more about oh yeah
thank you this is a this is
hard question yeah because I have to say
empathy doesn't come very natural to me
so I have to follow the steps and then
hopefully it'll become real you know
it's like so I have instead a very
empathetic husband so I try to look at
him so I just look for the signs right
so I I can recognize that louder really
identifies with the bolder I can see
patricia Puccini the first time I saw
her work was in Japan and she always
does this monster aliens that are tender
like you want to hug them immediately so
I recognized the empathy but right now
I'm trying to see how it can really be
enacted so is it enough to design a
space where say animals and humans live
well it's that just going through the
motion and does it take something much
more radical and who is really radical
empathetic even Gandhi and mother Teresa
have been accused lately you know so
I've been wondering a lot and that's
like violence this is something that I'm
exploring in a way the most impact
piece for me it's not a place but it's a
mental place was most of us you know
that the Angels facility I thought that
that was so beautiful because it didn't
try to make it really try to theorize
this this empathy before it even
happened I am right now looking I'm
working with a small group and I am
advising also hashing Sarkis for next
year's Biennale which is about living
together so that way I'm forced to think
empathy and maybe one day I'll really
feel it too
they were you but do you have a do you
have what have you seen that really is
that way I usually ask questions I don't
have the answer for and yet doesn't and
I always like to ask questions that they
do have an answer and I think that
empathy is is something that the 20th
century was trying to somehow erase all
the kind of like professional
relationships intellectual debates the
way in which we all have trained to
produce forms of success actually have
been by raising emotions and in fact I
think there was last year the mayor of
Barcelona at some point in a meeting she
she broke and she started crying and she
was very much pointed out by the press
it's like how can a politician cry right
and and you know she just gave a very
human response and somehow the question
here is I don't know if it is a matter
of design in terms of spaces but in
terms of acceptance and in terms of
tolerance and and so I I think it's much
more of a human condition that we do
need to recalibrate I think schools are
incredibly important in in generating
and new forms of engagement the
classroom the lecture hall and every
single act of pedagogical transmission
if you want can be that the space of
learning and we are dealing with issues
of mental health but also emotional
support and it's not easy I don't think
that we have been trained I don't think
that we have the tools by which we can
really learn how to be empathic unless
one has it culturally like your husband
does if you want well I think it's also
sorry for this is so stereotypical but
it's also New York and it's New York
after 9/11 I saw it change tremendously
so if empathy means having appreciating
others then maybe I do feel it I'm still
trying to understand what it is but it's
about living together definitely to me
what I'm trying to understand in a way
human empathy okay it's the interspecies
empathy that I want to understand in
architectural terms you know how can it
really manifest
itself is it a utopia do we really need
to rebalance that is it something we
know how to do do we have some questions
yes it's coming too
hi thank you for that great lecture
thank you a recurring theme in your
practice seems to be doing something
without asking for permission and then
finding the loophole in the rules doing
it anyway and then it ends up being
accepted
has there been times where that hasn't
worked quite so well like the examples
he showed us oh yeah
no there I had done a lecture once on
about the rejections that haven't gone
anywhere yet yeah it does it happens
very often I fell flat on my face quite
a few times Sam I cannot really talk
about major watts so once again I'm very
good at transforming them into you know
I always say you know what was a reason
it works now but it's also when I talk
about it I'm not too proud it's a little
bit like a mental problem you know what
I'm saying it's like a problem with
authority that sometimes goes beyond
what is really justified so I guess we
all have to learn who we are and try to
make the best out of it but I'm not
proud
it seems like in the tree naalai one of
the most potent moments for you was when
this space for the exhibition became
really public and activated by the
protest as you're saying how do you sort
of reconcile the desire to do that with
like any exclusivity of the museum
especially the MoMA and like the
constant the cost to attend and like you
were saying with that exhibition or with
the salons that you sort of like the
only way was to make them explicitly
exclusive and to your I'm sure like
Elite 3500 guest list and not open to
the public so how do you sort of like
walk that line or how are you interested
in sort of breaking the exclusivity of
the museum as a space sure it's funny
the exclusivity of the museum is more
urban condition than it is price you
have to remember that in the United
States
museums are not subsidized by the
government so we need to charge a ticket
but the ticket that we charge is a
fragment of a theatre play it's like
twenty seven dollars twenty-five dollars
right now and a movie theater is movies
twenty-one you know and the membership
for the whole year is 80 so and then
there are many ways also to pay less so
money is not really the issue it's more
Midtown and the way MoMA presents itself
also architectural and we just went
through an expansion that hopefully then
I feel has done a lot to make the museum
more open and more accepting number one
numbered but but still we have this
problem of it's not even elitism anymore
it's maybe days I don't know it's just I
understand how people I don't feel like
going to Midtown you know every every
morning I have to go to midtown and I'm
like you know I get out of the subway
and I run to mom and I'm like and then I
have to go back downtown but so it's
really the urban dynamics also because
once you're inside the problem if
anything is that it's too crowded it's
not the elitism it's almost the up
when it comes to the nonetheless the
museum is a sanitized sterile place
where you can't bring your food where
you cannot act inappropriately or you
know you have to kind of watch yourself
and behave a certain way especially when
it's the white box kind of museum that
MoMA is the tria not it was a much
dirtier place you know between quotes
you still couldn't bring your food but
there was a different sense of the body
occupying the space and also there was a
lot of public space including the park
behind where things could happen where
concerts could happen so it was a much
more porous space to begin with when it
comes to the to the not public aspect of
the other salons literally somebody in
the street could tell me can you put me
on the list and I would put him on the
list or her on the list you know what
I'm saying
the only difference is that I don't use
the MoMA website publicize the program
because otherwise it would be an endless
bureaucratic nightmare and I would be
able to do the next one in seven months
so it's very instrumental
but the elitism of museums is something
that is very cultural besides even
beyond how real it is like people talk
about the Met in New York is the place
where they used to go when they were
children but now it has a ticket price
still that has not changed their
attitude towards the Met and instead
MoMA is the place for a certain cultural
elite more than financial elite and
that's what we have to deal with
I don't know if I've really answered
I've given you more context perhaps
thank you thank you
it was such a great talk I'm just thank
you many ideas and thoughts now but my
interested just to ask what you think
the future of curation is and what are
you excited to see emerging in the space
and if it's you know radically outside
of museums or there are other methods of
engaging in this sort of practice yeah
there are so many and you know a few
years ago everybody was using the word
curation and you know you could curate
the olive-oil aisle at the supermarket
and some of my colleagues were incensed
by it I've always thought it was great
once again trusted guides you can be a
trusted guide in the Orient olive-oil
universe right so it's fine by me and
same thing maybe because I had to
experiment with it but the idea that
it's not only about a gallery is very
healthy if there are so many different
spaces you can curate in the street
there's a I don't know enough about
London institutions but there are
institutions like creative time in New
York I remember when I started knowing
New York or understanding New York they
had brought in
Agnes Denis who's this great artist that
is going to have a retrospective right
now at the shed in New York and she had
planted wheat fields underneath the
World Trade Center when you had the Twin
Towers so you had this wheat fields with
the towers coming out of them and he was
in the city or creative town also took
over from Coney Island one year and had
artists we do all the science for all
the rides so there's so many different
ways to curate and that's the beauty of
it to me the real problem is the
business model for museums and for
culture that's what I'm really concerned
about I'm concerned about the abdication
of responsibility that so many
governments have operated by that's why
the R&D department was born because
politicians have their stump speeches
all of these ways to save the financial
and the industrial sector and instead
the cultural sector goes down the drain
in a second
is it because we don't have the right
metrics I don't know but really we need
to find a new business plan it's really
it's a matter of survival for art
schools and architectural schools and
design schools for museums for curators
really we need to find a way to show our
not our value because we know that but
just our monetary political stump speech
value so that they can take us into
account it was a beautiful reflection in
which you said you know some the really
good ones are able to sing for
generations ahead of them how far is the
most responsible feature that we can
think of you know the the whole matter
of the exhibition I was always saying
you know we will become extinct we don't
have control on the fact we have some
control on the when and a lot of control
on the how right so I am not counting
the ears but you know there's this great
book called the watchman's rattle that
talks about how the Mayan civilization
became extinct over 500 years
so is it 500 years is it a millennium is
it a hundred years I don't know that but
we should look very much forward to a
legacy you know like when you know that
you're bound to die you start thinking
of a legacy we should do that as a
species as well thank you
