good evening everyone
Thank You Annie I just met introduction
thank you all so especially the last
minute this lecture series I understand
that is a new canonical histories and we
have not actually been necessarily going
after but we've been kind of pursuing a
unique mode of practice in thinking that
are only possible in Korea where we are
based in I get that we want to move
forward and go beyond canons but to do
that actually I think we want to go
before to look at what was before the
canons or beneath or below the canons
and there were a couple of occasions in
our previous projects that we force our
force our self to look back we designed
South Korean pavilion for the Shanghai
Expo in 2010 and this Expo had a 200
nations the highest ever number of
participants in history of Expo what is
notable is that in hundred years a
period of time the world has close to
quadrupled in population and in similar
proportion in the number of nations so
you we just jumped into this kind of
absurd theme park of national identities
where the majority maybe 3/4 of the
world national nations had less than 100
years of identity as a sort of state
sort of entity
and they're mostly had a quite different
sort of a modern modernization process
which has to with this Canon
transmission let's say the process so
here we are we are kind of surrounded by
balls and domes and what I call Niemeyer
ask sort of escape and this view is from
another sort of another dome or
spaceship and these were all the largest
pavilions after Chinese pavilion from
the left it's a Japan Korea and Saudi
Arabia and India and they're not even
young nations actually there were 100
years ago they kind of showed up from
the early on this these are the Korean
pavilions in world Expos in 20th century
the very first one in Chicago it looks
nothing like Korean to me right it looks
more like a nation maybe some kind of
translation situation and then there's
about 60 450 half century gap in the 60s
and that explains between was this
colonial period of 35 years and then
followed by Korean War and so these two
are quite important architects actually
only probably important to architects
one is Kim Joon who study during the
chunky valve time in the fifties the
other one Kim sugeun study around the
same time in Tokyo when the Tokyo see
when the metropolis was very thriving so
and then but then they both died quite
young in their 50s and 60s around 1980s
and so that kind of left us another kind
of void of influences in a way so
there's current constants or a brain
drain
come back and sort of also crisis in
talent in a way but then you know now
it's a very different time so yeah first
two pavilions are kind of clear that is
before the cannons and then the other
two are after somehow arrived there and
after that is also followed by many a
few other experts until now
a Korean Pavilion appeared with what I
call a post-colonial fan dance double
gaze so this is an alibi for a symbol
that we choose for the Shanghai Expo in
syrup dragons and lanterns and pottery
and we choose multiple things that is 24
letters from Korean alphabet which
itself is a modern idea which was
invented 500 years ago as a distribution
of knowledge but in a venture Ian sense
this is a decorated shed pretending to
be a duck because the budget was
outrageously low so we call the talk
shed as we call it basically this very
abstract geometric straight lines
horizontal vertical diagonal with
circulation systems and so on but more
importantly instead of presenting it as
a large object we presented as a room a
space that is captured by this kind of
merger of these geometries simple
geometries the space that is a larger
than the soccer field 7 meter tall semi
enclosed space sort of with the porosity
so sort of has this metaphor of our
situation as an open Peninsula situation
and you can see this kind of our plan
talks with the round one it's a Japanese
one but it talks more with the smaller
scales of these other supporting
buildings in plan like toilets and
information booths and so on so also
with the Kentucky Fried Chicken this is
part that we have to put circle for
Korea's it's a little bit formally
contrived but overlooking the one to
liver river with a Korean restaurant
with a viewing and this is kind of the
moment like wow you know the big void
and this worked well because we ended up
[Music]
waiting hours three hours and just to go
upstairs and see the very disappointing
kpop video for 30 minutes and come down
this capture space is a sinus space idea
sort of a space as a sign and in sinus
space order and this was a 1 to 300
scale three-dimensional model of Seoul
with the river and mountain as a stage
and breeches for waiting people and then
this was among the 200 countries there
was a first-timer it said North Korea
very first time they say next to Iran
and Iraq pavilion which someone jokingly
said this was axis of evil Street
you know Chinese because it was so from
my previous experience with the Expo I
mean when you look just to bring South
Korean story will be missing the half of
the story so then I had to think about
actually showing both territories so
then just become after his father sudden
death at the time who is in jail now
after impeachment going very well but
[Music]
actually trying to do the first
architecture exhibition of both
countries together both by notes in
South Korea the diplomatic effort that
there are a lot of European diplomats
ambassadors great Institute's so
basically they become this kind first
eight months was a very this is very dry
sort of situations photographers and
filmmakers and so on so we end up sort
of bringing and he during the Japanese
colonization era only for 27 years
[Music]
poetry that he wrote for supposed to be
the one month long you know just general
newspaper because people complain so
much that it was completely intelligible
unintelligible so I mean of course
obviously this was a 1934 but he was
influenced by the studies poetry
I think it's called concrete it's kind
of a very visual and shocking because
it's kind of
that is a split in half so this is a
Chinese and so I wouldn't tell you which
one is North Korea or South Korea but
some of the pages of the book they have
actually
amazing this is the African from this I
[Music]
was able to bring them know about their
own work but the first time they got to
meet each other so interesting I think
one of the spin-up I'm very jealous
because he was teaching spacing of these
39 protagonists
bittersweet in a way that initially my
plan a was try to stay within this
country only like 20 miles apart but
then you have to kind of go through
these and metre wide buffer zone between
North and South Korea it's mostly
untouched by sixty six power dynamism in
the last century most heavily armed
territories in the world with an
estimated two million
[Music]
and mines which will be taking 100 years
to decay because it's inviting people
[Music]
until now using live bamboos as a
structural support so it kind of floats
and then wooden planks so recent Hara
museum exhibition he made artists people
and all of aliasing berman condensation
[Music]
imagining for animals and so on so it's
[Music]
something else actually that she asked
me to think about
seedbank ecology library
so what happened in England actually
because this is discovered by South
Koreans obviously made by North Korean
for in the Asian purpose we discover
four of them there is not far from where
she proposed this passage
[Music]
[Music]
so when they and this geological area
this area is actually one of the most
important also bird migration site in
Korea because hot springs also go down
to 40 minus 40 degree but it's war is a
ten degree
so that's another machine into almost 50
times a population growth so from 2002
at the time which is now shrunk a little
bit especially my region but I think it
worked at the two polarizing camps in
architecture one is a systematic camp
who is fearlessly responsible for 99% of
the built environment and they were very
brave
[Music]
whose share is remaining 1% this
profession is a serious cultural
endeavor and they're making dialogues of
canons or at least not completely about
the canons counterpart yet very angry
because they don't have much to do
and and actually involved and guilt and
anger in this world the details we have
to work with others the rest of the
world the game to be played by two and
painters that can be raised or painted
over but goes alternating black and
white reversible affecting each other
through recursive processing time every
day newspaper this famous and you can
read the whole story their numbers
represent the order here but it only
becomes important within certain
constellations at certain moments
so
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
beginning and the physical end of the
world beginning at the end of the
building and the actually interesting
the whole thing becomes its own project
so basically there's a lobby with the
two amazing we call white room which is
a before room
we show everything that happens before
building is complete that's the moment
after the building is something that we
highlight our preoccupation with that
just in frequency so the most frequent
one everything about you
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
we space residual space which could be
later used quite well however
only so much with this capitalist
development you can do and also I
realize these things I think more
project that I experienced was actually
no idea about the users that's more
satisfying I think to me Tories and
other more specific it's a dormitory for
600 students and from the campus it
appears as a four-story building but
this building has a 27 meter drop with
the gap in between and is a cheap
construction so it's actually plain wall
reinforced concrete wall system the
slope and also the geometry has to be
more like a parallelogram because of the
grain of the story
Tommy Therese you have first two floors
one floor as a common area and then
there's eight floors of sleeping area
but because of the slope actually there
is in the middle there two common floors
there is Sandidge by boys rooms and then
those rooms basically and they meet in
the middle and this central suspended
for with the giant trusses
and also the hidden something can happen
I think we did something Korean you then
you take off your shoes with different
[Music]
showers our private and toilets but
watch the next one so this is one hour
[Music]
on the spectrum of it has to with the
Korean spa situation is very unique
[Music]
this is also kind of culminated there
here for now
we call it Domino which is also system
five-story stacked up using also the air
circulation which don't need in the
center somehow we create this unique
office space now I think is quite common
but this was very first project image
that Japanese know about this useless
invention this actually like Venice or
also our TMT project in this
[Music]
anyway so these are only certain project
are like over-ambitious as many is a
pictogram together
of course it's red and when you get out
of the white room back to the hallway
you get into black room which is after
or you can come directly from this
curtain to white room it's actually
really about about our building but none
of this after room is done by us
basically photographers filmmakers
there's some YouTube users things but
also in a way
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
and then and it was interesting they
want to build the ring dome there first
I refused it because first done in the
storefront on the street outside really
engaging just luxurious setting with
this thing next to Rodin sculpture
but I managed to see this in such a
social housing public space keep an
unnecessarily flashy buildings but I
think these are kind of rewarding and
more dignifying in a way
without doing is quite rewarding because
they're about really nurturing either
social cultural or natural urban
ecologists they are endangered in a way
so I think is a very important public
role so from here next five slides
starting from you it shows the site of
recent public projects ground conditions
are for refreshingly utopian ambitions
are very unusual not much ground left in
the city and it has become very
expensive in the city too and often the
ground itself is more strange and
interesting than the architecture that
will land or therefore it does sometimes
and sometimes there is hardly any ground
so they don't come with the pictogram
yet but for now we're gonna just call it
a new ground so that's
I don't mean to be this upside-down
situation this is this is I call it a
brutal
Arcadia because it was this ring road
that was built 20 years ago and he's
about 15 meters above ground and then
there's a stream running that connects
the Han River and now is this huge fish
is a very exotic cranes and so on but
there is a sight that the most recent
competition win which is a social
housing next to this situation so
basically this was I took this picture
of this area of this 20 years ago and I
was really inspired with the students at
the time so I hundred forty seven there
is meant to be the infrastructure site
so they're already infrastructure which
is a rain water station on top of it
because open open competition and this
happened to face the south is the where
it's not facing the noisy side that is
facing this wing node has a great view
of this it's noisy so the idea is that
actually this given rainwater pump
station very deep and then just this
facility and then this housing on the
south and then other things are like in
atrium situation facing north with a
view so that's that and that's basically
the part that is facing with sort of
high Kabul you can see is part of the
scene scenery and
because it's also situs there's no
really left oversight there the next one
is actually intention because about the
nurturing the cultural ecology you know
the director is one of the advocate for
that so it was very some huge superstars
and but strangely I think everywhere
that now it's harder and harder for
independent filmmakers to make films you
know they all go to Marvel Comics and
usually they just produce the big ones
now so it was very important to keep
this social cultural ecology going so
they pick the side that is very small
but you can build 50 meters high so so
we the brief itself was a very unusual
and exciting so basically there are five
parts they're solid and very social and
also not like Netflix binge watching at
home situation urban experience
so you basically it's like four stacked
up monkeys in between underneath spaces
because we
I think this situation also ended
[Music]
earlier this year after so we're just
starting now it already has elements
like a mountain and fragment
started from this mountain mountain
situation with enpsychopedia and then
and this also we're going to retweet
that and
- we are working with archeology also
team so this is how these two important
things the end of it thank you for
putting up with this by the way
[Music]
domestic a whole new part of this very
dense opus park-like development
actually LG you probably know
flat-screen TVs they develop the larger
area here and our task was to design a
park at the same time art gallery and
then this arch is about 27 meters span
so it has huge anchor so that required
varying height space we just proposes a
one large space 700 square meter column
space that varies and this is actually
we are pouring right now but we're doing
it actually is about this Riverside and
there is actually unlike I mean
[Music]
there was understood this was when the
city was under control so they have to
be exploded into rubbles to create
rubbles to make them so that's what
happened so they disappear grew back but
it used to be six times so now it's
become
very important bird migration site is
called Ramsar site and it's a very
surreal sort of situation so the premise
of that is basically bird-watching
floating structure pontoon structure so
this is three years and it's a very long
process but still going and just next
there's what we call maybe the budget
modern situation that is a power station
there is no longer used this was the
first power station in the 1930s control
yet now that this connection with the
water happened so it's actually a quite
challenging situation now all the
riverside is occupied by private views
and experiences basically this is the
ground level with this island blocked by
these 4 meter high structure five over
and then which is the turbine has this
amazing view so basically we're trying
to make this into a most urban sort of
space so that bringing the it's a place
where you can go up without paying for
entry function as an urban space and
there are two power stations one is
gonna be safe as industrial let's say
[Music]
heritage and then using appropriate as
much as we can but performance black box
and then basement exhibition and
so sort of a residency program and the
top part of the boiler will become
without the boiler we're just keeping
them as it is all the catwalks and that
becomes like an observation platform we
[Music]
also extend further the basement parking
linear urban space so we made some
comparison with this for the competition
[Music]
super budget project but also and we you
know now in precious cultural spaces in
so this could be also have a unique role
[Music]
and then this vertical difference is
about 50 meters with the flyover in
between from the machine so I'm making
this anti-climatic just interest you can
ask me questions or comments
[Laughter]
continue I think I went on quite long
[Music]
thank you very much very very time thank
you
[Applause]
