welcome back everyone this afternoon we
have a slightly shorter session I
believe it's now an hour long so we have
two presentations and then a 30-minute
discussion which I hope you'll all
participate in first of all we're going
to hear from Julia Gatley Julia's head
of the School of Architecture and
planning at the University of Auckland
New Zealand she's also a historian of
New Zealand architecture and her most
recent book is a centennial history of
the Auckland school co-edited with Lucy
tree our second speaker is Silvana Tahir
she is a writer and an architect
she studied economics and politics at
UCL and development and planning at the
Bartlett she gained her diploma in
architecture the AAA in 2011 and since
then has been teaching in history in
theory and this year she started
teaching intermediate design studio at
Central Saint Martin's on the role of
nature in the city her writing has
appeared in the AFL's Publica blueprints
and the AR so welcome so the University
of Auckland began teaching architecture
in 1917 the same year that the AAA
admitted women as students the auckland
school was New Zealand's only
professionally recognized school of
architecture until the mid nineteen
seventies and this history therefore
underscores many of the developments in
the country's twentieth century
architecture in September of this year
the school celebrated its centenary with
the launch of an edited book surveying
its history as well as exhibitions and
other events
this paper draws from the book and the
exhibition research to present and
reflect upon what this 100 years of
architecture has meant for women it
shows that while the auckland school was
a distinctly male and masculine
environment for much of its 100-year
history women have almost always been
present including a particular
particular bubble of women students at
the end of World War two growing numbers
from 1972 and gender balance starting to
become
a parent from the late nineteen nineteen
90s so one of the several exhibitions
for the centenary was as an expanded
version of a timeline that was built up
by an organization called architecture
plus women New Zealand formed in 2011 to
raise the visibility of women architects
through such means as publication in
exhibition this timeline was first shown
in 2013 and for each subsequent show
showing new panels have been added to in
different colors you can see the various
colors and the dark blue panels are the
ones that were new for this particular
version they show all the names of the
women students attending the auckland
school up into the 1980s when the list
started to get very long nights first
major achievement in the school was the
introduction of a full-time degree in
architecture and this was offered from
1926 like his own education at the
University of Liverpool it used bozer
methods with emphases on the history of
architecture particularly classicism as
well as drawing rendering via skates in
the formal crit the first students to
graduate with a Bachelor of architecture
did so in 1931 in 1926 the school had 50
students of which 15 were enrolled
full-time the first woman to sit and
pass exams in the school did so that
year this was Laura castles Brown night
seemed pleased to have her in the school
saying that year and I quote so far as I
can see there is no reason why women
should not take up architecture as a
profession most architects need a girl
for secretarial work such as typing
specifications and letters but there's
not enough work of that kind to occupy
the whole of a girl's time so if she
could undertake drafting as well she
could be sure of permanent employment
into quote two more women enrolled
following year B
three Smith and mill Greenwood castles
Brown and Smith completed stand-alone
papers whereas Greenwood enrolled in the
B Ark and became the first woman to
complete the degree in New Zealand
graduating in 1933 at the early woman
graduates included Dorothy Wilson 1935
Mary Edwards and 39 and Nancy North
Grove in 1914 of these Nancy North
crafts was awarded an empire scholarship
for women moved to London to study Town
Planner and became well known as a
planner before World War two the school
was producing up to eight architecture
graduates a year enrollments but later
in the war and after the war enrollments
mushroomed
there was a six-fold increase in student
numbers from 40 students in 1942 to 240
in 1947
first-year enrollments jumped the most
including a jump from 30 students in
1945 to 70 in 1946 the school really
struggled to cope with this mushroom
mushroom of numbers and with shortages
in both space and staffing it only had
five full-time members of staff at that
time and started using senior students
as tutors and studio students made
formal complaints about the program at
that time and ultimately this led to the
appointment of more full-time staff so
that by 1551 there were 15 of them all
mean of course in addition to being
larger the classes of the mid-1940s had
more women students as many of six of
them in the 1945 cohort it seems that
the opportunities that the war had
offered women to work and jobs
historically undertaken by men now also
encouraged those finishing high school
to consider the profession is being open
to them of particular note of these
students Lily
laidlaw later crystal who started in
1944 became the first woman to teach in
the school working as a part-time studio
teacher in 1948 after the end of her
fourth year she had a successful career
in practice and the 1967 became the
first woman to eat in a New Zealand
Institute of Architects medal for design
among the 30 of the students who
enrolled in first year in 1945 were
Marilyn hat
Nancy Martin and Barbara Potter in this
second year hat and Parker joined a
collective called the architectural
group who published a manifesto in the
magazine Marilyn hat did not finish her
degree but worked in practice in the UK
nonetheless and later earned a
reputation as a writer particularly on
housing Habra Parker also practiced in
the UK for a while and had a career in
the film industry at the third of these
three women Nancy Martin moved to Sydney
in 1960 where she specialized in the
lighting design she was appointed to the
academic staff of the University of New
South Wales and completed a PhD BA also
in lighting the particularly large first
year cohort of 1946 had full women in it
and from that point the number of
women's students began to shrink this is
apparent in the 1950s and a continued in
the 1960s well so while the size of the
school as a whole continued to grow
reaching 300 in 1960 the number of women
and that those two decades was very
small and sometimes they were none these
were the baby boom years in which many
young women whose lives have been
impacted by war often followed the norm
of marriage housewifery in motherhood in
addition and Jim Matheson has recently
identified physics as an issue in these
1960s demographics the school
restructured its degree in
1361 prior to this it had offered a
diploma of architecture as well as the
Bachelor of architecture we were the
differences between the two of them
being that the degree required students
to enroll in physics and also to
complete a final year thesis whereas the
Diploma did not require either of those
two things and the Diploma also served
as an option for direct entry students
who had served some of their articles
and practice but with the new degree
structure of 1961 and through until the
mid-1990s students were not admitted
straight into the school and first year
and the first year at university but had
to complete an intermediate year
comprising first year physics as well as
electives from a range of courses
offered by the faculties of some arts
and sciences followed by four
professional years in the school so this
brought the B arc into alignment without
the professional degrees and it also
allowed students to do their first year
in any New Zealand University it had an
impact upon women because some of girls
high schools at that time weren't
teaching physics which means that they
couldn't go straight into their
intermediate year and do university
level physics so they couldn't enter the
degree program they did though still
have the option of enrolling in the
Diploma of architecture although the
university was also starting to phase
out the Diploma and so and the New
Zealand Institute of Architects was also
supporting the phasing out of the
Diploma at that time so these things
contributed to the small number in the
1960s student demographics changed again
from 1972 when suddenly in the first
year class of 70 we were 13 women
students the school had revised its
rules for the intimate year intermediate
year and from 1971 students could do
either maths or physics in the
intermediate rather than not having to
be physics and this reopened the door
for women who'd not bent
physics at high school one of the first
year students from 1970 to Denice civil
has reflected on her time in the school
she recalls the very male atmosphere of
the place and the sexist comments made
by male staff and students including
quote an oft quoted piece of research
that apparently proved that women had
difficulty visualizing in 3d end quote
but this class wasn't anomaly and its
demographics it was the start of a new
trend with 1973 seeing another 10 women
entering first year and subsequent years
also showing a gradual increase by 1976
one third of the incoming students were
women a year earlier in 1975 the school
also saw its first woman graduate with
the PhD in architecture this was Susan
Nicolas ku who subsequently moved to
United States and had a career and
practice there the number of women
students continue to increase during the
1980s and 1990s Rachael close to gender
balance in the ninth in the late 90s but
still fluctuating the proportion of
women architecture graduates was also
increasing to 39 percent by the late
1990s and 250 percent from 2007 the rise
of feminism during the 1970s means not
only more will of students but also more
political awareness and more activism
aimed at the male establishment in 1979
a group of these women activists focused
attention on the fact that the school
had still had no women on the full-time
academic staff although an artist
claudia pond ely had taught drawing pat
time since 1974 with Pat Hanley who was
a well-known New Zealand artist the
women activists wrote to Professor Ellen
Wilde who was the head of school at that
time pressuring him to appoint well or
more women to the staff when a position
in drawing came up the school solicited
applications from women and in 1981
and appointed ser tradeable to the job
trade well Sarah trade will had
completed her be act in the school in
1976 and had practiced in Wellington and
in London
she taught drawing and developed a very
different approach compared with that of
pant Hanley and Claudia pond le where
Hanley had encouraged loose drawing with
a focus on the big issues
Treadwell took a speculative or critical
approach to representation and allowed
for famous and care with detail this
underscored the school's design and
drawing culture for many years that
included painstaking rendering by hand
and in the 1980's and 1990's the Oakland
School earned a reputation as a drawing
school from 1986 Treadwell also taught
an elective course entitled women and
architecture later engendering
architecture and encouraged student
research on some of New Zealand's early
women architects she remains the only
woman on the full-time staff 14 years in
1990 and accreditation visiting panel
concluded that this was unacceptable I
recommended that at least half of new
appointments should be women the school
appointed Rosemarie Schofield in 1991
Diane brand and 94 Brenda Vale and 96
Duty Cockrum in 1998 and more in
subsequent years the school which became
part of the Faculty of creative arts and
industries in 2004 and been merged with
the Department of Planning to become the
School of Architecture and planning in
2006 has had good gender balance and
male students for many years now and
even an emergent majority of women in
both architecture and urban planning is
currently sitting at 58% women students
in architecture if his gender Blair
gender balance among urban planning
staff while among architecture staff
just under well food a woman this sounds
until the figure is compared with
practice it's still the case that less
than 1/4 of New Zealand's registered
architects are women
notable however is the fact that the
Faculty of creative arts and industries
has been led by three consecutive women
serving as Dean since 2004 and the
school of architectural planning has
been led by five consecutive women
serving as heads since 2006 this is
unusual even today here our staff today
so to summarize the paper shows that
women were welcome in the school from
the outset the number of women students
increased noticeably in the mid-1940s
before dropping again and remaining
small until 1972 when it increased
rapidly and continued to increase
gradually and until starting to approach
gender balance in the late 90s today a
third of the architecture staff are
women but notably with a series of women
serving as both Dean's of the faculty
and heads of the school the low
proportion of women and practice remains
of greater concern it was this that gave
rise to the formation of architecture
plus women New Zealand in 2011 this
organization continues to work to raise
the visibility of women architects and
as a result the school was really proud
to have hosted an updated version of
this architecture plus woman NZ timeline
as part of the events for the centenary
celebrations in 2017 to demonstrate the
institution's contribution to the
history of women's in architecture in
New Zealand thank you very much
my name is Sylvie Taher and the topic
that I want to discuss today is when
education fails so I'd like to start
with a brief caveat everything that I'm
going to be saying is incredibly
personal I'm not going to be giving you
very many facts at all hopefully though
as the kind of conversation progresses
you will understand my logic in doing
that so to begin I wanted to just
quickly kind of raise the question why
do I want to discuss the the idea of
Education failing and why do I think I'm
the right person to do it so I have
studied at the AAA I've also taught at
the AAA and aside from the 10 years that
I have spent here either as a student or
as a teacher I also spent another four
years studying economics and politics
one years studying planning and
development a surprising nine months
studying pastry because sometimes a
person really does need cake in their
life and what I hope that this rather
odd curriculum vitae of mine will convey
to you all is that I have a very
ambiguous relationship with education
having spent the larger part of my life
in it in one form or another you might
imagine that this is a relationship
based on love as an active member in
said relationship I can say that no such
love exists it is first and foremost a
love-hate relationship if anything it is
a relationship divined by AB ambiguous
in brief my wish to discuss this top
topic stems from the fact that I have
had a very long and very bumpy
relationship to education and as such
most of what I will discuss today will
be autobiographical for that I do
apologize so that caveat given the
autobiographical anecdote begins
throughout my many years in education
many in relation to the number of years
I have existed I have had both very good
and very bad experiences what has
surprised me is that it is not
immediately obvious which are the good
experiences and which are the bad
experiences as a young student in my
teens I was a very bookish person to the
point of preferring preferring the
company of words and ideas to that of
people many were the night that my
family would try to encourage me to
leave my room and my books and be a
little bit more social I was an A
student and it's so filed that at the
age of 13 I was invited to skip a year
so that I might be more challenged by
the curriculum to all expense and
purposes it would appear that these were
good experiences my teachers at the time
certainly thought so as did my parents
despite their slight annoyance that
having a socially slightly inept
daughter but with hindsight I would like
to propose that these were not in fact
the good experiences that they certainly
were not bad but that in itself does not
qualify them to be labeled as good the
first time I became aware of having a
good educational experience came shortly
after I started studying here it was not
something which happened at the AAA but
rather the memory of a much earlier
experience which suddenly dawned on me
as having been a genuinely good
educational experience as I mentioned I
was bookish when I was younger I was
very interested in my education and by
consequence there were classes I loved
in classes I was not so keen with for
example I took a disproportionately
intense dislike to my English teacher on
the grounds that she used the word stuff
too often by comparison
I was completely smitten with my math
teacher on the grounds that when I
proposed to write an essay on the number
zero rather than complete a long set of
equations I was not only allowed to do
so but got a flashing a on the
assignment it so followed that three
years later age 17 when it came time for
me to decide what I should study in
university I sought out the advice of
said math teacher and
asked rather naively do you think I
could study architecture and he said no
his reasoning being that I was not good
enough at math and would never be able
to do any of the structural calculations
sorry now it was the memory of this
experience which which struck me as
having been my first really good
educational experience if you by
comparison were listening to this
anecdote and thought ah this must be
what she means by educational failure
you are in fact wrong it is easy enough
to imagine why you might think so
headline reads math teacher derails
young girls dream of becoming an
architect by highlighting a real albeit
inconsequential shortcoming in her
mathematical abilities my math teacher
my much adored math teacher who let me
write about the number zero when most
would have refused had given me bad
advice really bad advice in fact it
wasn't so much advice as it was a
straight-up command no afterall is not
advice it took me ten years to figure
out that the person I should be asking
if I could study architecture was in
fact myself not my math teacher and when
I did finally ask myself the answer was
a resounding yes but it took ten years
to get to that conclusion frankly
getting to that own conclusion to my own
conclusion turned out to be the best
educational experience I've had so far
now that I'm on the other side of things
now that I am one of the educators I
often refer back to that moment the
moment of my teachers epic fail and what
it ended up doing for me in the long run
as educators we have an innate desire to
educate and to pass on bodies of
knowledge we have I would argue an
innate desire to not fail to not let
down our students and to provide
guidance and skills and knowledge which
will help our students avoid any
pitfalls and all things bad but in so
doing what we
accidentally do is remove education from
the realm of personal growth and
discovery we divorce education from life
an intern transform it into an island
onto itself where only the academic can
live and perhaps even more destructively
an island in which only academics can
communicate we are educators within a
given discipline and there's no doubts
that it is that discipline with which we
want to acquaint our students we are not
self-help therapists so why you might
ask could we concern ourselves with
either personal growth or personal
discovery why must we subscribe to the
cult of self the answer I would argue is
precisely in order to ensure the
validity and existence of our discipline
if we look at what architecture is today
versus what it was 50 years ago or even
30 years ago we find ourselves with a
vastly changed field these changes have
come as much from internal as they have
come from external forces
so if our discipline is a constantly
changing one where the boundaries are
fuzzy if what we teach if the realm in
which we work is fuzzy how can we as
proponents of that discipline as the
educators of that field be anything but
fuzzy if we are averse to failing and if
we are averse to seeing our students
fail we are denying the fuzzy so let us
assume for a moment that you are all on
board that you agree and we should all
embrace failure both our own and that of
our students what exactly does that mean
and how do we qualify our own profession
as educators if we had by having waves
of waves of students failing year in and
year out in truth I think it is much
easier said than done
it is incredibly difficult to watch
somebody fail and not intervene even
when we know that it may be a lesson
they simply have to learn we still have
a desire to reach out and solve the
problem who among us wants to be the
teacher who made the comment that led to
the ten year derailment I imagine not
very
amongst us quite aside from that even if
someone was remarkably brave and was in
fact willing to allow a student to go
through that painful but necessary
failure the fact is most students are
themselves pretty reluctant to fail and
it is not everyone that can lift the fit
the veil of failure and show that it is
actually okay that I would art this I
would argue comes down to a very basic
relationship that between tutor and
students and that at the base a very
simple understanding on the part of the
tutor that a student is not a tabula
rasa we are all familiar with the phrase
there are as many histories as there are
historians I propose that there are as
many architectures as there are
architecture students on a very
practical level in order to embrace the
full potential of the fail we need to
engage the individuality of each and
every student and that is not an easy
thing as educators we are confronted
with a new set of possible futures every
year each student comes with his or her
own past and by consequence his or her
own trajectory of the future it is an
exercise in the absurd to imagine that
we as educators are left unscathed in
this dialogue or in fact that we can
somehow ignore this dialogue my proposal
is that this is precisely where we ought
to engage in this multitude of active
pasts and possible futures which opens
the possibility to fail now to be before
I finish I would just like to quickly
make a link to women because so far
everything I've said has been
predominantly gender neutral mainly
because sometimes I think there is a
benefit to speaking in general before
delving into this specific but also
because I often often feel that it is
dangerous to assume that being a woman I
am somehow allowed to make statements on
the behalf of women as a whole so I will
introduce my last and final caveat which
is that this is a
speculation and I put it forward to be
considered only as women we have gone
through remarkable changes in the past
few generations for me these could best
be illustrated with reference to the
knight in shining armor for those of you
that are unfamiliar with the concept the
knight and shining armor is the prince
often good-looking and wealthy who saves
the princess also often good-looking and
wealthy in the last scene of most fairy
tales now there is a generation there
was a generation of women that was
entirely comfortable with this
relationship to the night there was a
subsequent generation who questioned why
it was the woman who always had to be
saved and so the story was flipped and
what we were given were a series of
fairy tales in which the princess saved
the prince I believe that there is a
third alternative to this relationship
between the knight and the princess and
that is that no one saves anyone that if
we have the presence of mind to stand
back and take in the situation it may
turn out that actually no one needs
saving all we need to do is embrace a
little more failure in our lives
thank you I hope many people have
questions to ask after both of your
rather intriguing presentations and
quite different in many ways in good
ways so I'm gonna start with a few
questions of my own firstly I was quite
intrigued by the fact that Auckland
sounds like an incredibly
gender-balanced
institution why this strikes me as
important is that in the UK we actually
have one third of our academic staff for
female in schools of architecture but
only one in 40 are in leadership
positions I a head of school ëthis to
the US where one in four are Dean's in
schools of architecture and you see a
massive drop in transmission between two
area in otherwise quite comparable
regions so what might explain this is do
you think it's a policy
thing or a pedagogy thing it's
definitely not a policy thing because
our our faculty is unusual the
University of Oakland has eight
faculties and ours is the only faculty
that has a woman is Dean and then so
having had three in a row makes it more
unusual similarly across the university
I don't know the exact figure but it's
definitely a minority of heads of school
or heads of department that women so
there is something cumulative I guess
happening within our school and I guess
part of it is if you have the women as
Dean then they're going to open up
opportunities for women coming up
potentially as he heads of school little
hints of Department but I don't think
it's all of it I think I think in our
school B's a kind of culture of some of
the women just having a stronger sense
of of duty or service towards the
institution than some of the the male
staff are so some of it is about me and
that with the cover right what why might
they be ducking for cover do you think
of a reputation for being a lot of work
quite stressful not always easy so
annoying what you're describing is
what's commonly known as the glass cliff
face where women are often brought in as
fixers people who are there to in some
ways address the problems previously
created by men bit like in banking in
Iceland for example so do you think
that's actually what's happening in
higher education now in the schools of
architecture that when we have so many
pressures from usually driven by
government and cuts of to funding and so
on that in a way make our education
particularly schools of architecture
very attractive to women as places to go
and be mistreated and underpaid
casualized
provided with low child care facilities
and obviously poor promotion prospects
do you think that's why so many as many
of us find out tractive now and that's
what
something there's many many many
different points that you've raised many
other I think it's narrow for
researchers yeah yeah possibly not what
what why that's happening Auckland you
should just think that's actually to do
with more positive aspects of leading a
school of architecture yeah but I mean
so many so many issues fear I think for
for me in the school at the moment I
don't think of it as a place with glass
ceilings
I think whatever opportunities you want
the Olivia to be to be taken to be head
yeah there is there is definitely
difference between women have chosen to
have children one woman who haven't
haven't had children majority of the
women and those roles of women who've
chosen not to have children so there's
nothing and there's nothing kind of
perfect situation about it there are
still many of the issues that are that
are relevant within other institutions
of parenting ours as well yeah
absolutely
um I'd love to bring you into the
conversation actually and not just feel
it's you and is lovely as it is but I
was intrigued by the comments you made
and quite a few comments around this
notion of autobiography or to
ethnography and the cult of self and and
that made me think about the kind of
trend in selfie ISM that we're now
facing where you know the next
generation and many ways our students
conspicuous in the way that they
position themselves constantly recording
what they do and how that's starting to
inform their self awareness about much
of if you like the intersectionality
challenges they're facing if they're
coming from different backgrounds and
you know issues beyond being just women
but beyond that I'd really like if you
talk a bit more about this this idea
about the culture of self and what you
think that means how that might have a
pedagogical fluence within schools of
architecture and future yeah I mean it
again you know like I want to stress
that I'm a person who speaks about this
on on the basis that I've been teaching
for five years and I
I have no kind of professional training
on this subject but my feeling and my
worry often with students today is that
the the cult of self the way it's kind
of engaged with particularly at this
point in a person's career or their
evolutionist people is that it is a very
constructed concept and in a sense when
it becomes really interesting is when
it's not so much something that's
constructed by outside forces whether
it's you know you want to have the
coolest Instagram feed or I'm sure
there's like a more modern version of
Instagram that I don't know about but
that you know it's a very very different
thing when when you ask a student to
deal with the idea of a self as a much
more complex and fragile thing that does
have cracks and kind of emerges in its
own way at times you know I mentioned
pastry if you watch like bread rise in
the oven it will kind of bubble up on
one side and look really unappealing
until it kind of finally reaches its
full form and I think many students are
uncomfortable about going through that
period where it is a bit awkward and
funny-looking and it's just not right
and we kind of all know that but you
have to do it anyway so I think it's two
very different things yes I I do think
this generation is very self-aware and
in a certain way but it is a constructed
self that I think sometimes can can
actually get in the way of things so is
the solution then or a possible tactic
to reimagine how we might set briefs for
example to get students to address
certain aspects of imperfect brief so
imperfect buildings and spaces yes
absolutely I mean I think a lot a lot of
it can be done in the briefs but also a
lot of it can be done in the way that we
teach one thing I mean obviously I've
studied and and teach here so I have a
bias towards this school but I think one
thing that has always helped is having
the time and the space available for the
one-to-one whether it's the one-to-one
tutorial or the one
you know the seminar with smaller groups
of students that the kind of setting up
in an environment where it's not that I
have this discipline that I'm now
passing on to you right but it's it's
really like it's part of a conversation
and it's as much what you give as what I
give so it's a two-way kind of
relationship I think that does a lot to
kind of break these preconception things
that we carry around which is normal
right I nobody wants to walk around like
a broken vase you know I think maybe yes
okay I don't know yeah um that's
interesting so um this this idea that
you were touching on office in in what
you described
Sarah Treadwell specifically and her
legacies with an institution this idea
of the emphasis on drawing culture and
research culture and so on what do you
think the responsibilities are of women
academics in architecture schools in
relation to encouraging other young
female students and indeed all students
to recognize the contribution of female
architects and female academics it's
hard no that's a difficult question yeah
okay it's always going to book it's
always going to be something that's of
interest to some academics more than
others so the responsibility falls to
those who are interested in it I think
there's a there is a particular
responsibility placed on those of us who
teach history and theory of architecture
because it's up to us to to be able to
bring the woman from the past into our
history programs and it's just not
always easy when you've got a lot of
material to cover in courses that have
descriptions or prescriptions so the
post great post graduate seminars are
any excellent opportunity to to start
growing greater interest but also
schools that offer studio programs where
students can choose the design topic for
particular
semester's just also have more
opportunity I think because you can have
diversity embedded into those studio
topics across the year group rather than
having the whole class working on the
same topic which really kind of limits
things yeah it's interesting I mean I
was certainly um when I was in the u.s.
recently a discussion on this issue it
was presented that actually historians
are over obligated to discuss you know
the histories of women architects and
women academics and in fact what should
be happening more is a shift towards
seeing the stories woman is being
impacting on the briefs for example and
the agenda set within studios have
either of you encountered any attempts I
know we're going to hear from someone
tomorrow who's done a great job of doing
this but have you either of you
encountered any briefs that you feel
have actually addressed issues but if
you look like more closely pertain to
interests and agendas and experiences of
women I'm I'm sure that there have been
lots of them but I can't think of any of
them at the moment and I went once that
I've taught myself I've I've kind of
consciously pursued cultural issues
rather than gender issues and studio
topics yeah even though it's no it's an
area of interest but I haven't pursued
it myself in studio I think I mean I I'm
not sure if this is a kind of an answer
to the question but I'm at the moment
I'm teaching a brief which is about the
relationship between nature and the city
and when I first proposed this last year
and I said it in passing to a few
students who incidentally happened to be
mailed and they went oh that's a really
girly topic and I was like okay like I
really didn't see why it was and
incidentally I it's not the first year
teaching it and 80% of the people that
signed up for for my studio are girls
which I'm totally happy with I mean it's
a great environment but I really didn't
it's really funny because I hadn't even
seen it as a kind of gender I didn't
feel I was taking a position but
obviously from the point of view of a
young 20 year old studying architecture
it's a girly topic well it's fascinating
um it's
investigating that further imagine in
terms of their work so far what they've
actually been producing well I mean the
the girls in particular or all the
students all this music okay no because
we have we we do have kind of four boys
that everybody's really curious to see
what they're gonna do in this like
strongly you know girlie unit well it's
very I mean it it's very much it borrows
a lot from kind of surrealist ideas so
there's a lot of kind of absurd things
being constructed at the moment all kind
of to deal with the typology z-- and
relationships that we have to nature at
the moment and I think you know
introducing really interesting questions
but maybe a bit dull I think for this
audience I don't know if you want to
hear about plants I think well no it's
just I wasn't sure if you were going to
tell me that they were all designing
retirement holds homes for women with
allotments no no no no not at all not at
all so it's reassuring yeah in many ways
they're actually they're seeing it yeah
interpretation of it yeah if you like
what sounds very much like a feminine to
some people yeah design studio is not
necessarily resulting you know the
outcomes that's interesting I think I'll
allow myself indulge myself with one
last question um it was what you
mentioned about this notion of women's
ability to think beyond the two
dimensional realm you probably aware
that Walter Gropius actually thought
about this in our house and insisted
that women couldn't study architecture
because they couldn't think in three
dimensions and sent them all off into
the weaving rooms and where all of these
frustrated women created these
incredible textured very
three-dimensional patterns and shapes
within their looms as a means to try and
express their if you like three
dimensional spatial intonations and
their architectural frustrations so um
I'm intrigued I just wonder if if you
what your view is on this particular
challenge because I don't think there's
necessarily been a conclusive study
that's ever bothered to debunk this
nonsense and I some
think it's important to go after the
myths as much as the things that are you
know I'm closer to sounding more
truthful but what's your view on how you
know female students often perceive
their ability to design in ways that are
entirely can measure it with male
students I mean I mean I found so I
found that oddly it's not a matter of
skill but right but there is definitely
I have noticed a difference in attitude
and in confidence I often get the
feeling that with males students I have
nothing against male students but they
feel really entitled to build that
building and it's like the most
inevitable thing in the world that
you're going to construct something and
it's not a real kind of issue that they
really grapple with
whereas I found find with many of my
female students there is a question of
should something more be brought into
the city or into the world there's a
consciousness about the idea of creating
something new which is it's a bit more
apprehensive for me it's much more
interesting in terms of what it produces
a as work but I don't know how you found
that and I know your historian and
they're writing papers for you rather
than designing things but have you
noticed any I hate to do just not not in
recent years but I guess for me I
haven't I haven't kind of gone back
through my studio - nothing really
conspicuous they all seem similar in the
way their program I just know I'm
different there's more that we're
different as what am I thinking rambling
similar and just I guess encouraging
difference yeah yeah leaving people feel
feel confident and the difference rather
than having to rather than wanting to
draw similarities yeah and those
differences are obviously beyond gender
boundaries and reach out nor otherwise I
mean yes I mean it's a very
multicultural environment so these
multiple differences yeah going on okay
um I'm gonna open this up now and then
have some questions from someone who
hasn't got flu
this is a microphone and hi
I can ask Sylvia just to go what you're
just talking about before with the male
students having this entitlement to
build something and how you were talking
about female students somewhat thinking
about about whether something should be
built or not I think this is a
fascinating topic and I've worked 23
years in five different countries and
for me this idea of I don't call it
confidence
I call it overconfidence and hoover's
which I encounter that that a lot of
male students or men in the industry
have and so I don't know where this
comes from if it's in primary school or
when kids are born and they're just
gendered right from the beginning but
it's I think it's a fascinating topic so
I'm not really asking a question I'm
just saying that that's actually a very
fascinating thing that you're observing
thank you I mean if I can i I agree I'm
always a bit curious if that should be
called confidence or overconfidence but
and and sometimes I do agree with you I
have to say like I have a I see it
happening and I think like ah but then
on the other hand it's really funny to
follow it through to its to its logical
conclusion because they're so because
there's often in that way of thinking
with that way of thinking so little
consideration that the consider the
thinking through process comes much
later or it's actually much more
destructive to kind of consider things
later in I feel obviously like I'm
biased but so I I do feel that by the
time you get to the end of the year
things have kind of balanced out but the
trajectories to begin with are really
very different I would say I mean
oh hi I teach first-year architecture
which is really fun so I get them right
the beginning and something I've tried
to engender in in my year this year is
that they have loads of skill already
they know about the world already and
I'm interested to learn what they know
I'm trying to design new briefs for next
year as well and I just wanted to know
if the panel had any good briefs or
things where you were celebrating the
skills but they already had and I sort
of got them thinking that yeah I guess
their experiences are worthwhile to
bring to school of architecture and to
that discipline so yeah have you got any
good first year briefs
so I can steal them it's not so good
first you stuff on those conferences and
organized by the architectural educators
UK and I'm sure that they're coming
through in the publication's Sherita as
well and website ran out of a university
near Chicago or Detroit called something
like early early designers or beginning
design teaching beginning design or
something like that yeah that's a good
one International Conference the
beginning design student in the u.s.
next ones in Minneapolis isn't it in
March I think you can still go but they
they're all about first year teaching
but specifically with gendered things or
certainly briefs that are more sensitive
to gender not specifically about
designing for women
I've tend to find with students um you
know set up a very early brief that gets
them to consider designing for
themselves as clients and understand
something really that's one way for them
to reveal it if you like what their own
interest could be I also like to
encourage them to see feminism as a
design tool so you know feminism is
something that is about deconstructing
preconceived ideas it's about creating a
means through which one can
systematically attack a set of
assumptions about behaviors that
have been controlling and limiting it's
a means through which um biases and
inequalities can be discerned and then
tackled and it's also useful as a way
for generating alternatives you know
just as a theory but we tend to teach
feminism just within history in theory
courses and not within design studio so
I think there's a lot of appropriation
that could happen just between the
modernization of architecture education
that's in many ways limiting is the
efficacy of some of the content in
relation to design cos that would be a
start I imagine but also you know the
good old life project students are out
there looking designing for clients in
need and you know if you're based in the
u.s. right now Planned Parenthood needs
you immediately and certainly here
things aren't looking so great either
and with practice it looming you know so
there's a number of communities of all
kinds of you know if you like
demographic configurations that
definitely need some kind of real-time
response so I think that would be a
really good tactic for a first year I
think if I if I could add to that I
don't want to discount any of these
responses because I think they're
fantastic responses but in in a funny
way I think you're doing yourself in
interest is by asking that question
because at least I find that one of the
greatest joys of writing their brief is
that you you you make this thing and
then you put it out there in the world
and you get this weird feedback that you
never saw coming and it's kind of it you
know it's a bummer if you're you if you
don't do that and and I think whatever I
think you can create a brief out of
anything really and it in in a sense
like one of the joys of being able to
write one is that you get to put your
own interests into it and see you know
where you get the bounce back I think as
you know I mean obviously as well as and
coming back to a point that you both
raised I thought was very interesting
you know the way that in a way what we
do to allow the barriers we create
before we allow students even into the
profession
so we're saying math
physics engineering and all these other
skills and we never really say actually
one of the quality is not just
qualifications that a young person might
need is around empathy or some sort of
compassion or affinity for others and
these are qualities that are just
completely overlooked in our assessments
and even our own gatekeeping on
educational experience of architecture
so I think I'd be careful in allowing
students to actually set their own you
know it's what Knowles in the 1970s used
to called learning contracts where he'd
get the students to if you like coal for
their own design briefs and also their
own assessment criteria I mean it was a
means of actually recognizing what
students were bringing in in terms of
the things that they thought they should
be recognized for the skills that they
had and skills and qualities that we
would otherwise overlook or not see as
being important within our own
demographic metrics so I think the next
generation has a lot to teach us about
the values they think are important in
terms of their own academic performance
and ultimately how that could influence
architectural education and I had a
comment question so about Sylvie's
conversation about failure which i think
is super interesting Hartley because
I've also written it makes me think of
the ignorant schoolmaster piece and and
the sort of values and one thing it made
me also think of is that if you're in my
sort of position then there's metrics
that come in at the bureaucracy of
Education which are increasingly
powerful like retention figures and
they're now counted as part of teaching
excellence frameworks and one of the
things that I think the real irony is
sort of bind is that I think a lot of
people a lot of educators would
subliminally and intuitively totally
agree with you that in the fate in
failure at some various levels exists
you know the learning experience but in
those sorts of retention figures you're
really held up to you know any sort of
lack of progress on to the next level
being a problem and in particular for
beer me and and gender that's really
caught pork brought forward that if
those people are not being retained and
progressing meaning if they failures
basically
a serious problem for any of those sort
of demographics and it I think that's an
interesting thing I don't know what one
could do about it because in a way it's
like the problem of education now which
is it sort of exists at this other macro
level but it does make me also think
that what is the other driver about
failure is the competition that exists
between educational institutions and
this you know I guess the fact that
we're drawn into giving our students
success or forcing success upon them
because we're we're also the problem of
failure as an institution is that as an
issue so I don't know if there's any
thoughts you've got it's a sort of I
think it's a really big conundrum
because education now exists completely
differently and I think failure was part
of an intellectual journey 4050 years
ago I mean I completely agree and you
know I've had several conversations
particularly on that on that topic when
you kind of find yourself
obviously the a a at the moment is going
through a series of changes as well and
there there is a genuine fear that at
one point the thing that's kind of
drives everything is bureaucracy
actually and it isn't it's no longer a
matter of the you know the tutors
brought in or the the director brought
in because the number of box ticking
exercises and you frankly I don't know I
mean the the the only thing I can
imagine is that on some level we have to
work on two on two different planes yeah
I mean I guess we have to make a sort of
success out of failure in our buildings
our domes we have to do something I
guess it's it's but it's it's the it's
the lawsuit it's the sort of inability
to risk anymore I think and the system
and that and that in a way I guess it's
relevant to the talk talking about women
and in education students and staff
because in a way it's most pointed
towards those you know we're supposed to
provide representation at a greater
level success at a greater level but if
we genuinely think that comes through
failure or
cycles of failure it says complete
conflict I mean maybe one one thing
that's also worth highlighting is I
think that in the if you it's not that I
know how to do this right but in a in an
ideal world if you are able as a tutor
to create an environment where failure
is tolerated it may often kind of be
experienced but not fully it kind of
then doesn't lead lead to the like the
full collapse that a denial of failure
who creates right so I ironically I
don't I don't think that embracing the
possibility of that would necessarily
lead to loads and loads of students
failing I think it would just lead
probably to periods of either no
production or very low production in
which case it really falls on the tutor
to be comfortable with with that that
they may at one point have a studio
where thirty or forty percent of their
students are just not producing because
they're in that moment so it's I mean I
don't suddenly think that we should all
fail our students it's not
okay so this is the last question
apparently right okay okay so I will I
will try that house daily special oh no
pressure no no okay
yeah just going back to the worrying
figure of women in higher position in
academia yeah so I guess we could agree
that architecture is a is a somehow is a
and it used to be a gentleman club mom
yeah and I guess they are kadhi Mia is
something really similar so is a very
dangerous combo of the two things so I
was just wondering if any of your
institutions where your were you working
if you have like active or just in
formal or informal strategies to create
like a Women's Club just to fight this
gentlemen's club for example in social
yeah work in social social science for
example and is this this group called
resistors or the lecturers and specially
first at the beginning of their career
so I'm just wondering if in your
institution you have some yeah formal or
informal forms of resistance no not mine
no no
but yeah but there are some
organizations that are not that if you
like transcended situations parlor in
America in Australia I think they're
here actually tomorrow maybe and they're
really doing really interesting work
I'm architects x-axis is an American
based group doing a lot to raise the
profile of women architects and so that
and there's that so there's a few things
around that are certainly trying to not
only if you like represent as a
represent the interests of women
architects but also women academics too
but I think there's nothing in a way
cohesive necessarily that's tackling the
problem I mean certainly within
institutions I don't know of any one
institution that necessarily in a way is
shining a beacon of optimism I know that
Mel who spoke before about the failure
conundrum you know your dean jeremy hill
was you know would like to consider his
efforts at Sheffield as his attempt to
create a feminist school of architecture
many years ago where he quite
deliberately recruited many women to the
program at a time when they were in very
short supply if you're at least no
representation across architecture
academia so I think there's been small
efforts pockets of resistance if you
like but regrettably we don't have a
strategy but it's a great thing to end
on actually because clearly it would be
useful if we start thinking about
developing them internally in perhaps
amongst ourselves after this event and
so the next time we we're all here in
our little jars 100 years from now with
electrodes beeping we can swap notes of
what we've achieved in the last 100
years but thanks that's a very great
question to end upon thank you very much
and thanks to speak
[Applause]
