thank you everyone for coming to
tonight's lecture which is the last in
on what's next series this term and as
you probably know over the last four
years this series has been a way to
invite a graduates back to the edge
discuss their unique forms of practice
and the title of tonight's talk what
came before is actually a deviation from
the theme of what's next so instead of
talking about what came after you
graduated from the a a at the current
student Khafre is gonna be talking about
a project that he did before he even
started studying here and the idea for
this talk and including it in this
series came out of a conversation that
Kasper had with Brett last year then I
was like pulled into the room and Brett
thought it would be a nice twist to
incorporate this into the series to talk
about how you don't have to have
graduated from the a in order to do a
substantial architectural project you
can actually be doing them as a current
student or before you even start
studying architecture and it's quite
nice to look at this project because it
like the Commission was to build a kind
of hobby space for your mom and I think
what's nice is that you didn't build
like a standard shed or even like a
stand at home but it was really
something that responded to the needs of
its client and is flexible and uses
these different layers of timber and
glass to create something really special
so yeah I'm excited to find out more
about how the process went so to briefly
introduce Casper although I guess you
all probably know who he is
he's currently second year student in
intermediate 5 he previously studied
physics at the University of Amsterdam
graduating with both bachelor's and a
master's from there and in the final
year of his master's he worked on
research at the chip manufacturer ASML
he worked briefly for a co2 technology
company and then quit his job to build
and design the garden house that will
hear more about tonight and eight months
later he finished the project and
subsequently applied to study at the AAA
so without any further ado I'll hand
over to Caswell
[Applause]
thank you very much
thanks thanks Manisha for offering the
opportunity to share my project here
today and thanks all of you for coming
because I mean it's super busy now I'm
not so stressed around juries so I
appreciate it look I'll start by showing
your video
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
tonight I'm gonna tell you the story of
how physicist ends up on the gene but
perhaps more importantly I hope to give
you some insight on how you may end the
scene in the next year as well so but
before I go into the quartic itself I
wanted to share with you something else
and it feels a bit weird mentioning it
but I must say would have been even more
weird not sharing it mm-hmm it's today
4th December it's exactly eight years
ago that my father died and it is for
many reasons because of him that I'm
studying architecture now and I'm among
all of you and he was an incredibly warm
and inspiring man and he took us from
that we could barely walk through the to
his projects he was a real estate
developer in a builder and he was always
super excited about it and I could still
feel this excitement and smell the fresh
concrete and we would be wearing one of
these pink helmets me and my three
brothers walking around was always
pretty incredible so somehow he thought
about me as an architect from a your
young age and what's interesting is that
he didn't I have three older brothers he
never mentioned it to them but somehow
he saw something that made me belong to
you guys and it was only very yeah
actually maybe only now that I see what
he was seeing now that I feel so
comfortable with you guys and yeah it's
just been incredible to be here they aim
so after high school I went travelling
for a year
- alienation when I came back I went to
study architecture at the Technical
University of Delft for two weeks and
then I quit because I could I just
couldn't do it somehow so and later the
year it went travelling again I went to
South America and then when I came back
I studied physics in Amsterdam actually
I'm very happy still that I did I
studied physics it really shaped the way
I'm viewing the world and and actually
also how ridiculous the world is which
is I think a very important thing to see
as an architect and you pretty much all
see that I feel so then where was I so I
studied physics but every year that I
was studying physics I still had the
architecture in the back of my mind so I
would drag my girlfriend and my mother
every summer to some kind of remarkable
architecture Institute in Europe and say
yeah next year I'm gonna study here but
then in the end I wouldn't do it because
I couldn't really leave physics behind
it so at some point I even went to
summer school here after my bachelor
which was incredible but still it was
like yeah I don't know enough about
physics yet so it's not time to make
that switch and then I did a master of
physics after my master I thought well
now I know so much about physics I
better find a job in physics as well so
it was only after six months within that
job that I was talking to my mother and
she mentioned that she wanted to build
this or by actually this prefab garden
shed and
I managed to convince her that I would
design and build it for her which was
not really that hard because the whole
plan involved that I would move back to
my mother move in with her and worked
there for a year which was something she
was possibly more excited about than the
the whole shared idea and it it turned
out an incredible incredible year so I
quit my job the first thing I actually
did I think which was very important to
the project is that I get her the team
of experts around me so the first one
was Thomas Kaiser Baek who was the
father of one of my best friends and he
built a house in France by himself with
the help of his children and I would
Skype twice a month with him to discuss
all the technical problems
he lived in Switzerland that's why it
was always through Skype and if these
sessions turned out mostly to be sort of
to your pretty girl pretty girl
psychological sessions because it was a
major struggle most of the time just
finding figuring out stuff by myself in
my mother's garden so he was incredibly
important incredibly helpful that when
there was my friend who's a carpenter I
discussed the wood joinery with him I
discussed the tools I needed my
girlfriend was an incredible eye for
aesthetics and actually also had some
very good technical ideas that made it
into the final design and obviously that
was my mother
who's the inspirator it was my mother
who was the defender and the client
mm-hm so and then an incredible year
start just working outside all day
having a amazing lunch conversation with
them with my mother it's also really
nice to maybe go back and spend this
much time with your mother after you've
been away for a few years and get to
know each other in a different way an
absolutely incredible year
this is where we are looking at so is
that the medical effect the faculty in
my state city in the Netherlands and
they were putting the roof on the new
extension so yeah and before I start I
wanted to emphasize gonna it's not I'm
not standing here to convince you how
either amazing I am or how remarkable or
this project is I do hope to share this
experience with you and I believe I
really do believe that all of you can I
mean you're amazingly talented and if
you have parents they have a piece of
land and a little bit of money or you
have a friend with parents with a piece
of land or a little bit then I would say
I mean it's just it's a incredible
amount of fun it's also a big struggle
but it's a lot of fun and I think it is
also quite help for your career possibly
even more so than another internship you
could do like in your summer or two
summers or my project took me about
seven seven months altogether
so before I before my mother came up
with this idea of building this garden
shot in her inner garden I already had
two sort of ideas that were playing in
the back of my mind so one was I wanted
to design a house which had a different
room for every every whetted type and
the other one was I wanted to design a
house that consisted of a suitcase and
umbrella and then umbrella would be to
protection from the weather and the
suitcase would house all your facilities
like the toilet your bad your storage
who draws and then whenever you would
need it you would take it out and you
would literally leave on top of your
suitcase use it and protect yourself
with the umbrella
and then my mother's wish list came in
as well which was pretty long and
including she wanted to sleep under the
stars in a comfortable bed she wanted to
go bird-watching she wanted to have
dinner with 30 of her best friends she
wanted to have a little theatre for her
grandchildren to perform plays for the
family
meditation mediation and endless lists
so with these three elements I started
to to design which also through talking
a lot with my mother Kim ended up in
this concept where you basically have
one layer that's the suitcase so at the
bottom the bottom line which houses the
bats and the storage and then on top of
them you have loose layers that
configure and that you can put in
different configurations either for
different weather times so you can if
it's super nice weather you slide
everything open and you sleep under the
stars or you you have breakfast outdoors
if it is a little less nice weather then
you slide then you keep the glass layer
closed and only two would you slide open
and then if it's like very winter like
weather you have everything closed and
you're in an insulated like literally
warm winter jacket and so that's a in
with cross weather and then obviously
you have also this configurations that
allow for different activities for
example yet the bottom one turns into
one big space which would allow for a
very long table for for dinner with
maybe 30 30 guests so I looked at the
few references and
I was very much looking for this
traditional house shape and then in a
modern jacket modest modest design
especially one in the middle this one
yeah I think you can see some elements
of that back in the design so I was
looking at different kind of facades how
this should open it should be glass
should it be just wood I was looking at
how the layers would move slides lift
explodes earlier design where you slide
everything back is a little critter oh
my for my nephew it's awesome
well again this is sort of summarizing
everything has said all the activities
that you can do and then there was the
the question of the structure because
it's not attached to the ground it needs
to get a stiffness from something else
so I was looking at this sort of train
station structure kind of trusses and I
was experiment with different
configurations in terms of aesthetics
what would be strong what where I would
and not lose too much of my extra space
inside in the end I went for the the
upper left one right right one different
sliding systems which turned out into an
angle and the steel angle with the
groove wheeled the double Baron groove
will they can carry up to 500 kilos each
and it's a super stable way of sliding
roof slate or zinc zinc is super
expensive Slade is quite expensive and
super heavy we were looking for
something light obviously
Jenny and we went for the steel roof
that was super easy to manufacture I
mean to install and very highly durable
it's pretty pretty cheap and it's also
pretty light
choosing the would consist of Douglas
pine which is also light and it has
quite a high there's a lot of oils in
that so you it's cheap wood but because
of all the oils it you can actually
leave it outside for about 20 years and
nothing will happen to it you don't even
need to treat it so some earlier designs
where I designed this concrete sort of
box within everything the whole living
would happen it's fairly similar to the
final comes up here big doors that would
open up which seems quite problematic
because you're gonna gonna get all these
forces on the hinges so we got rid of
the doors and you see a clearly in in
the lair like in the bottom layer the
bats and the storage and maybe even the
one I built or doesn't have a bathtub
but that was in one of the initial
designs to have one of the bathtubs
hidden in the floor so then we start
building the first thing was digging 18
1 meter holes which took me about a week
and pouring then concrete in it with a
wheelbarrow like literally for two weeks
running up and down with a wheelbarrow
full of concrete there was a quite a
tough start but it became very rewarding
when I got to the bit that stuck out of
the ground this is actually it needed to
be obviously quite neat so I had this
very shitty laser light actually to
match
you couldn't really see it during the
day so I had to do all these
measurements in the night which is super
annoying because then obviously you're
not gonna see the rest but in the end it
became more or less straight concrete
casting on top I think this was a great
moment because then you can really start
to yeah this is the groove wheels did I
miss one picture so there's enough
picture say there we go
so then I was gonna experiment with the
trusses which are connected with dow
wood dowels from the inside and wood
glue literally testing it so I mean I
had some ways of like sort of
calculating how strong it would be but
you never really know so I had to do
this kind of tricks to see if it will
hold and actually it's still an
experiment I mean it's it's still
standing so this was really nice moment
getting revealing these concrete bits
I'm sure all of you notice moments where
you unpack it and then it just looks
super nice that was actually the first
time I felt okay this is really gonna
become something real the wood coming in
and and this was another struggle
obviously it had to be super flat
because well I didn't know how flat it
had to be because with the sliding
elements I thought maybe one mill
difference between two sides or two mill
or three mill I didn't want to take the
ratio I tried to get everything without
within the mill but then the the the
pillars I casted were obviously off by a
few mill each and then the wood was also
it's always bent it's never straight so
this was later
it took me a month and and I was
completely lost and a full despair of
this because I thought my mother spent
all this money and all this all this
trust in me and I'm just sitting next to
it
pile of wood and I can't even get it
straight and I think it will never work
in the end I got it pretty close and I
was like let's go for this and it's it's
William two mill and it seems to seems
to work so this is the start of the
where the bats go yeah this is the
moment of despair I guess that's my
brother inside here we put that five
mill at blue foam in it and to prevent
the cold from coming underneath the
structure and we put a layer of
waterproof this cold concrete supply and
it's completely sealed and and one
percent waterproof putting the bind
dagger spine on top and then it was
pretty much getting ready for the for
the winter so at this point our left is
in the garden and I moved to the garage
to start building the dresses which have
been in a very mechanical way so one
piece 50 times the other piece and we're
about 120 pieces during the whole
stacking them up and then slowly putting
the whole thing together it took me
about six weeks which was I mean it was
an incredible year but there were like
awfully boring stuff like this that had
to be done and which is only really
rewarding at the end of the six weeks
these are the the walls with the
rockwool rock wall installation
insulation the roof attaching the wheels
to the two trusses as my mother helped
me and sometimes she would step in here
I'm bending one of the roof tiles to
make sure that when two pieces come
together they overlap and so it's not
leaking
surely the total was for eight so
sixteen of these dresses then it was
spring and it was I had basically all
the pieces from the garage so it was
time to put it all together in the back
of the garden with my brother's help my
friends help and that started off pretty
good it was tricky because you have this
sliding these big trusses and they are
connected to the wheels so it's super
home stable and we had no real solid
idea how to do it so it was sort of a
trial and error but we grew super
confident after we had clamped those
four elements in a row but that's always
dangerous to get to confidence so within
an hour everything collapsed and we went
for lunch and discussed it and luckily
enough nothing really broke and nobody
really got hurt but I think is one of
these moments that you get overconfident
and we stuck on the insulated walls so
it's based like a fool
yeah back it's almost like an Ikea
package that I made and which we could
put together in a few days except so the
roof this is an oil that is I don't know
how school things but it's let's say
damn can show what water vapor can pass
through from one side but there's no way
vapor can go or rain can go through the
other side so it remains the let's say
the breathing capacity of the house so
then it starts to really look like how
slowly I thought that was just so super
rewarding like seeing it grow every day
here we start so that you see like the
outdoor outside layer is completely done
and now we start the inner layer
it's my girlfriend and my sister-in-law
helping out there's many many people who
have been coming helping it out for a
day or some for a week or it's also an
incredible part of the project so now
the inner layers let's say the structure
is completely done this is how the outer
layer grips around the platform such
that the wind wouldn't pass through and
also when it would when really heavy
winds would occur it theoretically it
should prevent the whole thing from
blowing off is the hole for the wood
stove pipe chimney this is the robe and
that would literally visit me every day
and over a year and like it would come
closer and closer and somebody was like
a meter sitting here and I was working
and somehow I always had this idea this
was my father as like a watchman on the
the construction side so we get a very
good relationship in here I put it on
the sides the glass fitting in the glass
also with four or five people
and in the end the most work is
finishing now if you get the whole piece
standing within a week and then you
spend like two months making it nice and
finishing everything so this is almost
almost there
lost bits and here it's pretty much
pretty much done it's about two months
after we started building on site so
room to some more close-ups so these are
the double bearing wheels that are
connected with these bolts in a system
where I can lower or raise the whole
structure just to make sure if things
wouldn't come off as I'd planned I could
always correct this with the wheels it's
also something my girlfriend came up
with actually and it was super helpful
if I had not done that it would have
been a complete disaster
as a heat shield behind Tim but the wood
stove again spot lies in the floor how
the trusses connect to the sidewall this
is here so the glass consists of two
layers actually three layers there's a
glass of three mil four layer of three
mil glass then there's foil then a lot a
layer of three mil glass which is
insulating but also for safety so if
this breaks it would never come down and
you would just yeah you would just see
cracking it this is the storage in the
floor the wheels where I lifted those
structure this is where this bit slides
over the other bit to make it completely
waterproof this little range there
connection from between the trusses
plugs in the floor the real system okay
so then we start to actually use the
structure and see if if the whole
concept works and
it's nice to be there and to wake up
there and the invited friends there so
waking up there in the morning having
breakfast throwing a party having guests
over it's my mother I reading a book or
being on Facebook's you know it's looks
like she's in her phone as well
so and then so this is the whole design
and the building process and I think
there's a few things that happen after
were half coincidental half plans
I met yoga that wound in the share of
Griffith Academy in Amsterdam is
absolutely amazing photographer
professional photographer and when I was
finished I offer you one obviously
wanted to document it and I was not a
very good photographer still so I still
I'm still not a very good for everybody
he's absolutely incredible so I said do
you please want to come over and take
pictures so he spent the whole day
running around and like as a
professional job and we end up with
these incredible pictures and there was
not an event where my my cousin thought
you guys would he visit it with his
drone he had just bought a drone and he
said yeah I can I fly around a bit can i
film a bit I was like yeah why not could
be fun and but I didn't see the value of
that old just like playing around and so
we flew around so that's pretty nice to
fly this thing and then when he left he
said I'll leave it with you keep it for
a week fly around and bring it back to
me so at some point I started making
more shots and I was an looks pretty
good actually
so I sent those shots to another friend
actually a friend of a friend who turned
that into a nice video like a yeah nice
video and so together this movie and and
the photos from yogurt I think we're
quite important for the whole
advertisement how it got on the scene
and so oh that's so quick so this
depicts your took open conformation so
here it is like Oh
all the different configurations you see
how the bats come out of the floor a
glass ceiling
and now you could sit there and at night
this with your fire and just having this
being super comfortable but still being
outdoors enjoying your campfire enjoying
a good conversation under under like
these big trees actually I found this
there were some coincidental things I
didn't think of it ended up quite nice
when you sit there and the trees are lit
from below I don't know you have this
you feel like being under this big tree
and some mother mother tree it's really
nice so and then your than I were like
okay what are we gonna do is pictures
shall we try to maybe send it somewhere
and see what happens so we send it to
the scene and we didn't hear anything
for a month and then suddenly one day
they posted it and things went literally
super crazy from that months from that
day a few hours later arts daily
contacted me they wanted to post it as
well
then inhabited there were five millions
views on Facebook there were a few
million on YouTube at some point it was
even in the list higher than Earth so
can the [ __ ] I mean obviously I quickly
took like a screenshot when I saw
[Music]
and then so from that it went even more
crazy like there were people wanted it
really like for for a few weeks I felt
what I was like - what what it must be
like to be famous because people wanted
to interview me they wanted to take
pictures they wanted to was completely
nuts and it was it was quite uplifting
so you can you get this feeling of being
I don't know being for a moment you feel
like a celebrity which is a nice
experience yeah I said and then think 20
vain' more crazy when my didn't this is
actually my mother's favorite talk show
she watches every night together with
five hundred thousand other people it's
int that she's just to show you quickly
the ID it's just super weird that you
see this lady you see her every night
and Davina's somewhere he's not a normal
size remarkable I am as
quite quite nice quite nice of her but
super weird super strange
oh yeah the related to arch daily they
wanted to post it but they needed nice
drawings and I had no idea to use
AutoCAD or Rhino any sort of that I just
knew how to use Sketchup and so I didn't
know how I knew Eva sort of vaguely and
she said okay I'll try to help your
teacher AutoCAD but she saw me fooling
around with it for like 30 minutes she
was like this is never gonna work so she
actually made these drawings for me and
they were posted along with the article
so that was another like I mean you get
just so much help from people that's
it's amazing then I thought if I can get
this in in a fairly simple way with
sharing these pictures and movie files
quite a lot of intention maybe I can try
to push it a bit more and and send it to
some Awards and so my got quite far some
rejected immediately this one I got was
really cool because they they this is
actually prized for its not super famous
in architecture but it's surprise for
the hotel industry to do it every year
and they Ward the price in the new
Museum in New York and I was chosen
I was the not a winner but the honorable
mention today but anyway how they flew
me into New York which was amazing we
are there five days with a with an
audience and with lots of foreign
architects in and a good thing I mean if
you if some time you you may have a
project doesn't have to be as real as
mine which if you if you would be
interested in something like this I
think this is a really nice award
because they also put a lot of effort in
advertising you as so they even help
making the whole thing mortgage so but
if any of you would win this there
put your name on somewhere and just
there's a whole advertisement company
behind it and you just you literally see
your views on Facebook going within a
few days with a few million more just
because they are pressing these buttons
and they take very well care of you so
if some one day you have time spare time
you can I would highly recommend joining
into this one but I had to change into
sort of the hotel console because I
wasn't a hotel so I came up with this
idea that I go on hiking trips every
year ten days and the wilderness would
take my backpack
oh my food for ten days my tent
everything and go into into into the
wilderness and these are like incredible
journeys always where you because you're
alone and because you're so far out of
the the let's say the human world you
see all this you pick up on all these
little details like I don't know you
were having lunch by yourself on a big
rock and a little hamster come sit next
to you or or in the morning suddenly Sun
comes up and bursts like into fire on
the lake all these like beautiful little
moments you are super aware of so the
idea was to to use that as a concept for
but also provide the luxury that you
normally would experience in a hotel so
your are a few pictures of this these
kind of travels
so this was the concept so normally
you're super connected to the outdoors
when you go camping but it's super
uncomfortable and there's not that many
people want to go hiking with 30 kilos
and hike for many kilometers either they
just not interested in that kind of
stuff or they come to it physically or
so the idea was that if you're in a
hotel you have all the comfort but you
don't you're super sealed from the
outdoors there's no connection with
nature or your environment so then I
turned it into this concept so which is
basically the house if it's super nice
whether you have your comfortable hotel
bat out in the open you can sleep on the
day I don't know the Northern Lights
stars anything you can have your
breakfast outside when it gets a bit
more rough you put the glass and you
close the clasp and obviously in like
harsh conditions you close everything so
all to establish this relationship with
with your environment with the weather
and I changed it a bit to fit in a
toilet and a shower put in this little
house it was one idea already so here we
put in a bathtub in the floor so that
these are the bats commands um yeah this
is not a way of putting a bathroom in
here you actually have a fully
integrated bathroom and then you would
move one side and have the same effect
yeah I'm gonna show you one more video
it's so together with friends we made it
sick it's quite a it's a bit of a cheesy
video for this event but I mean you
gotta realize not architects more like
investors and like different different
kind of people hotel people so you you
need like a more let's say not too
theoretical video it is a bit it is a
bit cheating
imagine under the stars enjoy the camp
fire from a lazy chair gaze at every
minute of nature's big shell while being
perfectly safe and comfortable refresh
before returning to your demanding life
in society
Jasper Scholes mother had been searching
for the perfect prefab garden house for
years after seeing her disappointment in
various standard designs he decided to
build the house of her dreams himself
inspired by her long list of demands and
their shared love for the outdoors he
designed and built garden house nature
shows its overwhelming beauty in very
particular moments the smell of Orion
after a heavy shower the shimmering
sun's reflection of her a lake with the
sounds of nearby animals
crunching softly over fallen leaves
moments that typically only reveal
themselves to the few that are willing
to camp out in the great unknown garden
house was born from a love for such
beautiful moments and a desire to
introduce them to a new audience longing
to connect with nature but still looking
for the comfort of a hotel
in the same way you choose your clowns
every day these structures can adjust
their layers to every season weather
type or occasion so imagine a beautiful
spot in pristine uninhibited wilderness
multiple cabins situated as a nature
resort in the middle of a forest escape
into nature's deep beauty and witness
its fleeting magical moments sleep under
the open skies in the comfort of a real
bed within a safe abode enjoy a book
while listening to the sounds of birds
flying over your head have a glass of
wine in a lazy chair surrounded by
wilderness just like Casper's mother
[Music]
thank you very much
yeah I told you was cheesy and then yeah
wonderful
one thing the funny thing is that after
all this I started to make this actual
technical drawing which was also super
painful but in the end super rewarding
just to make these drawings so questions
or did you do you think it oh my god
I do you think it really works as you
expected I wanted it to work or is it
kind of surprised you in ways I know I
think well I did I think the problem
NASA is not
it would be good to like because I would
say I thought about this whole thing's
10g question and see people really use
that way I should really study or do
people just position I mean I always use
it in this way
sorry to be that guy but was the budget
no 20,000 Europe and it's like only
material obviously no labor costs him I
guess that my question is based on you
being an unusual speaker on the what's
next serious because yours happen
actually before coming to ei if you
could speak await on the impact the
house has had throughout your studies
here or how often do you look back what
is like your post thoughts of effete now
being enrolled in the AAA so you mean
what how does affect my work here or how
does it affect I wouldn't call it affect
or if it actually affects if like how
often they look back at it what are your
thoughts nowadays or based on you being
on a more empirical methodology when you
were building it right now if you see
the Saints the same attitude in your
unit work or I don't know any parallels
or contrasts that you would kind of draw
at right now yeah I I think actually I
think that the AAA wants to teach me
completely different way of working so
and I struggle with that there's quite a
lot sometimes but I also feel that I'm
getting a lot out of that I'm not saying
that because Ryan is sitting there
yeah I don't know it's I mean it's it's
it almost feels like it's completely
different
I don't I also don't feel like I have an
advantage to the rest of my unit or
address it it's just such a difference
I mean I'm relatively good at building
stuff working with wood but that would
be I guess the only advantage I have
another question to you or the house and
one of the question I said is how many
times did you up
and I think that that was I was hopeful
to hear a bit about that and how maybe
on an academic level or like on an
educational level such as the a a maybe
those mistakes like are different than
the ones that you're worried about the
budget of day like that your mother gave
you you know what I mean so what they
said lost an answer a well your first
question like how many times did you
 up in this project I up
everything the first time so it's almost
like a build two houses because I had to
redo everything but that's like in the
process of building and we're almost
never here in the product process of
building we're always in the process of
designing something and I guess in
designing something I'm not sure if you
can it up as long as you're an
experimental enough yeah I'm yeah I'm
not sure that answers your question
sorry this is a very technical question
but how how did you join like make it
waterproof between the two glass sides
yeah what is wrong way there's this
piece this one picture should you know
yeah so here did this steel angle there
slides over the other side and there's a
little it just it almost clamps over the
other side
so that's wood in glass I met glass in
glass
yes similar way sure of a picture of the
so you can see here how it's sticking
out as well so it's also sliding under
the other bit and then the rain is
directed to the platform in its goes
into the crown a different question
that's like so obviously our unit still
makes quite a bit but do you find that
not being able to design and make
changes your design process quite a bit
and how so well I think it's I would
always want to be an architect that does
both actually because when I was
building this I during the building
process I would find out that some
things wouldn't work and I would change
them as I as I went so I think that's
actually a shame that most of it is in
the drawings but I can imagine that I
just love building I can imagine that
you can have the same kind of process
within your same drawing actually it's
also when you're making a solid drawing
it's it's almost like you're building I
guess no more further question about
time management and how you kind of
planned for you said it took seven
months and you had to plan for winter
because you had to build inside and you
just talked about how you planned for it
and also how it's like I'm guessing it
wasn't a hundred
and in reality probably didn't work out
like you planned
yeah exactly I mean I plan to finish it
within three months so and I also talked
to this Thomas has big feather my friend
and he said yeah three months should be
do well just work hard and but like then
I was winter and I have only done it
platform yeah because you don't know
anything you you can't plan anything and
it's a whole improvisation I think the
whole struggle or the whole let's say
the the trick is just to do it and
it all up and not be too distracted
distracted by I mean you you get super
frustrated super frustrated but then you
have lunged and you do it again I mean
that's like you just got to do it and
see I wear dancer I guess that's how I
do how do you see the the shift from
that shelter being becoming a house so
this is a kind of a place that depends
on another house right so your your
mother comes there to you know spend a
night or or an afternoon but then when
it becomes
commodified or part of a financial
project it's also you also include a
toilet right that you shouldn't need
really right because you could actually
go into nature because that's what is so
so how this shift of this house becoming
like kind of kind of a dwelling space or
a space that you would live into for a
week how how does that work is that one
designed to also accommodates that life
during a week or well it is but it is
or is bit for the die-hard because like
its neck next to it due to poems and
like to say you can it's it's in the
middle of the forest
so yeah it's the way I do it when I go
these hikes you shipped in the forest
and you and you wash yourself in the
lake I mean that's for sure but I mean
that's why when I went for the hotel
version so in this sense you we can like
you can have your you can survive there
but maybe it's not for a wide audience
and but then for the hotel version we I
played around like how would you fit in
a toilet and I mean the stove is meant
to be for cooking as well as it has one
spot for for a pattern but yeah so so
making it commercial that sense would be
going for a yeah
it feels a bit weird I mean it is about
being close to nature and being and also
back to basic and then fitting in a
luxury bathroom also feels a bit weird
to me but it is things that I'm yeah
working with me actually yeah but yeah I
mean when but the thing is have you have
you imagined how could you actually live
in that space because that's also what
interests us what that can bring to
architecture
can it connect brings can you bring a
you know another type of dwelling space
or to what extent well in a way this is
the Kong I'm super interested in the
concept and this is one step an early
step in this concept let's say and I
guess in the future I want to keep on
working this kind of concept and it's
just one way of dealing with it I guess
and but what I'm interested in having
this super flexible tiny space where you
stay very much connected to to your
environment and yeah I think that's
something it's an experiment so there
will be more experiments like
just a question about your like process
of building you showed the constructive
drawings after building your project so
you had only sketches while you're
building this sketchup file so i
literally you know you have this ruler
and sketchup so i I would build with my
Sketchup file and measure everything and
then and then make it yeah so your next
project after this is it a house you
wear or is it a luxurious hotel
well did that's one of our our topics
right that ultimately I I think it
should be a house did you wear yeah yeah
absolutely
get rid of nice buildings yeah I think
that's an excellent note to end on thank
you very much and just before we end I
wanted to say um I think I was talking
to Sabrina right before the lecture
started and we've had many lectures at
they that were organized by students in
the past but we've never really had an
evening standalone lecture by a student
so you've made history
[Applause]
[Applause]
