[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
we'd like to start now
welcome
you know we've been talking quite a lot
all afternoon so I have a very croaky
voice fortunately for me and maybe for
you all so I don't have to say much
other than to introduce our speaker and
this is Michael Smith masses Michael is
a graduate of our city sustainable
Environmental Design MHC which he
completed in 2008 he then went back home
to Costa Rica and founded his own
practice and practice I need my notes to
remember the awards the young architects
in Latin America award the Buenos Aires
Biennale of architecture international
architecture to accommodate prizes in
Costa Rica design in 2014 and 2016 and
the sustainable construction award in
Costa Rica in 2005 and I think Michael
Riedel is now taking a year off practice
and is going to Harvard where he's
currently loved the Graduate School of
Design so please welcome Michael Smith
glasses
[Applause]
hello can you hear me well on the back
yeah perfect awesome always I feel so
grateful to be here
grateful Simmons and Jorge to consider
me to be part of this event today and to
share with you the the projects we do
back in Central America and I don't know
this place is amazing I was here like
almost 12 years ago and I remember the
first time I entered that hallway and
then we came here to the lecture hall
and I remember was not Simoes but
seriously honest he was very serious to
us and he was oh my god that was
intimidating when our colleagues I think
we thought the same way but then
afterwards that year was truly
transformative for most of us and I want
to dedicate this little talk to my
friends back in those days it was an
amazing life experience and something
else I want to say last Saturday I came
to the a a was fully empty and something
I realized about this fine institution
is that when you see it empty it's quite
small it's quite compact premises you
know when what it really makes this
place amazing is the people and for the
people and I think something that was
really challenged for and amazing about
this program NCD is that the core value
lies within the people within wellness
within this humanistic approach about
comfort about how you have different
notions in terms of technical but also
emotional and physiological aspects
about human beings and a build
environment which in a way for me it
gave me a lot of tools when I went back
home Simmons pointed out we found it
with my associate our own practice and
it's based on that and what I wanted to
share with you is this architecture as
an excuse an excuse to do things to work
with the people and for the people and I
come from Costa Rica Costa Rica is this
small Central American country is a
paradise we abolish the army in the
1940s so that money that is badly spend
other countries in the third world in
weapons and military we spending in
health and education so it's a wonderful
paradise you're more than welcome to
come and have a beer and surface is
beautiful and I keep inviting Simmons
all the time to come over Jorge has been
in in Costa Rica and I'm pretty sure I'm
saying the tourists right now it's a
very beautiful country and this is my
associate Alejandro and I Mike we
founded our practice but I truly believe
that I am the boys here of different
people community leaders colleagues
emergence mall collectives students
activists I think there is a strong
Latin American movement right now
different offices that we work and deal
with the same issues and I think we all
believe in making things even each
collective has different approach about
how to deal with the practice I truly
believe we believe in making but there
is one big question why it matters to
make things even Batman loses patience
with global urban especially that
ideologies I got this image from in the
GSD from Neil Brenner's a lecture about
histories and theories of urban
interventions and Robin was telling
Batman for the first time in history
more than half the world's population
lives on it shut up Batman says why we
all know this I mean I'm not gonna show
you a much data we all notice that the
world population is obedient but do we
really know about this because these are
the conversations we're having we had in
London like 10 to 12 years ago we're
having it now we have anything cameras
as well eating Harvard and MIT and
something that I'm gonna say a very good
French something that really pisses me
off is this concept about the globe of
North where they think they're the
developers and the wealthy people and
then the global self in and for need of
development of the poor with the poor
right and what about for example the
global central I told this to bruno
latour have you heard about he came to
the Z a few weeks ago and I told him
about it what about us did I mean there
is a lot of people in the tropics in the
central part of the country didn't even
talk about us and
what about the global majority because I
mean there is this polarization of north
and south but what happens with the
mouths of the population in the world
it's not about north and south and there
are very important correlations between
informality and poverty
we can talk about in your speak is a 1
billion of the population lives under or
under the line of poverty to 2 million
lives from informal economies 80% of the
world population lives with that less
than $10 per day I mean if you show it
in in the global North everybody's
asking what how can you manage to do
that but if you live in the global
central and/or in the global majority
you know those ten dollars they expand
and contract and you cannot put a price
to life quality so there is a different
response to that I mean you can you
cannot buy life quality half of the
population in Latin America lives under
the line of poverty the opposite the
opposite of poverty is in wealth but
justice Bryan Stevenson says in claims
in this powerful statement so we were
talking now about global justice are we
talking about inclusion and resource
access how do we assess this from a
design perspective are we talking and we
developing projects that we're dealing
with this are we doing relevant things
that we work working for that overall of
the world population or we're just you
know in our own little bubbles thinking
that that's the only thing that matters
in Latin America at least because I
speak from where I live and I work
everybody keeps talking about the rural
migration and again Batman we slap in
Robin right I mean since the 60s the
majority of the of the population live
in the cities does and in the other hand
there are some amazing rural
developments as well so there is nothing
about migration anymore there is not a
poverty rising indeed so it's not about
showing the global solve to be the
poorest part of the world it's not it's
not true at all actually since 1995 half
of the population has improved their
life conditions so we're talking about
informal economies that we have to
acknowledge and recognize these as a
very important part
the urban fabrics there is a lack of
affordable housing yeah but there's a
lack of affordable urban housing and
we're building communities where we're
still thinking about building housing
units we're thinking about building
communities how did how did this may
happen do we have access to quality
access to design the most of the world
population has access to designers or
we're still thinking that we put
everybody in the same box
everybody compacted and we don't really
care about incorporate all the
necessities of the users which is make
sense but it's not not in real practice
three-fourths of the housing has been
built without any architects or urban
planners neither regulations and this is
not bad and good it's just a phenomenon
it's not about taking a position but
it's to acknowledge I mean if you even
go to Bern ocular architecture it's
amazing how these five hundred thousand
year buildings they work perfectly today
in terms of environmental performance
and it's not only a third-world issue
you can see it in the US London Athens
Paris Madrid even in Boston where I'm
based right now we're talking about it's
almost seven hundred thousand persons so
it's not about the numbers it's about
the people and when you work in a 1:1 in
scale with the people you understand
that numbers are useless
Robert narratives in his book shadow
cities he claims that 1 billion people 1
billion mixes more concrete than any
other developer in the world so
basically here is what the cities are
being built and the cities of the future
also it's important to understand that
their users and environment at the
protagonist not the designers we just
provide a service unfortunately in most
academia we keep going through that 1%
of the world population investing all
our efforts energies and tools to work
for a particular segment that is doesn't
represent the overall of the world
population and we work walk blindly
towards this still and we provide a
service and it's a shame because it
happens in Costa Rica I have seen it in
different academia around the world and
they basically they put this idea in Sep
this idea on the students that you're
gonna graduate you're gonna put your
office your phone and they're gonna call
you to design an airport
I mean we know that's not gonna happen
and and and that's very important to
understand
I respect different ways of about people
how did they want to achieve their
careers but I'm pretty sure there are
other options and how about we think
about providing a service and if you
take it from the sustainable perspective
in the overall approach from
socioeconomic environmental we work with
this with the social resource and we
truly believe in our practice that
collaboration and participation develop
a sense of ownership walking through the
house to the halls here in the AAA I saw
this amazing poster about some talks I
don't know if they happen on radio
they're gonna happen but this is our
discussion we're doing in the GSD right
now in harboured and actually we are
again I seen a symposium in March which
is called informal means and we're
speaking about the same issues means of
developing a practice because today I'm
gonna show you some of our projects you
may like it or not but the important
part is how do you sustain a practice
you're showing you can show these
amazing projects we have social impact
but how do you manage to sustain your
practice because there's a big question
after you graduated right and with
clients with frameworks sustain social
business models so rethinking that
clients forms of Alliance afford in risk
they're really fundamental issues that
we as designers face in these days I'm
gonna tell you our story very quickly
very briefly we have two type of
projects the one that fed us and one the
day they don't we started like this 15
years ago so the red dot is a fad the
white is not so me I came here to the to
the AAA with with a grant with a
scholarship my associate and I we don't
have family members that owned
enterprises construction and the price
is nothing I mean we have to build our
own pathway so it was pretty amazing
because when you graduated you have this
first Commission to do that doggie house
for your aunt but that's cool I mean you
have one project you get paid for that
one so that that's okay but then what
happens afterwards in the other side is
that you knock doors with
ngo's public and private enterprises I
mean can be can I be part of any
initiative over there and in a matter of
15 years we have build up a network of
possibilities to work along and the
projects that were not getting money
were getting money and they overlapped
it and we have built a very powerful
working frame in the last 15 years to
sustain our practice I will not lie to
and tell you that we have a lot of money
and we have a big affirm is still small
actually this is one of the questions
I'm trying to work in this year in the
GSD but at least these ways about
pursuing projects moving away from their
comfort zone and more important that you
don't need to get paid to do what you
really love and you're passionate about
it of course the money is important to
sustain a practice but there is
something that goes beyond and even when
you try to develop these projects I mean
you can really get the fun in easily for
the most of the projects if you have a
tremendous idea and you connect well
with and you manage to communicate and
articulate these projects in a
appropriate way with different
stakeholders it's possible to do
whatever we want if we have it clear in
that sense the values that we pursue I'm
going to show to you in Costa Rica there
was a program and time ago like 10 years
ago
it's called the cuido which was
nurseries in rural and and low-income
communities we designing we got
commissioned by wholesome to design
guidelines for the nurseries and again
this was by knocking doors there's no
context we just knock door how can I
help and actually remember I came back
from the sed program afterwards and they
knew I was an expert in the field so
they hire me and they knew I knew a
little bit so I was helpful and then
they the Commission has to design these
guidelines and we work also with the
government and the former president in
and in that time leveraging Cheeta we we
gave her these design guidelines which
we basically work it in in four teams
the case studies we did regulations try
to integrate them because was a totally
a mess then we work with environmental
design features for for climatic regions
in Costa Rica and also the qualities of
the spaces and from this we got
different important outputs in terms of
how you organize the programmatic
relationships the orientations the
proportions the transitional spaces I
still truly believe that in the tropics
this is a very important feature in
terms of architecture how you make
transitions and how you connect the
spaces and also in terms of the form of
the space and the proportions and this
very basic rule of thumbs about the
depth of the spaces and how you deal
with the envelope and have you enhance
the use of cross ventilation under
different conditions and we also explore
and this is part also the research I did
in the sed back in those days having
this parasol roof and this buffer the
thermal buffer space for multifunctional
activities and how do you can have the
cross flows and then after we got
commissioned with these design
guidelines we did this project based on
some of this so at the beginning they
thought we were crazy about this space
in particular the top one because they
said was useless just wide open space on
the top which plain to them was a
thermal buffer it was multifunctional
and at the end it became quite quite
successful because one of the problems
of this type of infrastructures in Latin
America is that they're conceived only
for one particular purpose so 60% of the
day is gonna be a nursery
I'm sorry 60% of the week it's gonna be
a nursery but what happens with the
other 40% so there is a tremendous
opportunity to develop this as touch
points for the community itself and to
have capacitation workshops and many
other activities so at the end they
truly understood the importance of this
and this project was built and warm
sorry hot dry conditions and then also
we made another one but in a warm humid
climate in hung Creek in the Korean side
of our country we work with very very
rough and low budget materials and
especially the importance of this was
relying mostly on the transitional
spaces the porosity of the envelope how
these spaces are articulated how we have
mobile partitions in order to integrate
the whole space if we want if we wanted
to and these are some of the details as
you see very very simple architecture
but as we have follow-up after the
project was built very useful for them
in terms of the functionalities of it
and something important about these
projects as you may see they're very
basic is a very basic frame concrete
structure which allow us allow them
sorry to customize some of the panels in
the different climatic conditions they
will perform so in this case this was a
hybrid between concrete and wood
laminated beams and timber beams and was
almost the same concept and still I
think these are the same principles from
the design guidelines and we have built
at least six of these centers and what
insights we have from them community
members are very useful for us because
they really appreciated these these
spaces that allows them to grow in time
to adapt to being flexible to change
this project probably is the most
important project we have in our office
right now it's called Cueva I lose we're
going to show you a quick video here
[Music]
this is located in Samos s biggest
informal settlement
[Music]
whose means in the cave of light
[Music]
so most every thousand persons
[Music]
we're changing the roof there's some
work
[Music]
so like RPO as I told you is 50,000
inhabitants this place is is very
powerful and we have learned so much
from this community and especially from
these two ladies this powerful crazy two
ladies Alicia and marries Alicia is a
community leader marriage is tough the
leader and the founding of the
organization suffice they invented this
program is called
system of art education for social
inclusion so eight years ago we knocked
the door how can we help and we help
them to develop the infrastructure and
it was amazing because Alicia Marie's
ask Alicia what can we do in here eight
years ago and at least at all told her
hey how about our nor castra a symphonic
orchestra okay let's go for it and these
two crazy ones they they did it they
managed to to have an amazing a terrific
project very embedded and grassroot and
with the community for example we Lee
Robles and you can reach to these in the
media from the community since the
beginning there was some traces of
engagement and empowerment and hope the
project was coming up and there was a
lot of positive messages and images and
in a matter of years they have more than
150 volunteers the investment has top 1
million dollars to develop from public
and private efforts which is like one of
the greatest challenge in Latin America
is how you can get the public and the
private to work together
the carpets Orchestra perform in the
National Theater which is like a great
great honor and it impacts more than 900
persons within the community and even
the kids that train judo in the
community they won a gold medal in the
National gaming scene Costa Rica so this
is some examples about the greatness of
this community and their fights in their
struggle and how their voices are
building up in this frame it's located
in that the sample which means the tote
tote Cape probably used to be called by
the most dangerous site in San Jose
where drugs killing was by a very bad
place to be at least from the
consumption media but
what happened afterwards it's called the
game of life and the concept of the
project that we work together was a
pro-gay progressive change based in
urban acupuncture and that's more or
less how is situated and it has like
tweaks three stages I'm going to show
you the couple the other two in a while
and it was a very very simple project
open floor plan because you have a
limited plot density to achieve in order
to have and to host these activities
that were very important for for the
community the concept of the project is
a laminated timber frames in a sequence
and then you have all these elements
that provided the the environmental the
climate climatic responsive design in to
some extent I can just resume this in
these two drawings I think they they
talked about we use I mean that the wood
structure is everything and everything
has to fit in that because of the
density and the limitations and the
budget so what we managed to do is there
is this wonderful book is called climate
responsive design by Richard Hyde and he
says that one of the biggest problems in
the tropics is that we try to solve
everything with one opinion and we need
to have different opinions for different
things for the visuals for the
ventilation for the illumination that's
something very keen important to do so
in that sense we we try to explore with
the envelope and I wish you can come
over because it really performs well we
have very well cross ventilation
the environment is so comfortable and is
based on these principles of having
porosity then having these a element
that provides adequate protection from
rain rain water but allows the
penetration of in this case it's direct
solar radiation but and also there is a
sky component very important but allow
allow us to have just enough amount of
daylight for for the space and these
columns because of the sequence of the
frameworks these columns help us to have
like little chimneys in a way I mean we
don't need that the adiabatic effect
that much
but at least it helped us to have this
like mm membranes that helps you to move
and work along with the airflows this is
a picture of the process of the
construction process and this is partly
the final outcome and this there's a I
like to tell this anecdote because I
mean this project has one very important
awards and the last one was in the
Venice Biennale in the young architects
award in a collateral event and we a won
in the in the Costa Rican be an ally as
well the first prize in the
international prize but something silly
about this is that for example we want
this prize a colleague from Costa Rica
he called to the College of Architects
and say hey guys
how come this project won how is it
possible it's illegal so that the
College of Architects they call us and
guys is that true of course it's true
I mean is he it's what do you know
informal settlements I mean for the sake
so they told us okay what can we do when
we received a phone call we sent to them
all the technical documents and in a
matter of hours was legal the project
it's important to say about this
anecdote it's not that I'm promoting now
illegal architecture which sometimes it
makes sense but what I'm saying is that
of course there was a lot of background
from engineers from the government
everybody was on board but because it
was illegal they say yes but we cannot
sign anything but at the end everything
came up together nicely and I think the
most important and relevant part about
this is that if we still thinking about
construction codes if we're still
thinking about all the restrictions
especially in Latin America all them
urban regulations are means
interpretations or adaptations of the
global north right they don't really
respond to the citizens
I mean Carpio has been and struggling
for 40 years to have a space like this
and we keep blaming these communities
because they have Tiff's they have drugs
and I mean nobody does anything that's a
very you know tension and very a very
strong thing to deal with
so can citizens and truly I'm not
talking up in the Hat of an architect
I'm talking with the head of a citizen
we got together we put this together and
we're showing that there is another way
to to think the city to - that is more
related and oriented with the
communities and the necessities so this
is an emergent voice is this a way of
solving a problem I mean go inside and
talk to the people and what happens
that's very important is that this
project was built and then finally 50
years after the government they built a
school close by 50 years after so this
is a catalyst so I we truly believe that
this type of a carpenters are very
important and the sequence of working
with in informal settlements and of
course I'm not speaking something new
this has been done since the I mean
there is a wonderful work like hold him
are you how are you from the eighties
and in in Rio and and there's a great
examples about this but and this is the
images from before and after we also
participated in the fundraising we have
some of the beams and we imprinted with
CNC agreed so people can sign on it and
donate some funds so in a matter of
weekends we managed to get $40,000 so
this is an example about other means and
ways to to develop a practice and to
develop a project and the beams then
afterwards they were installed on the
project so it has like a print and
imprint from the people and everybody
getting together another important thing
to say is this is no architects
imposition and you can tell this the
project was not even finished and you
have everybody using the project when
there was no construction of course when
it was safe as well so this is not these
the greatness of the architect imposing
their ideas within the urban fabric this
is about just trying to work together
and to have these spaces that are
necessary for the community this not
these are not our inventions they were
needed they were useful and they of
course their grass rooted and
appropriated within the users and lately
in 2014
a professor tomas de camino he may he
made a makers workshop over there and
then now there it is University where I
work they just managed to do a half Fab
Lab in a car pool so they have all 3d
printers and they have amazing tools
over there I heard the community is
doing a terrific work of this very
really getting into digital fabrication
there is also a tailoring third preneur
ship which is called Antico students
there is also break dance classes there
is music and samples there is jazz rock
do you name it there is a lot of things
happening in there pretty amazing judo
karate cuckoo scene we even teach the
class back in Costa Rica and we work
on-site with the community to address
further steps and different
possibilities working along the Carpio
this is the talus a good construction
and we're talking about laminated timber
in terms of structure so that that's for
us is a challenge now we're facing also
we also have back
Internode's but with other associates we
have a wood construction enterprise and
we are getting into the laminated timber
work but also with the cross laminated
frames and yeah this is a tremendous
opportunity to push for the further this
type of typology some projects and
densities and I mean I can we can even
have another lecture just talking about
the benefits of wood which are there is
plenty of them as a construction
material but there is also there's a
quality paradigm with this type of
construction we have the best engineer
in our country which is named is one
tube it's been for years around
he wrote the code construction codes for
for Central America and Costa Rica in
terms of wood he set the standards and
he worked with us and something very
important about this type of projects is
usually the government if they do this
type of projects they want it to be
generic and cheap and has to be the
opposite way around you have to have the
best quality people involved to have I
mean just want to do cheap stuff and
this is not helping at all
so I mean there are amazing examples
good and bad examples for example in
managing and in Colombia about these
situations and conditions there are some
pending operations the project it's not
finished yet there's some things that we
still struggle in I'm going to tell you
a little bit about later there is this
conciliation I told you about the about
the public and the private efforts and
some of the transitional spaces I I
really I'm really in love with this part
of the project because you can tell how
the users are really appropriate they
put the plants the environment and all
the workshops and other things the
project has a patina how is a patina in
English patina like Farina like the
aging there is like an aging of the
building which my associate when they
told me how my the building is looking
quite all right now but it's not a
getting all is getting mature you know
it's getting response from the community
is being used and I think there is a
very nice part about how the
projects get into age and they're like
so that's open operations flexible to
adapt to the users conditions there was
another important price we want
dimension in the ibero-american design
Biennale Madrid in interior design and
we're not interior designers so we just
send up pictures it's about the wood and
I'm telling this about the words not
because I want to to brag I really don't
care up about that I'm saying this
because I mean there I'm gonna show you
another project later on that this is
being done by the community I'm not
speaking about the internals and myself
I'm speaking about a group of people
that will feel very proud about what we
have achieved collectively together in
participation and I think that there is
that's very important and I think this
last picture from quaaludes is powerful
for us because there is a paradigm about
conciliation efforts but and this
picture resumes everybody resumes
private and enterprise owners community
leaders community members NGOs us the
government even the Costa Rican former
president is in there he used to be the
Ministry of Social Welfare in that in
that moment and now he's the president
of Costa Rica but we need a new about
that and it's pretty amazing because it
is really about getting connected
getting the stakeholders get everybody
on board work together that's where the
real synergy occurs and makes these
projects to roll on and happen then
after this project we have other
interventions within the place one is
called a recess day in the lose I'm
doing with time seems to I happen yeah
because I got 40 minutes here but I have
yes before the minutes already
all right this is Britta the loose is
another project we're working in a car
pew this is a multi programmatic aim
project with a skatepark
MIT is gonna be a workshop and then the
sports facilities and and there is a
roof garden and a I mean these projects
usually you have to think it in phases
because you don't know you're gonna have
the funding for building the whole thing
so usually we think in phases in that
sense and we're trying to get uber and
the government to work together and
finance this project the other one is
called loose which is a bigger question
inside and one of the biggest questions
in informal settlements is how to
release a space without harming
communities and I mean there's no space
if we want to do the public space
gathering space is there there is none
there's there is a lack of this so we we
knew some important things first of all
the street is that the common public
space we did this project so there is a
lot of trust the trust probably is the
most important part I think building
trust observe and listening are three
important skills that we need to
conceive and then finally we have these
discussions with the community about a
housing density project and we came out
with this strategy which means that okay
we got the plot where we have core
values we might be able to work in here
there are some vulnerable families that
live in these very critical conditions
over there
so how about we get them together we
have an a possibility close to the car
people to use a temporary plot to make a
camp where the families can stay there
for a few months and we can make like a
capacitation to build and strengthen
each capacities within and then we can
open the plot and we can incorporate mid
density solutions which later on will
allow to provide housing for the
families and then other ones they can be
on board and then afterwards we can
speculate to have more or less this type
of solutions so we work in this and we
incorporated try to be more the more of
the grid as possible with water in terms
of
and urban gardens and the different
solutions that we work with our
engineers to develop all the sustainable
solutions in terms in terms of water
management also in terms of energy we
bio digesters Solars Costa Rica I don't
know if you know but we managed to
almost perform the whole year without
any co2 emissions we have all renewable
energy basically so I think this is
something very well developed back back
home
also these public spaces are so
important in the way you address the
first level to connect and interconnect
all these spaces for different events
and the collective agenda and finally
but not rather all the principles that
have the passive design techniques and
strategies in order to achieve these and
well this is a rough image from this
project the other thing that is
happening this is more coming soon
than the other one is called loses a
compound what happens is that still the
project achieved to deal with 900
persons but we need to build up more
capacity so the capacity is being built
first of all we need to finish the
balconies we haven't finished that one
and they're very important for the
performance of the building also we are
doing a water tank to make a water tank
treatment of the disposable water we
they really need this version to have
this space which is like a sports
facilities and a veranda to protect this
little placer they have and they want to
rethink the the boundary to claim a bit
better this public space not public semi
public space so we're working on this
right now
and also some of the questions that are
coming along is some of the families
that really involve and engage with the
project how about we interconnect the
project with some of the surrounding
house in private houses from from the
project so in this case one of these
houses they rented for they rent the
rooms for different families so we
managed to talk to them and they say ok
if we manage to do a density proposed
proposal and liberate the space a little
bit
that could be something that we can work
along together so we came out with this
idea about doing one plot as an example
to liberate the space to provide density
to generate these a green and landscape
regeneration and water treatment because
all the water goes directly and
uncontaminated so this could be like a
one pattern that can be replied into the
in the margins of the river and this is
a carpio and this is this problem is
something that we are doing with the
housing ministry right now in Costa Rica
we think in the border and how we can
provide density along this border and
and how to walk and move along with
these proposals so this is something
we're keen about exploring and hopefully
we can manage to this year or two to put
one of these prototypes on site as I
show an example because I mean this is
not about master planning this is more
about being strategic and try to do
these sequence of interventions in order
to the community also to understand and
have feedback and and grow along the
process with this and these are some of
the prototypes we were trying to develop
and different structures these different
structure possibilities and and then
afterwards this is one project that we
already have the plans and we're just
getting the funding in these months is
on the back to build capacity is called
tower tree and this is providing a
little bit more of density because there
is a lot sensitive for especially for
the elderly and the young ones to
develop a Montessori daycare centre so
these are very immediate necessities at
least that we can solve and cover to see
what are the steps to follow so it's
quite a complex environment but I mean
we have been there for more than 12 feet
know what is it now yeah like 10 years
10 10 to 9 years there so it's an
amazing place to be we believe in this
we believe in inclusive design we don't
do any render model or a sketch before
getting engaged and on board with our
clients for customers we fire
were communities we work together in
participatory design processes and I
don't know have you ever experienced
this but there is a wonderful lessons
that they go beyond academia we were
talking today about in the sed reviews I
was pulling the idea that maybe there is
a great exploration between
participatory design articulated with
sustainable Environmental Design agendas
days days to they couldn't underpin they
can't collide and do amazing stuff
because it's putting the users as a user
centered design approach in how to
debate and how to speculate but also how
to build possible occupational patterns
and scenarios within the built
environment and of course you get if you
get people on board they really empower
they really think this belong to them
and it's an amazing experience a
transformative experience at least for
myself in the last years what we have
learned from different communities I
just spent the last three weeks in
Mexico we went to work in a rural
community in close to a la Jara and it
was a tremendous experience and this is
what we get I mean it's not about having
all these funky drawings with the
community of course it's about raising
voices and everybody feels comfortable
and safe to to give an opinion and it's
very important to be clear that we are
the the technical the facilitators and
we are gonna get this information we're
gonna process it we're gonna do design
patterns we're gonna do design
guidelines we're gonna organize the
space and then we can put this into a
specific context and then we go back to
the community and do a validation
process we present our ideas and we have
done this a lot of times and how many
times you have to present to the client
all the times you need until you get an
approval the good thing from us is we
present it and they say yes but this is
not rocket science this is not the nos
of course if you get their clients on
board you you will they will trust you
they would say okay no we we agree we
might change this a little bit and that
and that but this is a very important
part get people
and this project we dealing is called
Calaca capital we in an indigenous
community in Costa Rica we work in with
the same tools we work with the
community participatory design process
we have translators for the Quebec are a
dialect and was a very very simple
linear project where they wanted to have
community shelter a library and having
like a place to sleep over because most
of the indigenous communities they go
there they sleep and then the day after
they go to the closest biggest town so
it's like a transitional part in their
journey and same design elements as I
show in other projects is about the
frames is about the elements that help
us to give this articulation the
community make make to us very clear
their cosmovision
in terms of in frame you know super
mundo upper lower world and how is it
connected everything flows the energy
flows and is connected with the
environment and with the external
conditions and this is in a rural area
that is probably four hours right from
the San Jose the capital and there is
also a sense of proudness this project
has also one very important award
especially in Latin America and I mean
the community feels very proud of we we
thought it together and as you can say
see I'm sorry it is a porous envelope
with this transitional transitional
spaces I have to admit that we have some
failures here is in terms of the
overhangs we became quite short with
them we have to extend it especially
these ones but they're fixed now already
and as I told you this cosmovision of
the indigenous way of thinking and
living the spaces with the aim from the
sopra worlds and we got I mean most of
these projects we got engaged afterwards
there is a couple's engagement for sure
I think that's one of the most important
part because designers they love to show
the pictures of the project when it's
finished
don't get the users in let me let me let
me hire some fancy furniture take these
amazing pictures and then you get it and
that's it and that that's silly
the most important critical part is what
happens afterwards and how the space is
being used and there is a lot of
successes but also failures and it's
wonderful to learn about this about this
notion that these are open operations
that they're flexible they're adaptable
then we don't have the solutions for
everything we have to be humble in that
way that we can every time we can
improve I was looking into the Renzo
Piano Exhibition in the National Gallery
and he was talking about this endless
wave for seeking of beauty as a driven
force and I think even rather than the
beauty I think this is where it's a
human truly a human behavior about this
never-ending way of the way we live and
we interact with things which I think we
have learned a lot from from our
projects and we even make the collective
to get books in the library we got
engaged with that operation as well
in 2015 we got invited to Venezuela to
work in as passive they pass I don't
know if you have heard about this
initiative was very powerful they did
two editions 2013 and 15 as you may know
but as well as very harsh condition
right now it's quite complex I have been
there three times this time we work in a
communities called Co Harris and we work
with 60 60 to 70 community members to
rethink this space it was not this was
nobody's land was a place where they
have violations they have a lot of
troubles drugs and so on and so forth
and they wanted to refurbish this space
and there was a set of operations that
they told us that we might pursue the
first one please close the freaking roof
they have like I don't know who
projected this building in the tropics
but truly
any notion and especially in the way you
deal with water and solar radiation so
they the community told us the first
priority is please close the roof then
secondly we have a Berlin wall let's
open it up to the community so we can
see what happens inside also the
programming within the disturb how you
call that in English the staircases the
benches benches right a grey area in the
sitting area
of course underneath that there is a lot
of opportunity to develop that space and
put program in it so social productive
activities sports facilities community
spaces education restrooms also we
thought about this man automatic way of
dealing with the pitch we managed to
think with the community how about we
put stripes and we divided with nets and
colors to have different activities at
the same time
solar radiation impinge was an Equus an
issue for sure we needed to have some
protection how to deal with the public
spaces along and probably some other
elements that will be keen to have the
adequate environmental performance for
the building and since it's quite high
how about we incorporate incorporate
other spaces and this was some of the
images we show to the community we
arrived and even we did the
participatory design workshop today the
day after we show these images and in
the evening we went to the warehouse to
buy all the materials and weeks acute
this project in a matter of one month
and a half so it was truly truly a
challenge but we got all the community
on board and most of the for this for
example we we have the biggest project
in terms of a scale but we have the same
budget so it was a truly a challenge
so these are some recycled beams from
some social housing units donated by
Uruguay in the 90s nobody used them this
bin so we put it into the facade recycle
them in order to incorporate these
overhangs to cut the solar radiation
most of the design decisions of course
we build it and we work it with the
community and I think something I
appreciate a lot about these images is
that these pictures have been taken by
the community you can go to let achada
in facebook and they keep posting
pictures because this really belongs to
them and they're really empowered and
there is a lot of activities and I heard
from all the interventions in his
passive day pass which probably I'm
talking about 15 interventions in all
the country this is probably in the top
three interventions not because of the
architecture itself but because of the
use and belong Ness to the community in
that in that sense that you can tell I
mean these images they released show
about the people for the people we are
currently trying to develop a project in
Guatemala we're working in Limone
we got a Guatemalan yeah there we go in
the house what mala has this informal
settlements column una which is Central
America's biggest informal cell we did a
workshop like a year ago and we work in
this place used to be still a little bit
quite harsh in terms of gangs and
matters I don't know have you heard
about the matters but it's quite they
face very tremendous challenges because
of the matters but before because of the
social exclusion I mean it's a very
conflictive area but with a lot of
opportunities with a lot of great people
and we got with another collective para
todos from what Amala we worked together
we went to the community and we did a
participatory design a process with some
community leaders and members to develop
this part of the of the settlement I
mean they don't have a space basically
but they have this little community
center and this a risk Oh
looks like a query almost so we wanted
to explore the possibility to provide a
little bit of density in order to
achieve a touch point a place that the
community can gather and has to have
different activities and this is
something is quite preliminary but we
work along together with with them just
I'm about almost to finish this is a
project we want a commission in Costa
Rica we work it with our practice and
you so architects we want a commission
from a municipality to develop some
urban acupuncture's we already submitted
all the plans and it is gonna be
constructed this year it's a bus
terminal that articulates some of the
segments with within the urban fabric
and some other little interventions say
Meteorology's same ways of thinking and
practicing and then this is what is
gonna be build build first the the bus
terminal and then we have these occur
punchers in different places I there is
a little vertical garden placed like mid
middle or a place to see some
sightseeing and a community center on
top and also we are working on the
connections within the spaces so this
first one is still is all these open
platforms that allow the touch points
and the people to to be engaged and on
board to these places and for example
this is the vertical garden which is
located in that area and more or less
this is the the vision is quite simple
it's just trying to fit within the
geomorphology of the side and having
multifunctional possibilities and to
activate these abandoned spaces and also
where this is very very complex we're
working with that all the staircase that
connects these community so we're doing
modular staircases in order to upgrade
and try to to enhance some of the public
relationships along the spaces so these
are a this is a vision from the
municipality we participated in the
competition we wanted it's gonna be
being built I still have my questions
about this but I think the most
important parties this upgrade has a
sequence and it's gonna be progressive
and hopefully can has can have a lot of
retro alimentation from the from the
community itself and just to finalize I
wanted to finally show you some of the
projects we do back in the university as
in the studio we I direct with my
associate Alejandro is calling the
community and we work put in several
places like in a car pool and this these
examples are quite nice this this our
students they work with this I forgot
her name Anna Maria Dona Maria they work
together to develop an America Ito so a
mariachi he was selling in his front
door she was selling a lens she was and
in panties bread everything all together
in the same in the same window so they
work along together with her and try to
do some branding to the facade or there
is gel bar
she has like she was selling fruits and
they worked with gel Bob the students to
develop this they call it gel bomber
will to to have the fruits along the
community and I think this examples are
I like them because I mean some of them
they have work with pallets but this is
no Instagram inspiration of course or
Pinterest this is because we tell our
students don't worry about the money
because we don't have so basically I
always love to say this because this is
the probably the core value of our
practice as well I mean it's not about
the money so get a good idea and then
they they don't even are allowed to put
money from there from the wallet they
have to seek for the resources do some
fundraising within the school get all
the resources together and then finally
execute these projects which builds a
very important competency about how you
achieve and promote these ideas these
projects this one is I really am I'm
very we did this in 2012 I feel very
connected with this project because we
work it with ketchup are my pies they
used to have this community center that
was fully closed and they worked along
with the community to open it up
and with the same methodologies and and
I think it receives a little bit that
architecture is a great excuse to build
human relationships and I mean we we are
part of this and we have learned skills
and we have part of this profession that
is truly a very powerful excuse to
improve lives as a heading there may say
as well so I think that's that's very
beautiful about our our way as whole of
all of us that we can achieve and do
most of the projects we design and make
studio so we build it up we implemented
we construct trust we don't go from just
merely academic simulations and
speculations this is something I'm
really critical in different schools
that I mean sometimes you do this option
Studios like for example in the GSD and
they go to China or India or Africa or
Latin America they spend five days they
come back and then they propose
something that's quite silly I mean you
really need to get on board and embark
in a long term relationship even from
the tutors point of view so you have to
construct construct trust that's that's
a very important part and this is not
merely academic simulations they're our
speculations this is also trying to do a
step by step following up projects and
with the users with our clients because
they really matter we're speaking about
people and if you get the people on
board they will be engaged and every
single part is relevant within this
collective transformation of the spaces
in this case we we did a paint
intubation with some houses because of
that families they told us we wanted to
to implement a little bit 50 houses and
we thought all together that we this was
the best possible solution and most
affordable we did it everybody was on
board part of this intervention we enjoy
it a lot we invest as much as time as
possible to get everybody on board to
listen to their ideas to present these
ideas to potential donators donors to
get the funding to build
and for example in our university they
used to make like an exhibition of all
the studios and our studios 10 was the
crappiest one because we didn't have a
project was only like these very cheesy
wooden images and stuff like that
because the project was built on the
parking garage of the school and then it
was implemented on site so sometimes I
think it's I mean it's good to make
simulations is good to expect late with
forums and 3d printing and these amazing
ideas but also sometimes it's good to
invest all these resources in something
that also can have a real impact on real
people so we need to find a balance I
think within academia to get everybody
on board and this transformative
experience and there is a lot of stigmas
with these communities because that's
insertional is press up for consumption
they say it is the worst place but this
is the treatment we have it it's amazing
I mean the first time I step in an
informal settlement was in 2004 and it
was truly a transformative experience
for me because of the quality of the
people and there is a lot of stigmas and
a lot of preconceptions and
misconceptions about a what really means
poverty which is a very silly and stupid
way of thinking about these communities
is about speaking more about life
quality probably a good finally this is
a great thing when when you ask to the
little ones the kids they are really
part of this process and when you ask a
little kid what do you want to do when
you grow up when you start a project
they tell you maybe I want to be a
reggaeton singer with a suspicious
manner or I want to be like a soccer
player like Keylor Navas or Cristiano
Ronaldo right and then after the
experience you ask the same question and
they look more suspicious I may be like
an architect or engineer
and it's not that we want to bring them
to the dark side of the force but I
think that they're a really important
fact about this is that they truly
understand that we are there we are
available we are not our luxury we
provide a service we are part of a
society we are architects we are there
and that's very important because for
some people they don't really know what
is architecture about we got invited to
give a lecture in the way no sighted
Banali and there was BR Engels he was
presenting with after us and we were
talking about this particular issue that
most of the society they don't really
understand what does the architects to
know what we do is it's quite silly and
we need to find ways of communicating
and build up an adequate narrative to
make clear what we do because otherwise
we're going to just move in our own
bubbles and sometimes it's overwhelming
when you go to different schools and see
all these amazing exhibitions and invest
some resources and blah blah blah and so
on and so forth but do you really get
what is our profession about probably
the best way to test that is to bring
your I don't know your mother or your
families and bring them to the
exhibition and see if they understand it
otherwise it's just our
intellectualize discourses of our
practice with any consequence at all so
and with our students we try to at least
work with these work and build projects
with the same methodologies get people
on board try to to find the adequate
language to communicate and to
articulate and to construct and you can
have a lot of building lessons inside as
well I'm surprised sometimes the
students they don't even know how to use
a hammer which is that's that's crazy
but it has happened to us not how to use
a hammer I mean that's that's crazy and
some of these interventions they quite
feel proud because they have done it
with the community and probably the
first build project so there is a lot of
proudness about these type of
interventions and this is now this is
very important this is not false sense
of philanthropy I mean I'm not talking
about saving the world and be the best
person ever
I'm not talking about the atom what I'm
trying to tell you is that if you go to
informal settlement or or low-income
families communities they don't want
anything from you they just want an
opportunity as most of us have had in
this place so it's about building
opportunities together which really
matters in that sense and finally
finally but not letter there was this
project in a Carpio we worked with very
small interventions in terms of these
prototypes there was some families that
they have in their community in the
members in their family members they
have some physical disadvantages and in
that case we work the students they work
and developing these retractable bed
with recycled materials because of the
of the aim and the way that they can
solve in in order to address the
resources to to build these projects and
this year for example and and also this
one is the deployable sure that this
little young one needed and this is my
last image and I want to close with this
one because this truly shows with the
with the small scale there is a big
change this young one
he was oxygen dependent so she has to go
to her school and move around with this
tank oxygen tank every day so the
students they find out about this
condition and they design it this is
cooler so this little girl chip she was
very a link eliminated from all the
community and when she got the scooter
and put the tank on the scooter she
became from being the more eliminated
girl to be the coolest girl in the
neighborhood so she she was like very
cool and she got some Hello Kitty
stickers and put it in the tank so I
think my associate he'll always love to
talk about this example because it truly
brings out brings up the life quality
not for the junghwan but for the family
members for the community itself so
everything everything matters and Pura
Vida
it's so great to be to be here back here
and thank you all in thanks
[Applause]
thank you for this presentation very
inspiring very lively and also quite
sobering we have a few minutes for two
or three questions anyone
thank you for your presentation maybe
that's a bit too loud so you asked some
questions to me and now it's my turn
it's soft right myself and here we have
quite a few students so I think it's
very inspiring to see someone who
finished this program 10 years ago
actually being out there and doing
things achieving things and somehow
implementing because in somehow each of
your projects it was visible that this
thing is in the back of your heads and
you're designing with it and you're
thinking about it and it gets built and
it works that's really nice to see and
it was also nice to see how you went
with this timeline and the projects kind
of became more and more sophisticated
along the way and I'm sure other people
observed it as well there is a sense of
maturity that goes along with this
process and so congratulations today
it's the only question I have is that
mostly you showed public functions
things that improve life quality of
communities as a business model
therefore I think you you had found
raised from municipalities as you
mentioned in one project but it seems so
effortless that you go there's this
problem and then you build something but
then it costs money so who who is
typically the one investing into it
these communities don't have money I
guess you need ability sometimes you
sometimes don't you to crowdfunding how
do you fund this project I think that's
that's a very important question and
especially in this year in in Harvard
that's one of the great greatest
discussions were having because it's how
to sustain a practice itself it's not
even about the specific project but how
you achieve to have the funding and the
resources to have a team
and work together and one of the key
aspects we have learned in the past 15
years is when you go to a community the
best thing you can do is first to
understand who are the the stakeholders
inside who are the NGOs who are the
foundations who are the public and
private enterprises and not the door
over there and say how can I help
because probably they have done a lot of
work and they are capable of doing it
because they have anthropologists
sociologists they have all these people
know that knowledge and knowledgeable
people that know how to do this and then
we as designers we can show up and help
them to develop a design process and if
that's clear articulated the way of
getting funding is not that hard because
you're being part of a team it's not
there is your responsibility itself to
get the funding but in the other side
what we're discussing right now for
example in Harvard is about this concept
that I learned from Paul Nakazawa which
is called catalyst fund when you develop
a non-profit catalyst fund how first of
all if you have an organization like a
design organization you want to be
nonprofit what are the core values that
will make people to invest and to put
resources to your initiative and how
these funds are gonna be articulated to
different projects and how you can
ensure that this money is transparent
it's gonna
well executed and then you can have
feedback and the community's been
explained an important part and roll
along these processes so I think the
most important part is not about the
funding is about the structure you build
up and network and this structure is
more related with having the values very
clear and articulated very three very
important values and then what are the
elements their methodologies the the
tools that you develop in order to have
transparency and to articulate the
different stakeholders within the
project I know I'm giving like a very
abstract open answer but for example I
am very inspired lately by you know mass
design I told CMOS and worried about
this practice in Boston I think they're
quite clever they have done it very well
in the last year's in terms of the
business model but I think the social
business the social entrepreneurship is
the way to go and I think I truly
believe more in a hybrid model not just
nonprofit we can really live from this I
mean we have done it in our case and
that symposium we're gonna icing in GSD
in January the 30 2930 you're more more
than invited to come over into Boston
it's gonna be we're gonna be talking
about this and we're inviting other
collectives from latin america to share
their experiences in that sense you talk
about constructing trust and i have a
couple of questions the first one is do
you always use the the the help of an
NGO or somebody that already gained
their trust in in some way and then can
introduce you to the community or have
you had a project where you have to
build from scratch and then the second
one is once you do that how how long do
you really have before you can pitch and
to the to the community before you
really lose that trust mm-hmm well
that's very important we have done we
have tried at the beginning
do it by ourself and to be honest it was
a mess we managed to do a couple of good
examples mostly oriented with academic
experience with our students when we go
from scratch from zero to the community
I wouldn't recommend it at all actually
it's even dangerous because I mean you
don't go it's not because they're an
informal settlement I mean you don't go
to any community well if you're not well
then just go show up and hey no I mean
there is something that is common sense
that it's very important to acknowledge
that there is people that they really
know how to do this and we as architects
and designers we is good too to
understand that we don't have the skills
we can learn from these skills from
other professions and we have to
acknowledge a multi-city
multidisciplinary way of working and
thinking transdisciplinary way of
working and thinking by itself and then
to answer that what we do and what I
recommend is not just work with people
that has done that they have the fertile
field already so we can as designers we
can help in that sense that that's at
least our point of view in our practice
and then in terms of building trust I
think the most important part is to be
coherent step by step we have learned
that very little actions a at the very
beginning they help you to build up a
relationship so for example I'm going
back and tomorrow and tomorrow I'm
teaching a participatory design workshop
in in a Harvard and we're working with a
Cambodian refugee community in Boston
and it's gonna be our initial contact
and we already went to the community and
where we're gonna do is work a very
small intervention within a basement
we're just gonna probably paint it and
do some a little work ship along the
basement to make it a better place but
of course they're gonna be more powerful
questions about how to implement and get
the community center better and
retrofitted but you need to come past
you need to have a sequence in in MIT
there is this great professor his name
is [ __ ] Samuel
and I was an auditor I was taking a
class that is called challenging urban
informality and which I think he's very
keen about this part of sequencing about
what are these steps to follow us and
strategy
I think the key of this is sequencing
and Trust is a is a coherent and
collateral part very important part of
of this strategic way of thinking and
working now hi Mike it was a great
presentation thank you very much I have
a question back in Mexico I work with
some communities in similar projects and
I think one of the most challenging
situations is as you said the post
occupancy maintenance and feedback that
usually when the NGO arrives the place
and makes these beautiful projects and
everything and they once they leave
these projects tend to be abandoned or
transformed in other things in your
experience what you have seen that is
the best solution I mean to leave leave
it in hands of the NGO or to have like
in the community someone that takers of
this place or what you can recommend
about these situations you you say I
think is a community empowerment so I
mean we have work of different type of
NGOs to that's my point of view I I
don't trust that much NGOs at all I
think they're they're just inventing
business for themselves and to support
something for a little amount of time
and then move forward they're like they
have this post-colonial way of thinking
I don't know not all of them I don't
want to generalize but
but I don't know I don't and there is
something about the NGOs that is just
driving me crazy I think some of them
they have done good work and in our
experience is more oriented that related
in building community capacities
stakeholders and having the community
leaders always on both involve on charge
because they are the ones the project is
for them that it belongs to them and we
have to put the user on the center of
this the user and the environment and
the center of these discussions and if
we don't manage to do that I mean we is
a failure I mean if you don't get your
clients to be proud and when I say
clients I'm talking about the people to
be proud about the project and they feel
that this belongs to them we're failing
truly we're failing because we're not
idealizing the way of how people live is
we're talking about human beings and
experience about living within the build
environment so we are just facilitators
we provide a service but we have to
ensure that we are having this in that
sense humanistic way of thinking and and
connecting people with the built
environment that's that's critical so I
just want to highlight the last thing
you said it's on that community we need
to ensure that the people really is
embedded and it's grass rooted in the
project you know yeah my question pretty
much follows on those two and it's also
from having worked in Cape Town and we
see a studio and so there's been like a
long 10-year history of working with
government as well as engineers but
actually government so we just spoke
about the town but it's the pros and the
cons of the NGO also experiences sort of
projection or interest ideas that
arrived
as well as the problems are the
government's and change in government or
lack of change in government so what
results is like often a lot of senses
they keep living forever and they're
amazing and then other ones in the same
way that acupuncture needle is very
potent but it hits the ground it needs
to be relived and that same mapping and
participation and weaving in of people
and stakeholders sometimes needs to be
revived it feels and and a thread
rewoven and so I found it very
interesting how now you're starting to
take over these well yeah like mapping
large areas and being able to infiltrate
now in multiple groups of buildings as
opposed to the beginning where it was a
more individual so there's clustering
and mapping and routing which is also
incredibly powerful especially and for
the community so I just wondered
reflecting back on your 10 years yeah I
was also wondering how you feeling again
about this bringing public and private
together and then also those buildings
you said anyway there's the patina there
so there's this layering but also have
you been able to come back or have
groups themselves reinvented spaces and
started to translate like your very
organically and created that because
it's always that like I said that so
just how there is and then what the
potential is then within that you found
in your recent kind of clustering and
actually what I'm quite interested also
is in between spaces the current
performance of performative aspect of
the buildings besides being functional
the very performative in the way that
they play for the engaging the spatial
performance on multiple levels it's kind
of occurring so it's just wandering that
thread of the humanity and that
participation essentially feedback leap
how that could sustain within the
clustering now and within the various
relationships of the Institute's and the
people how you could see that merger
right well that's that
that's something Simmons we get a PhD
project now we can work together no no
but I truly understand your point and I
think I'm gonna attempt to summarize it
in a very simple with a very simple idea
or concept which is politics I think we
have to be engaged with politics
we are not architects we're citizens and
then afterwards we can think about our
being architects and being politics
involved with politics is because we
care we're members of the polity of the
city or what really means politics it's
a shame because I mean we've also narrow
and I'm sorry if somebody's we've also
narrow support human without this we get
precedence we are having everywhere I
mean you can tell that people they
everybody thinks that that's politics
within these poorly politicians these
corrupt politicians they really
represent the zeitgeist as period of the
era they don't and there is a lot of
great examples of activists and people
that is raising their voices and doing
amazing stuff amazing work and truly to
be members of the polity to be in
citizens it is extremely related with
architecture itself because we are aware
and care about the public and the
private effort and spaces so in that
sense I don't think I have the solution
but I think we we need to be part of the
discussions and we need to get involved
and not doors in all the apparatus with
within the city I think that's that's
very important we are doing that back
home we have gained some trust from
different local authorities with
different political parties and colors
so they know we're a political but we
care about our city and and we don't
care if his right left we just wanted to
work together and try to make this
better place for everybody
build opportunities together so I think
people this tire about what I'm doing
right now speaking and speaking and
speaking but I think people is more keen
about scene actions and that's why the
activist part is very important and very
precise actions they don't mean that we
have to build a building we we have to
be intentional about our role in the
places and the spaces we leave that's
our first approach I think the AAA has a
lot of great examples in the seventies
60s about these conditions and we're not
invented to invent in the will for sure
so I think this is the answer has to be
with another discussion and another
table I was speaking about Architects
and politics I truly recommend you side
the muck sea and mountain air I don't
know if you know them inside the muck
sea and you said Maria Montanaro they
have this book is called architecture a
political architecture and politics and
the mooks each is an amazing architect
activists that she's trying to to get
the role of women in design very well
centered because is a shame how women
has been just banished from the history
of architecture and design and they play
a very important role and they're just
their names are not there so these these
terrific architects in Latin America
they're they're working she's working on
raising up these issues and showing
evidence about the importance about
women in design and architecture and
when we speak about this we're speaking
about the necessity of a social
comprehend comprehend ssin of our field
of our practice and then something that
drives me crazy a little bit in the
States
I mean I've been in the States quite a
few times I'm there I'm living right now
there I'm working in the in Harvard but
it drives me crazy how we still talking
about people in terms of colors I mean
that's insane with 2019 and we're still
speaking out Brown black can and why
and that's crazy and and it's part of
the same discussions of gender and
colors I mean we have to move forward
and but we have to be very sensitive and
very intentional about these about these
emerging voices and how we provide them
we bring these discussions into the
schools and into the city more important
rather than the schools into the city
because the school sometimes there are
bubbles and I say it's very frustrating
sometimes in an amazing environments
like Harvard or MIT that they have both
sometimes there is a very intentional
way to to permit everything but in other
places there there are silos and they
don't that doesn't make any sense at all
sorry about the long answer that it's
politics politics is that what I'm
trying to say sorry oh yeah I think yep
what we have learned and what I learned
from the my thesis project by in Costa
Rica to be an architect is that as you
see some of these communities they don't
have spaces together to get together and
that's the first part of the sequence is
to provide adequate not sorry about the
words that provide start generated
collectively and spaced together that
doesn't have to be a building could be a
temporary place or infrastructure just
to get together and rethink the
environment and have discussions but
sometimes the communities don't even
have this space or this opportunity so I
think our projects I truly believe they
they reinforce this part they don't
generate it because it's like we're
imposing something out they reinforce
and they've they helped to provide and
to work along with this spaces yeah
thank you once again thank you
[Applause]
