I practice people large in Australia
Asia Europe and America I look at the
site technology there that's kind of the
little bit about the side projects I do
and there's the main thing I'm going to
talk about which is of course the
offworld architecture besides that I've
also been teaching in a few places puts
in in practice and I've also been
involved with for many years and now the
director of geometry which is this kind
of group of people computational design
people from lots of different practices
different two years 10 workshops
parallel over a period of six days is
this kind of place that really is in
between academia and practice talk about
today really started quite a few years
ago I would say exactly and smart
geometry I think it was like 2004 and we
had a smart geometry in mostly
University in Canada and I really want
to show this slide because there's a few
from Amtech on that slide as well as you
might recognize who they are it was a
great year for the Beasley nari I him
Andrew
and this was like early days of pretty
much it modeling right this is the days
when we were using chains of components
fighting because we actually got changed
and rewritten overnight
we're doing that I could probably give a
whole lecture about that kind of stuff
but I'm not going to do it today I'm
gonna talk about the fact that I founded
a basement of Waterloo University this
machine 2004 that was the first 3d
printer I saw with my own eyes prior
start working we actually was super
excited about it we could use that
technology this was like a secret
machine hard to get the participants of
this module tree workshop to get them
all 3d printed and it was kind of like
magic I thought back then but of course
and from these machines you see them
building stuff layer by layer magically
and you think well you know I won't do
this for real I wanna do this a real
scale why can't do architecture like
that one to one and it was a bit of a
dream but that dream kind of became
reality I met this guy which is on the
left he was at that point I think it was
a senior lecturer or professor I'm not
sure at love University background was
engineering it was really interested in
building physics and he's standing there
in actually a scaled up version of a
part of a termite mound but because he
was really interested in starting to
understand how termite mounds really
operated how the air circulated around
the
how they controls the internal
environments and he had some money from
I think it was an EPS or Sea Grant and
the idea about the grant was to really
start to understand how termite mounds
operated but nobody really the most
researchers did actually kick a hole in
it and kind of see what the internal
structure was but nobody actually poured
it full of plaster too full of plaster
to start to understand what that the
internal structure is I think now once
you get this kind of blast the thing it
still can't do much with it difficult to
scan so the next thing they did is they
build this massive rig which is see on
the left-hand side you can see these
were structure engineers designing this
plaster into this termite mounds and
then they had a big grinder which is the
big red thing that grinded it off layer
by layer and then every centimeter they
took a picture on the right hand side
and that way they were able to build up
layer by layer this digital model the
great research project interesting
outcomes and they brought the whole rig
with them back to LA River City and then
when they had the genius idea to reverse
the process but what don't we instead of
kind of slicing it off and demolishing
that thing layer by layer whatever the
opposite and start to think about
building something layer by layer so the
big kind of on the left-hand side was
really the first big large scale 3d
printer in the world
and it ended up being a research project
between foster partners when I was at
the time together with your apples and
lovely diversity remember this kind of
conversation we had with them what
material are we gonna use and we came up
with this kind of very big decision
concrete because there was a very quick
decision I thought maybe she thought
about a bit longer system the next
generation we use robotic arm to do it
and I think that was really the first
the first ever 3d printed concrete piece
of architecture it was kind of a wall
type thing that was that lots of
companies universities start to kind of
do this stuff putting concrete printer
on a rig on a robotic arm you know there
was a big China
Winston doing it there's extreme in in
France doing it lots and lots of
companies doing that and but I always
kind of questioned the output what is
happening with that this is gonna
winters first idea of what you can
accomplish with your houses I think it's
slightly better I still think there's
like massive limitations to it in the
end most of these companies - is the
Friends of concrete concrete is a
concrete wall is never just a concrete
wall it's always a combination of rebars
right
if you want to take up any anything else
then if you want to take up attention in
your structures you're gonna need
concrete you're gonna need steel right
you can't just do it with concrete on
its own for me just using concrete to
print with you call it that much for
that you can build some walls but I
think the efficiency of two blokes with
some breezeblocks is really hard to beat
I think right so is it really the right
what do we what the question is what do
we really do with this technology I
always ask myself because really what
you can do with it is create
compression-only structures right it's
really well in compression if we start
thinking compression only structures
well you know I immediately think of the
arena's work what Phillip blog does and
his block research group this is the
Venice Biennale of course where you have
compression only structures rebuke shell
structures and that's really the kind of
application that I've been using now 3d
printing for in quite a different
location and which is Mars and is the
first I'll be talking about for the rest
of the evening is about this project and
how we've created this 3d printed shell
structure but I don't talk about this
reprinting part of it it's just only
like a small part of it I actually won't
talk about how you redesign something
for a completely different environment
this project was part of a competition
competition organised by NASA so nASA
has this funding model that's called the
Centennial Challenges they were set up I
think about eight years ago and the idea
about the Centennial Challenges is that
they try to bring in different types of
industry different types of universities
into the space development world right
so they don't just want to work
for the bowings and the Lockheed
Martin's they want to see is there other
industries that can really help us
challenge the idea was can we 3d print
Mars habitats that was the top line of
this competition so how'd you start like
how do you start designing something for
different planets you might think this
is this must be like a really technical
thing examples we have this is it right
in space station the ISS highly highly
engineered project for the one of the
most expensive objects ever made by
humans skill do I have as an architect
to come into this field all right but I
think I'm convinced myself pretty
quickly that I do have a role to play
well you just look at the inside of the
ISS right so this is how engineers
designed you to live here for six months
or a year so I do think like design has
a role to play right and I started
looking in the history a little bit as
well of space development and so and
where were the designers involved the
first architects or the first designer
involved in space was Raymond Loewy all
right and he was there and that was for
project let's find out so scarlet was
the first let's say habitat or the first
space station orbital Space Station
where astronauts were really inhabiting
space they were there for weeks and
months they were not just there for days
but so
they had to inhabit space the first time
they brought designer in and that was
the famous industrial American designer
Raymond Loewy
so he was brought onto onto the project
now in the beginning they were very very
skeptical about him coming in into this
team it's very kind of full of space
engineers to do choose the collar or
something which you did do we did a
couple of other things which i think is
quite interesting and the other things
he did you most of them you see on this
in this picture so the first thing he
did was he put in a personal space for
each of the astronauts you know Scarlett
was a really big volume the engineer did
not think the spaces did not need their
own private space I think if you were
there for months you do want that you
don't want to be with the same three
people
James face the whole time so he brought
in a kind of a personal sleeping pod for
each of the of the astronauts second
thing and you can actually see it on the
phone the picture is he designed the
table they might think wow okay it's
kind of cool table it's not shocking
world-changing is it well if you look at
the original design of of Skylab the
engineers created these little little
tablets that came from the sides of
Skylab so there was one kind of
something like that so the Astros we're
gonna have a meal and not being able to
have a conversation but
because for the engine it was the most
awesome thing just have a little flappy
thing from from the wall so that was the
second thing he brought in the third
thing I think is the most shocking thing
after all is the thing you see in the
back and that's a window but in the
original design of Skylab there was not
going to be a window because the
engineers thought well that's really
risk no it's a risk we don't want to
take it's a weakness in the structure so
why don't we have our astronauts in this
capsule go around earth for months that
time and being able to see this and you
might think well this is this is this is
crazy
but of course now we're gonna make that
mistake again because what that kind of
did because so this is the the cupola in
the International Space Station the
cupola was designed it took 23 years
from design to implementation and each
time taken out because it wasn't deemed
necessary but because that thing came in
actually people actually start to know
yes more International Space Station was
taking pictures taken in front of this
cupola was playing his guitar in front
of it and suddenly you know people got
more and more engaged with it and that's
indeed that that's Cooper back here
what's gonna read something but we're
gonna find it now anyway a second person
I really admire is galina borisova we've
got the book here I was gonna read the
quote if I'm not gonna find it anyway
she works for the Russian space agency
Roscosmos and she was the really only
architects Quaffle architect to ever
work for the space agency and I too
loved the kind of drawings that she's
done and the work she's done some of the
work she's actually in an exhibition of
the moment in design museum you should
go and check that out so she works on
the interior for example of this one and
this is this was exhibited in the same a
few years ago so this was the Russian
moon lander that actually never flew so
the Russians also had their own this was
one designed for one actually works on
the interior of that she'll support
material Soyuz and the interior of Mir
it's just this kind of completely
different look at how a space for like
yeah why not have some wood veneer why
not look at it cause look at how things
are placed these are kind of for example
her drawings from the MIR Space Station
which i think is a sensitivity if you
could have look at the pure engineering
drawings and she had a hard time
actually placing herself with those
engineers because she had to decide
where everything go where economically
things went and this constant struggle
with the engineers who only were
thinking about their particular bit that
they did and she was the only one we
actually have an overall view over the
whole project and that's what architects
do right we cannot specialist
anything but we kind of have an idea of
we were able to kind of think in more a
whole way around the project so go back
to Mars that's these are kind of my
heroes all right designers in space
let's go back to Mars
what's the issue with Mars it's a big
issue with it right because first thing
is the distance that fixture that
drawing shows you the relative distance
the actual distance between Earth and
the moon and I think that takes about
three days to get there it's actually
quite far that is roughly about 300,000
kilometers is only 300 or 400 kilometers
away from the Earth's surface so that's
a thousand times that distance
[Music]
interesting from Earth from if I take
the same picture from Mars
I'll get that which is just a little dot
this is taken from the Curiosity rover
standing on Mars
tiny tiny speck in the sky now this is a
thousand times the distance did we get
there well the interesting thing about
designing something on another planet
the crucial thing is how you get stuff
there right it's actually not very
different to when you when you think
about designing something on earth you
also need to think about how you can
assemble it how it gets there it's
slightly more more crucial so this is we
work together with it with a crank
filter University the space engineering
course so this was kind of a sketch idea
on how we're gonna get there so this is
our Mars transfer vehicle today yeah so
these are what is in here is a lander
with the cargo whatever that is can be
proposed the habitats
something like that but for these two
bids to get to Mars you need all this
fuel because it's about a year to get
there and that's the engine now to get
all that into space you need to have
each of these on a different launch
vehicle we actually worked it out
calculations patches bonded but you
really need to think about how many
launches you need to do from us into
Earth orbit and then you assemble your
vehicle which is this one and your cargo
to go to Mars so I think it's heard so
for our project we were looking at about
34 SLS launches which is the Space
Launch System which is a NASA rocket
which is in development so you need to
start thinking about that right so you
see the sheer difficulty to get
something to Mars it makes you think
well we really have to think about it
what we take with it that we take the
minimal amount of material possible
which gives you different way of
thinking I think I'll shut in few other
slides is that although you might not
think this is a sustainable project the
way you think about it is you have to
think in a hyper sustainable way you
really have to think about recycling
remaking reusing in extreme way so
there's kind of like a duality in that
project right you know of course I'm
going to Mars not sustainable but the
way you think about it it has to be
environmental factors right it's it
squash this is if you have a storm on
Mars it's it's the whole planet and it
can last months these are two pictures
of Mars in two different dates and you
see this is a storm happening on Mars
very very fun dust the really kind of
driver for design project was radiation
so in space you have ready
cosmic radiation and which is gamma
radiation which is very radioactive the
great thing about being on the earth of
course is that we have magnetic fields
around our planet which makes that these
kind of gamma radiation gets deflected
most of it gets deflected from planets
which is a very good thing
boom is where we get to Mars we don't
have that so you have that radiation
happening all the time on the planet and
it's really dangerous for example when
there are solar flares when you get
solar flares the exposure of that thing
is about 50% chance that you will die
within the first week right so it's it's
kind of protection so we need to think
about how we're gonna protect ourselves
you know just that picture so kind of
people think like Mars seems to be quite
warm it's very cold it's average I think
the warmest ever guess is about 20
degrees Celsius - cause I think it's not
- 50 roughly let's say average
temperature was minus 60 that's about
minus 60 day atmosphere it's also very
different the atmosphere is a hundred
times less dense and it's mainly co2 at
least you have an atmosphere there so
which is it's it's better than the moon
where you don't have anything so that
kind of set out the environmental
parameters of this project so this was
kind of one of our sketches or one of
our drawings for the project that NASA
explains I think the different parts of
it right you have this kind of shell
structure which is it's free princess
shell structure done with regolith
explain in a minute
that's our protection shield right
against the radiation the needs we have
bunch of pods habitat pods which are
inflatables and inside we have the
interior so that's kind of the main
structure of our habitat now often
people kind of look at science fiction
for to get inspiration or to get to look
at it kind of an analogue we did for
this one but I think about one thing
which I find was kind of an interesting
with these these also pioneers right the
game West in the u.s. also had to travel
light
when they finally arrived I had to kind
of do what they have because the log
cabin is it is a habitat that you can
make really very simple is basically
just tree trunks stacks on top of each
other but interesting quite simple into
looking mechanism so they just used
whatever was there in the land when they
arrived and then it was actually very
simple construction technique so what do
we have when we go to Mars well we turn
much this is kind of like taking a
picture from some tracks in the surface
regulates we have rocks and we have
Martian dust so what are we gonna do
with that well see this place
yeah so we're thinking of creating our
shell structure our protection system by
3d printing layer by layer this gel
structure right by using Martian
regulates Martian dust as you notice we
don't have a big printer to do this we
really have just we have kind of small
printers or kind of a swarm of little
machines doing this let me just go into
that in a bit of detail so we have so we
have four different robots first one
goes and looks for the right regulates
the second one is the digger and that
goes and digs up the regulates the third
one is depositor brings a regulate to
your site to your construction sites and
the fourth one is the center or the
microwave robots then spent like that
isn't it
that microwaves all the layers together
and that was our swarm of robots some of
them we made up the one the rides
actually did is wonderful by NASA was
the the razor robot it's kind of an
interesting system because it actually
has these two drums that kind of digs
itself into the earth and starts
rotating and picking up the regulate the
reason for that is that's a normal kind
of bigger machine that you would have on
earth but it just kind of digs up work
slightly differently because they're
having machines in to use their own
weights to really kind of
action-reaction pick up dust so earth we
only have a third of gravity on Mars so
we don't have that weight to actually
dig so that's where we have that system
which has two drums that kind of counter
rotate and the whole thing actually kind
of digs itself into the earth once it
has everything he kind of transports it
this is the first renderings we got from
our visualization team and I noticed
this thing on the right-hand sides which
are finished a job and there's kind of
graveyards of robots happening there
this is kind of wrong that was creating
the shell structure and never do
anything with them recycle reuse
whatever we bring there as and as much
as we can so I thought this is wrong
right so we went back to the drawing
board
and we actually kind of start to rethink
our robots and there might be less
optimum than the first generation but
this second generation
a set of robotic systems that is modular
and they use the same wheels the same
the same topology and the same job so
this is the one the one wheel one that
actually kind of goes out and looks for
the right regulate six wheels two
diggers you can make it bigger robot
again or we can make it into a
transporter or transporter then becomes
Center or stroke microwaving robots got
a seam here in the field working
comments from mechanical engineers on
this one wheel one which was quite funny
but funny enough when they kind of
looked at the video quite a bit more in
detail the one comedy always had was
that yeah but that yeah that much of the
thing yeah that might worked out so that
maybe bit of confidence to kind of that
we might be in for something it might
not be just one wheel one but I do
believe somehow we won't do something
here so that is the the microwaving one
no we didn't just invent this
microwaving thing yeah there are
actually the German Space Agency and
there's another research group in Hawaii
Price's who actually doing research into
microwaving resolves or kind of regular
type materials project we never kind of
it's not what's nice fiction projects
right we looked at technology days out
there there's been research and that we
hope that will be on point within the
next 10 years
so for that we kind of gathered existing
tech that we knew somehow this is
feasible to kind of show how the
system's gonna go up and lower kind of
reconfiguring itself
into what
it needs to be put this one up because I
think it shows dude that I think our
robotics system is some quite unique I
think because it's sits in between these
two extremes right they have on the
left-hand side these the Tesla factory
very effective
these robots very productive they do a
very specific task and did very well
over and over again for me is if one
robot fails in that production line we
have big problem robot immediately on
the right hand side is things profit is
some swarm robotics where you know you
can get rid of half of them the system
will still work but you do have to ask
yourself what kind of it actually
produces how effective is it in its
actually doing something and I think
we're so in the middle where we do have
a system that is modular can behave as a
swarm but it still is quite pragmatic at
the same time so we're kind of thinking
of actually developing that that idea
further in a few research projects our
system has actually kind of noticed
there is actually two systems right it's
that shell structure and an inflatable
now we we actually wind it a little bit
against the rules that NASA sent because
NASA's in the brief they kind of said
that we had to create something that
would be able to contain an environment
so we had to create a 3d pretty
structure that was able to contain a
pressurized volume now we never really
believed in that right not true
three Britain structures but three print
something and believing that that will
be a complete sealed unit you know I
think that's way too risky I think you
have to do risk it and have to systems
where you have a shelf structure would
protect yourself from radiation and you
have an internal inflatable which is
manufactured on there with that we can
manufacture here and we're sure that you
know or Astral's are not gonna die and
there are protected in this in this
environment so we kind of had a
different view about that we also worked
with actually o Callaghan engineers to
create these shell structures as I said
before if you three bring something
concrete over here just microwave
regular together which was performed
even worse than than than that concrete
you really only want to do compression
of his choices so we didn't really
design it we gave it the parameters of
it and with rules like kangaroo we're
able to create that optimum shape and
that was done by about EFC engineers the
great thing about it is you know where
you do shell structures compression Airy
structures the problem is always when
you get bending in them or when you get
wind loads lateral loads on it right big
issue the great thing in on moon is that
the atmosphere is a hundred times less
dense than on earth
right we have a co2 atmosphere times
less dense which means the wind on if
you have a tunic lumps of winds on Mars
which does exist the pressure you get
your structure is almost nothing because
the pot you have a hundred thousand less
particles blowing on your structure so
it's actually quite interesting so it's
actually not deal environment to start
thinking about confessionary structures
reference of course felix candelas
structures which i think that the same
idea they had this kind of institute on
sides of the manufactures shell
structure lots of people right and
afterwards you get to the facades are of
course not made on sites they'll be made
in factories coming in afterwards
so that idea of having two systems
prefabricated one and an insulin coming
together then it's actually the one that
we followed as well inflatables right so
we have each tell me the project we have
these kind of larger pots and we have a
smaller connection pulse unfolds and at
the same time inflates
again it's not something we just made up
in the 1960s already looking at
inflatable systems for space great
because you can take white light you can
pack them up quite small which means
your launch costs actually go go lower
there was actually a very serious
research project at NASA which called
trans HAP I really like this idea
because this one has you see in the
middle you have a very kind of a hard
shell element there's no inflexible and
the outside is inflated which means if
it's compact that you can get it in the
fairing of a rocket that's the last of
whatever and then once the space you
actually kind of inflated and that
didn't stay as just a research project
at the moments at the International
Space Station there is this inflatable
module especially done by private
company called big Lou
they bought the license of inflatable
architecture or flexible systems from
NASA and are developing that now
and their goal is actually have
inflatable space hotels so serious about
it it's been tested in special space
station is still quite small modular as
a person in that module is just a pure
research testing facility now to see if
we can actually do this so that's a
habitat but and remember what I said in
the beginning with Raymond Larry and and
they are assessed to have like a
beautiful window right we didn't really
have that and has a very obvious in
engineering approach to it right because
they have these flaps that are able to
kind of close and protect the cupola
because this what's called the big
winner is called the cupola I think you
kind of not go for an engineering
approach and go for an architectural
approach something like this courtyards
many quarters what it great for is they
bring in sunlight that bein indirect
light direct sunlight and they also give
great views across space across the
habitats and so we did something similar
so we created this courtyard inner space
that with views across but we did quite
a bit of analysis to look at if it
actually works we have to kind of tweed
the browns a little bit it was the same
tool we would use to do some analysis on
a building less the only difference is
that like you see the comes the habitat
is like the weather the the white
circles are so one the blue so we never
have direct sunlight there which is it's
not that you Billy's gonna overheat it's
that you could potentially die so it's
it's quite it's quite a crucial thing to
do
ten building these shell structures
shelters are quite hard to do this is
looks I'm a dealer thing in the Biennale
as you see the only work once they've
finished right so you need to do a full
structure underneath a support structure
a full bug before you can kind of build
it and you might have seen our video
right it kind of quickly quickly quickly
builded up and there was no support very
much aware of that we did try to solve
that first that it was why don't we use
another inflatable why do we have a big
inflatable that sits underneath and is
your scaffolding ready for building but
then again it's still a really big thing
this is we start to think about can we
do this in a slightly different way in a
bit more elaborate or maybe even a dumb
way right and so we look at examples
like this summer museum which is
beautiful shell structure and the way
that was built was by earth formwork so
they made mounds and then put the
concrete on top of that we were like
yeah is this really going to to work
right how much time digging how much
time taking the regular hours again is
that gonna work so we worked again
without with our team from Cranfield
University they had a spread she's ready
I think it was about it will take us
about a year longer to construct and the
process we had was indeed instead of
just building it up without formwork we
would use regulates loose regulates to
build it up layer by layer and in the
end we would just stick it out but we
can use the same time
of robots they could reconfigure itself
in the ends they become all diggers take
the regulator out so we figured out that
shell structure I'm going to talk a
little bit about the interior as well so
this is in the International Space
Station's European Space Agency's
research module it's kind of an
interesting thing because it's a very
simple idea right simple idea is that
you have a cylinder on the left side you
have science racks and the bottom you
made basically have storage and have
these racks it's kind of a corridor with
each time a science rack and they do
operate these things this is actually
how the whole international space
station works it's all like this it's
corridors with science racks on the side
left air rides and I actually think it's
like a really inefficient structure
because the astronauts they said yes
we're way too big it's like massive for
them right and actually it's from an
architectural design perspective
structure I would think right which
which building do you know where you
just have corridors and stuff on the
sides like it's it's a bit of a bizarre
thing to think about so we start to kind
of thinking can we do this a bit better
all right so these archives racks that
are just able to move around and you
just go in whenever you need to do
something if you don't need to be there
just close it up there's the same idea
we had there so we kind of we didn't do
it in a linear way within it in a
circular way for our pods and each time
each of these pots has these rack
systems they are able to move some of
them are size racks
some of them are part of the greenhouse
but it all have the same idea you were
able to kind of compact so much more
stuff in a much of small space and you
just
in Iraq use it and then close it
afterwards and we did to kind of see so
each of the polls is a different
function one of the living space in
kitchen the other ones a lab we have a
fabrication lab as well a greenhouse and
so forth and the connection ports HD for
the connection posts is your life
support system so and they serve one on
the left and on the right so there's
like a triple redundancy in the system
as well and then the third opening it
can be a suit port which you see on the
outside there or a normal hatched that
goes to one of the Rovers
interior views which I showed you before
there's a few clues in there that we try
to do things slightly it's slightly
different I think
then then normally when you when you
look at an ISS or something like that
and we got a lot by talking to different
types of people in this project one of
the people we talked to was John eager
and he was the winterization things
capsules of the winterization captain of
Holly 6 which is the British Antarctic
Survey they lived there for eight months
they completely disconnected from the
rest of the world there's no way to
evacuate from it but there's a doctor
there if something needs to happen it
will be with that doctor that says all
right you can escape from the evacuate
from the ISS in about I think about
twelve hours no way out in winter so
it's a good analog for Mars we talked a
lot about them how it is to live there
and they sent up some pictures so that's
kind of how it looks like and one of the
complaints they had John had like what
was thought the complaint was they had
that the fact is they kind of live in
their workplace right kind of then this
thing kind of looks a bit like a
workplace actually looks a bit like a
like some cheap hotel
I think there's no
to them whatever there's nothing tactile
they didn't they wants to have something
that felt like home because it lived
there for eight months and then he sent
me this thing actually talks to me about
it then I awesome take the picture which
was this and this is living space and
they wants to clad one of the walls in
wood and the wood they have was from
packaging crates so they made their own
little thing looks like their local pub
or something like that because something
tactile something that wasn't looking
like a lab or workplace or this kind of
terrible Floyd out there so they wanted
something that felt like a home it just
made me think you know what Galena was
doing to live so if you see the flooring
here is it's actually some bamboo is
growing in the backgrounds so we start
to think about we maybe we shouldn't
grow stuff to eat but but maybe we
should grow stuff on Mars to build if
you grow stuff to eat you need a volume
you know you're never gonna get there
remember like biosphere 2 back in the
90s somewhere there was a massive
project that in Arizona I think trying
to sustain I think 10 people and it was
massive building it completely felt so
we were thinking maybe we just grow
stuff to build stuff with or make
flooring or something like that
another thing you might kind of think
there's a bit weird spacey furniture you
might think well have compact stuff are
you gonna have this massive long well we
did think about that the idea is that
you will not bring it and that your 3d
printers with your own printer on Mars
there's no point in bringing these big
things so why not it's really printed
with recycled materials and we
collaborate with this with money well
from Nogami
and we looked at his 3d printing process
and he actually designed for us some
furniture for Mars base and this is done
by recycle with recycled plastics and
you can imagine that your astronauts
would have lots of packaging material
from experiments of food and all that so
what are gonna do it is there's no waste
recycling units on Mars so why not reuse
it and start 3d printing with it
of course we're not going to bring a
massive like a BB or cuca robots in the
in the left you see like a delta 3d
printer printing one of their first
chairs and this is this is the the
workshop really for the habitat which
was actually also in addy we had but
talking to people from the Holly 6
because when they looked at our plans
the first thing they were like so where
am I gonna fix stuff but where's your
workshop because apparently that's about
half the time they spent is actually
fixing stuff and making the thing run
same thing on the ISS so because of that
we actually started to change our design
slightly now we also start thinking what
these astronauts are going to wear they
were like some cargo pants and polo
shirts that they only wear for a few
days and then they get rid of it and it
gets burned off in the atmosphere one of
the cargo units so not exactly
sustainable you can't do that on Mars
you can't just throw it out so we start
working with Christopher Rabin
there was a design practice here in in
Hackney and he looks at reusing
materials like for example he uses
parachute material on the Left there's a
parachute dam bang one as well there and
reuses it every makes jackass and
amateur and and then close out of that
so we start thinking well maybe maybe
that's as well because we have landing
parachutes a lot of this stuff will be
landed on mars with massive perishes why
don't we use that again right so it's
again that idea of kind of thinking
really radical about recycling and
reusing and you see the one over two
astronauts wearing them so that was kind
of the end of our of our project but
luckily didn't we stop there because
then we got approached by za Museum here
in London and just by pure luck they
were thinking of organizing an
exhibition titled moving to Mars an
exhibition about Mars in the size museum
this is in the design regime it's still
the 23rd of February and they asked us
to see if we could actually make one of
our pots
oh no that's what we did it's kind of
pictures we've taken a couple of weeks
ago so we wanted to make sure that you
can go visit that in the Design Museum
now we can go inside you can touch stuff
we want to make sure that it really felt
quite immersive right so we have indeed
an inflatable structure as you can see
the white one you can then view out to
the rest of your port like you know but
it talks about you have that quartet you
look at the rest of the of the habitat
it's about a 10-minute video it goes
over day and night even so you can sit
there and see the
the sky changing as well you see the
furniture was all three printed with
Nogami as well with recycled plastics
and we have racking system also working
so you can go in there you can move
stuff around of course we didn't put a
real lab it's kind of just we did we
just wanna make sure that people go
there they kind of have at least that
kind of physical experience of what it
might look like and you can see that is
the kind of the big this was before we
had the big Expo going over the big
screen that gives you that that that
feels kind of a ten minute video that
gives you the view out to the rest of
the habitat so we had to build this
inflatable which was kind of a tricky
one because of Mars of course there will
be an airlock now you have an internal
pressure which is a hundred times bigger
than the external pressure so you've
kind of just have a balloon inflated
which is fine we'll earth and we want to
create something that the system to
design this and we won't have an
inflatable but we didn't want it to look
very fat quite slim so we start to look
at these things kite surfing cards
special with it because I think it's
like a really interesting way of making
a structure because the cost of think
art has again this dual system way has
on the outsides a sleeve like the green
one is like a sleeve which has still
working no yeah that gives you geometry
on the inside down the bottom right you
have this kind of latex inflatable that
just inflates as a big sausage but it
doesn't really kind of keep a particular
shape but once you kind of combine these
through the outsiders shear and stretch
resistant the
inside isn't you can actually start
treating certain geometries that is with
a company in Slovenia Oliviana company
called dual and there they are making
these kind of inflatables and the
outside sleeves they made out of
individual pieces of material that are
all then stitched together to come quite
a long time to do but this was one of
the first prototypes of these structures
they're very kind of like there's a lot
of hot pressure in there and actually we
still that was the first in the end and
you see kind of all the kind of the the
inflatable the taps that we inflate the
structure on astronaut relaxing on
habitat I think I'm gonna finish with
just a little video that we made and
that was actually our entry to to the
competition so let me finish with that
half a century ago we took our first
step on the surface of the Moon today
there is renewed passion to explore for
our next human endeavor Mars the Red
Planet
further than any human has ever been we
face many challenges from illness no
livable atmosphere high radiation dust
storms and extremely low temperatures
we've already humans set foot on Mars we
must first design a protective shelter
we will protect our astronauts from
radiation with a thick 3d printed shell
structure using Martian regolith which
works great in compression but does not
perform well under tension to overcome
this shortfall we have chosen to
construct the pressure retaining parts
of the habitat from lightweight
inflatable pods they will be made out of
high precision engineered composites
that are prefabricated on earth
their ellipsoid geometry will be able to
mitigate the pressure differences wealth
optimizing spatial planning to create
the base on moss we will use a two-phase
approach in phase one an ecosystem of 3d
printing robots will arrive months in
advance of any human explore they will
construct a protective shield for the
base by adopting a modular robotic swarm
strategy a plan that allows for
redundancies and enhances the odds for
success intelligent autonomous robots
will have interchangeable roles from
battery storage to Scout Rovers
logistics to excavational and even 3d
printing units all integrated with
multiple cameras and sensors for
navigation they can reconfigure
themselves for a multitude of purposes
ensuring prolonged usage beyond the
initial build phases the smaller
configuration is the one wheeled Scout
Rover that uses ultrasonic scanning to
analyze the Martian surface to determine
the best regions for obtaining optimum
regolith the digger receives the
location coordinates and then escapades
the Martian soil it then delivers the
payload to the refining assemblies here
large chunks of Martian regolith can be
processed down to a finer grain and then
delivered to the melter robot since its
you they then use concentrated
microwaves to mount the regular and
extrude through the 3d printing nozzle
the shell is autonomously 3d printed
layer by layer over several months by
the robotic system
in the next phase the first astronauts
arrived with the habitation units
equipment and supplies the robots now
take on their second life rules to aid
the next phase they come together to
make flexible mobile platforms that can
carry the payload from the loading zone
to the base a convoy begins its journey
across the Martian surface to the
habitat site the build commences with a
connector module placed underneath the
protective shield and readied for
inflation the module that unfolds and
self inflates into its final form the
habitation units are then placed into
position and sequentially inflated to
form the completed pressurized
environments the circular layout of the
habitat ensures continuous accessibility
of the habitat in the event of a
catastrophic failure each connector
module houses three integrated
environmental control life support
systems delivering essential services
like power water data and oxygen to all
the habitation units a circular conduit
delivers these services to multiple
endpoints in each pod the base will be
remotely powered by two nuclear kylo
power reactors in a solar farm located a
safe distance away from the base in the
next stage the astronauts will construct
and install a flat-pack rail-based
racking system capable of connecting to
the distribution system enabling spaces
to reconfigure according to their
spatial needs
is modular and radical design principle
has been adopted for all the habitat
pots ensuring multi-use reconfigurable
environments a martian base should not
just be a habitat it is home for the
astronauts
each pod expresses its own identity
quality and character a highly
functional design which places the human
experience of the court
spaces include a state-of-the-art
research laboratory a hydroponic
greenhouse a fully equipped workshop
with digital fabrication facilities the
sleeping quarters with gym facilities
and immersive virtual-reality platform
we believe that the key to success of
human habitation on Mars is the health
and well-being of its residents creating
a place where work life and living
combined holistically to ensure they
feel connected to each other to
themselves and somehow to their distant
home
questions
it's all working the way that is Shawn
liked it don't you have any problems
would say like it's not working or
because I'm from em second I know I mean
we have been dealing with the computer
programming and everything and I I keep
remembering everyday an interview
Byron's a piano and he says computers
are stupid you have to tell them
everything like I feel like when I'm
watching it it's like it's my
visualization it's a concept I think
that's what we're good at so good at
somehow bringing lots of bits of
knowledge and trying to understand most
of it a little bit of enough of it and
then bringing it together and coming up
with the concepts in the idea of it and
that has to be super powerful right and
that's really important in this field we
have to kind of sit in this kind of
bizarre zone where you which doesn't
really happen in space development so
before I start this bridging before it
started the other projects I did I
looked at what is out there right and
there were like two extremes on the one
hand side there was people who do really
detailed studies right maybe about an
airlock 50 white papers about airlock
and on the other hand what you also have
in space is people to come up with
artist impressions is this kind of like
you know
spends about half a day and making a
drawing but starts fiction because a lot
of it isn't actually true isn't this
just as loads of these imagery that you
see done by you said done by NASA and
all that and you look at me like this is
a bit ridiculous
right so I want to make sure that we
kind of stay in that middle road where I
are able to kind of give an overall view
that is hopefully quite believable and
that used technology that is kind of
dare or almost there be realistic and be
grounded in science and an engineer as
much as I can you know done it yet you
know but that's right we don't build the
buildings we just the concepts that the
drawings and the ideas and kind of
putting it together so I do believe
there's a very particular role to play
in this field but it's not really
recognized yet I think leaving the space
station everything there's no he wanted
more private space in the design I saw
the living area small they kind of part
of the racking system as well so you
kind of get like a wire rack and from we
kind of model this by looking at again
at Hawley six because at Hawley six we
asked the people there so how much time
do you spend in your own room simple
question
I actually know that much we just we
like to be even if we read a book or
something
they like to be with other people people
love to be alone with other people right
but they do want to help psychologically
have their own space that was actually
quite formed but the size of it wasn't
actually a major issue so we do have
these kind of small pods almost these
racks so they're kind of wide racks that
everybody has their own private space
bed a table your your storage in the
same and do you think that is a need for
an architect to be in that building or
is everything designed on earth
50 the people from Holly six they said
like and also the people astronauts
right so the astronauts what is an
astronaut an astronaut is a very good
operator the top scientists right people
who can follow instructions really
clearly really and who really kind of
can concentrate really well can operate
an immense stress so the kind of perfect
robots the European astronaut Center in
Germany there's massive screen that
shows what each asteroid is gonna do for
the next six months but I think it's
five minutes or ten minutes lots so it's
completely regulated what they do
there's a control room that knows what
everybody is doing all the time
so again halli six on the Arctic base
the people that go are really practical
engineers that can fix stuff people that
can
operates and do instructions and I can
fix stuff that's the people you want
interesting about your approach as
opposed to some speculations run either
feasible basis looking to geological
features like you know placing a base on
shock Shackleton crater because you know
is places have been surveyed to give you
an advantage in a way your scheme almost
relies on there being no cyclicity in
some ways is on how you would cite but
we looked at the location or potential
not what specific location but we did
think about actually placing it in a
valley all right the reason for that is
that you've got the mountains that
protect you already from radiation so we
were that was one of the reason that we
looked at you know should that should be
that kind of location is on the moon and
that's a very good location because
there's an issue with the moon is if
you're on the equator you what you get
is you get fourteen days of on the moon
yeah fourteen days of of day and
fourteen days of not so you have the
lunar night switch everything plummets
temperature plummets is unlivable so on
the moon of course you've wanna go check
out the crater South Pole which means
you always have the Sun let's never
build the horizon and turns around you
over twenty-eight days three and sixty
degrees so from environmental reasons we
didn't really have that constraint but
you're right you could for example start
to look at lava tubes particularly the
moon as a protection but but then it's
also how'd you get into them what is the
risk but you could potentially do that
as well yeah that's
another way of looking but that NASA
competition was particularly about three
points anyway it is another way if if
you would have good data and which we
don't of 3d data of the environments
then you could start thinking that yeah
oh my two questions so the first one I
thought it was really smart at how you
reuse materials for furniture and
clothing but I was wondering if because
most of the furniture is actually the
racks and if those were printed as well
or brought there and also the second
question is you mentioned it gets down
to minus 150 degrees and how do how do
the inflatable structures resist the
cold weather good questions well as you
saw the video that kind of flat packed
programming you more something like that
racks but one of the things that I'll
think about which thoughts kind of
developing more is could we grow our
racks can we grow bambua can we make a
racks out of bamboo right and this is
got this weird thing because people
would think about space it's all clean
its wide is brushed aluminium but maybe
it's a little bit closer to these people
these pioneers in America that had to
may we grow our own stuff and start
making stuff so I think it'd be
interesting to kind of see what a base
looks like after ten years there might
be some Alemany racks some bamboo rags I
think I think I think the aesthetics
will be very different that what we
think they're getting to be right what's
the same question temperature yeah so
yeah good question I'm not upset sure we
think maybe it's to do with aerogels
that we use something so that that might
be inflatable you know the environment
that you have the the inflatable on the
ISS is insulating it's also kind of
protecting against micro meteoroids and
all that so we feel it's possible but we
haven't 100% figured it out yeah
other questions yes so I've seen this
idea grow from sandpit with some small
robots to the concept you have now how
do you think this will evolve in the
next years where it's gonna go next
yes well for me the next I would love to
do is really test base most of the
analog have been developed by NASA base
and all that there was no designer
involved but they terribly built it's
all about of psychology of these
astronauts they kind of put them in
these analogs and then do tests and
Atacama Desert or on the Antarctic but I
think the environments we live in is it
has a mash massive influence of
psychological and your well-being so I'm
really that's for me the next step is
actually building one and as a proper
MRSA analog somewhere on earth so step
past them Stocki
they made this 3d print like a 3d
printer to use the cabo shells to that
we have a bunch of three printers in
there to kind of maybe methyl PrinterOn
who knows we actually bring the printing
is still require complicated process
that needs very much control
environments
you know it won't be the first
generation I think you know there is an
FTM printer on the international space
station I think they can bring the
second one in now there was all about
NASA he said it will now as well but
it's so but if you kind of if you've a
little bit if you kind of see how much
involvement is in there in actually
developing something that is actually
works in space it's it's pretty crazy
and you know development which is the
simple of the EM printer to get it to
work in the ISS yeah metal bridges I
think was still bit the second question
is related to the fabrication of shell
itself usually exclusions don't exactly
happen perfectly the on deposit and all
the things that will need to be looks at
you you know yeah of course but you know
in a three-month project you can't
really do everything but yeah thank you
now you kind of need to do that
we're just two engineers sitting at the
back here we read enjoyed this talk
between the between the brief from NASA
and the delivery of your proposal how
long did you take what how much time
[Music]
[Music]
what we did at one point was kind of
halfway through the project and we felt
I need some people to come and give me
some input so symposium and invited
people that are bring us interesting
knowledge for this project and so we
invited professor of mining we invited
people robotics backgrounds people with
and was it the space anthropologists we
brought in people with radiation
radiation experts we bought them all in
to room we had like quick presentations
and then most of the afternoon what we
did we did not actual quit with all of
them so we put a massive wall all the
scientists please tell us everything
that's wrong with this right and we talk
through it so that we didn't actually
quit and it took us about four hours and
it was the most interesting afternoon we
had we taped the whole thing and that
was for us really interesting because it
just kind of shifted things that we were
able to kind of change things very
quickly and and the funny thing was is
that some of the scientists thought this
kind of review process was quite
interesting because they never do that
they never stand in a room with ten
other people and just really hack into
it you know that process of design they
didn't know
for them it was that kind of Wow maybe
we should try to eat it as well
sometimes was another question sausage
oh cool cool thank you very much
