so only the land on top strategists can
have a trajectory we just get momentum
no trajectory possible lots of power
what do you think of that this thing
committin momentum and rejected because
it seems even in my mind you don't need
the endpoint to have a trajectory well I
mean the first thing I would suggest is
it depends on where you are as to
whether you can see the endpoint or not
so what might be momentum for one person
could be your trajectory for someone
with a different viewpoint a vantage
point so that's that's you know and if
the risk you know sort of dropping into
kind of perceptive relativism you know
two things can be true and you know you
have I think we as actors have to
acknowledge that we exist within you
know a complex set of relationships I
mean I didn't I certainly didn't mean to
imply that you know that well I said
that you know the financial actors that
I deal with they respond to really
specific
you know incentives and if you're not if
you're a fund manager at scene or you're
part of the returns if you're if you're
on the credit community for bank it
might be a little bit longer but it's
still a very limited time scale which
means that it probably needs lots of
things but one of the results of that is
that the that their decision-making
drives things in an accelerating way and
their returns and the benefits that they
read the land on top guys definitely
benefit from responding to things did
that bring them very very short-term
benefits I certainly wasn't suggesting
that technology or the or the science
that underlies technology is pointless
and in fact you know the thing that will
probably displace you know the internal
combustion engine you obey
economy will be what we learned about
about material science leading to
battery storage leading to you know
outcomes of solar PV will that make the
world a better place is a completely
separate question you can you know the
increased technological skills could
mean that we have at least not a totally
disruptive environment but it doesn't
mean that the world will be more fair it
doesn't mean that the land on top guys
won't still and they are usually guys
still won't be landing on top and and so
I guess it's the question of how do you
interview how do we nan you how do we
arrive at the interventions in these
complex systems that address the
inequality that address you know did
just the the destruction of things that
I think and this is really old-school
environmentalism right have intrinsic
value you know the natural world however
you choose to do however we choose to
describe it I believe has intrinsic
value
it's not about ecosystem services it's
not about monetizing it it's about it's
about somehow creating a balance between
now the billions of people who occupy
co-op yep I this face with the you know
with the large number of chickens and a
decreasing number of other animals and
and the intrinsic value that exists
beyond all these cultural artifacts and
I mean everything that's happened up
until the great acceleration more or
less what's happening it was it was the
interaction of naturally I usually word
natural really in a limited
sense of systems that didn't have huge
amounts of human intervention small as
he had said but you know not totally
disruptive that what the Anthropocene
has done or is doing it is creating a
situation where the individual decisions
we make aggregate very quickly into
outcomes over which we have even the
land on top guys have little or no
control and that's I think the big
challenge of how do we make collective
decisions at the community level
national level regional level god help
us at the global level that allows the
minimizing damage and I really think
that that's where we are when you ask me
what I did
I think the lot of what I do feels like
Battlefield medicine to me it's triage
how do you stop the worst things
happening in the short term to have some
good things happen I mean to say forgive
landing somehow
because a good friend of ours would say
that that's real the problem in the
entire discussion where do you land the
earth beneath you has changed so quickly
you don't recognize all so how do we
become sensitive in Europe and I guess
big parts of America definitely in the
large civilization of the rivers in Asia
there is a clear relationship between
the governments and the hydrographic
basin seems to me that what you are
describing your work in this amazing
murky that's an evidence of plastics and
month you are somehow implying that your
work will be taken on by those
structures of governance that are in the
current because you said in the next 10
years it has to happen my question is
then to what point do you imagine
so what point do you imagine that what
is really at stake in your work is a
revision of the political basis of our
ground because what you're describing is
the ontology
with plastics and it modifies completely
the very formation of what we still
consider being the basis of our
existence the ground land to what point
are you imagining this and who do you
speak to in your scientific world
respective political scientists to speak
to artists to speak to musicians so I've
been sort of in this area actually
collecting my own data for probably just
under a year so so far Leicester City
Council it's once we've got some
traction with that and we've got a
preliminary project then we can move
forwards with them when you say what's a
Hawaiian vision and very similar kinds
of things to to what the larger
organizations are getting people who are
having the impact to accept
responsibility for that impact and part
of that is to understand and quantify
that impact into numbers because it's
numbers that they tend to attack on too
however every adjustment has an
alternative has like an alternative
problem they can sometimes be more
diverse so for example what you were
saying about oil turning into batteries
and and and different energy sources
that material that will create the
battery still has to be mined and that
will be done in the cheapest possible
way which will be done sadly very sadly
in places of the likes of Africa child
labour and unsafe environments and it's
just in these environments they these
situations are not known by the people
who have the capacity to make that
change but somehow the responsibility
needs to be accepted by those people and
changed and in order for those things to
happen you know if we want to make that
transition there are many other
transitions that have to happen along
that route so if we want to transition
away from plastic we need to get people
to accept responsibility for in a way we
should all be going to the market and
taking using paper bags and that kind of
thing and Sainsbury's has recently
started doing these useful bags and are
you saying that the integrated supply
chain of the global commodity market
doesn't know what I don't think they
don't know that's why I did this
[Music]
no and they're more knit they're sad
there's just no way to do it any
differently there's nothing immoral
condition matter I mean just in the
notion of accountability because we
started with the intrusion of the ants
work is all about accountability
modeling
it's an accountable practice your peer
reviewed completely but it seems that
model is at odds with the one that
Charlie is describing where
accountability is there but on time
frames that are so short that require
somehow a jump from one level one moment
of countability to the other which
doesn't imply continuity of the people
involved on the contrary it's peasant
food stability but it's the triumphant
financialization right so if you know if
you believe through qiyamah at the end
of history occurred in 1989 and the
triumph of the market means that
monetary policy is all you need to
ensure the smooth running the economy
and the smooth running of the economy
means that everything else will be fine
that is it's it's a you know as as an
orthography goes it's pretty limited but
it's it's it's so it's become such a
dominant you know world II thought I was
gonna use the word Paragon that it means
that almost no and I am not particularly
an anti-capitalist I'm not even
particularly ideological it's just an
observation of what dominates the
decision-making systems we make and the
metrics have been reduced to keeping the
inflation below 2% that's when the Bank
of England was given its independence
in nineteen its independence in 1997 by
the government then that was the only
thing the Bank of England had to do and
it was based on a belief which is kind
of like morals or kind of like religion
that if you could just achieve an
adequate monetary policy it would
deliver every other outcome for every
population in every place that has ever
lived and if anything could be more
demonstrable and it's hard to imagine
anything that when you kind of its like
the Wizard of Oz it's the little man
behind the you know crouching behind the
curtain with a you know with a lightning
machine you know the world is a far more
complex set of relationships whether you
know I mean it was amazing Mississippi
River I grew up with the navigable
headwaters in this city it's been a it's
been a place where it's been a channel
for commerce for a long long time it
just hasn't always been a canal so you
know again two things can be true
natural systems or at least minimally
modified systems can continue to provide
all kinds of services and function but
we have narrow we and let's do say we
because we've made a lot of Democrat
Democratic decisions to narrow our frame
of reference to just the most incredibly
binary it's good because if the market
or it's bad because it's not and I think
that the real challenge is and that's
Cohen that's not even with the great
acceleration that's really accelerated
massively since 1989 so that's where I
remain marginally optimistic if we could
may if we could it up that fast
you could probably unfuck it that fast
today is the fourth of November
yeah and just not the fact that on the
fourth of
1989 something architectural I wanted to
really open up the discussion to the
room here so if you have questions of
remarks obviously you are not only
invited to take the microphone but
please come to the table and don't be
shy I suppose there's a lot of nice
water and orange juice among other
things just join us please
[Music]
no just also I suppose on the question
of scale I'd be interested to hear what
you all think about whether there's a
difference between climate change in the
enthrone
because I feel like my understanding of
part of what the work of the
Anthropocene working group part of their
work is to make a distinction between
those two things under maybe disagree
well climate change is something that we
can see geologically climate change has
always happened
climate change happened in the time of
the dinosaurs up to the extinction of
the dinosaurs the clan have got
progressively warmer because of all kind
of activity and so that is that's crime
change it's kind of cause and effect the
effect of a huge number of causes can
lead to climate change both volcanic
activity being one of them the
introduction of a new form of life that
draws down different minerals from the
atmosphere definitely just like climate
cooling that can be a cause but the
effect is climate change and in the case
of the Anthropocene I think that we were
to find that as different by it is
something that is distinctively humans
causing climate change but not just
climate change a spectrum of things such
as an increase in minerals as young
presented in his presentation so I think
that there are definitely similarities
between the two and the two terms can be
into used on a modern scale but if we're
going to define them geologically one
who's always occurred and one is
occurring
I think also that Ian mentioned the fact
that climate change in the Anthropocene
it's not really a remarkable thing
it's incipient but it's happening it has
not yet happened and this is a major
distinction I think but I wanted to
return to the issue of scared before
going to my name
because hovering in the air is the idea
that I'm saying oh this is always
happening and I'm not at all saying that
I'm trying to reframe it and say how do
we get the power to leave behind the
idea that some of us are bad at it don't
take responsibility but that we have
these power these glands that can sort
out our ability to transform when when
the mortgage crisis happened we had
radically changed the structure of the
body politic of the United States we
built all these crappy houses you know
how can we unleash these powers to
actually conquer that and solve these
problems Brown I'm not at all mitigating
or saying that this is somehow okay just
just too because the scientific
materialists to the hill describing is
come too many desperation of a good set
of elements for life and the question
may be that we are trying to articulate
out of your work is how can how can each
one of us I said from your work but is
it from yarn about this transcending or
crossing the boundary of dance position
it seems to me that there's an element
of the cognitive you mentioned already
no question Justinian I'm just senior it
seems no Justin survived a major
epidemics in his attempt to crystallize
knowledge to make it scaler it's a
is for you the distinction between the
Anthropocene and climate change an
important one or do you think you rather
Qualis them of course she just laid it
out climate change is something that's
been happening forever it's always
changing and then there are these
punctuating moments where some new
living phenomenon can radically adjusted
the cyanobacteria that oxygenate you
know the oxygen flood then you know
radically did get murdered all the
creatures that relied on a low oxygen
environment died in the oxygen flood am
i right this is a horrible event I'm not
trying to say we're with some active God
I'm literally just trying to reframe us
as a living phenomenon that went
something like you know where we can
radically we are when we can change
material reality so quickly and
sometimes it's slightly controlled where
we'd slightly designate the rattle
reeking of material change and other
times it's simply an unintended
consequence ends of the the missing
ingredients is the power of designation
and there's like to me there's just a
few missing things that would allow us
to get in traction on it where we could
leave behind the idea that we're
actually not aware or morally you know
that we're not good enough to do this I
think it's so not true I think where
everyone is worried there just isn't the
thing with that guy can say I'm gonna
take granny's pension out of this oil
that's a dead end
disinvestment I need to be able to put
it in and that's the lack it's a lack of
imagination power to meet climate should
there Papa the catastrophe is a lack of
technical imagination power to create
the vehicles where we can put money in
this thing and it reeks good designated
matter and failure to harvest all the
errors of creativity and care that we
designate exactly specifically what it
is we're going to wreak
and that's the last go away I thank you
for the fantastic thoughts very
provoking just kind of maybe responding
some of the ideas and from from what
people have said today it feels almost
as if we're in a kind of unprecedented
time and I think that may be a useful
differentiation between perhaps climate
change in the Anthropocene and we we are
almost living on a new planet and like
historically iterative way of learning
and building knowledge can is no longer
really applicable and building on that I
mean we spoke a bit about how kind of
market processes and no longer viable I
was just wondering whether people people
had any thoughts on the role whether
there is any role in the kind of
financialization of the environment the
natural world and in on the on the topic
of kind of agency in on this whole issue
of the Anthropocene and the way in which
we're changing the world given all of
the kind of positive feedback loops that
can exist and the fact that we we cannot
know whether we are passed a tipping
point of the numerous different kind of
factors such as the the lack of kind of
so reflection of solar energy from the
ice caps from the kind of reducing
solubility of the oceans from there
warming the release of kind of methane
from the permafrost all of these
different factors
I was just wondering how we how we deal
with the fact that we that uncertainty
of whether we are past a tipping point
and whether all week whether all we can
do is just see it's like try and do what
we can or whether almost we just have to
almost
and a kind of deep adaptation way just
deal with the fact that we are maybe
beyond that and just have to kind of
manage what where we are and kind of go
through a collective mourning process
and kind of prepare we can sorry to be a
bit of a Down having to go so for I
think Tim Linton will talk about this
there are I don't think there is I think
the science would say or the scientific
leaders say there is no single tipping
point there are tipping points in
different depending on the strategy
you're looking at and or the territory
longitude latitude early altitude there
are lots of different ways where tipping
points will occur at different times and
I've guessed the challenge for us as
human actors who want to intervene in
anthropogenic climate change is to find
the ones that matter the most and try to
intervene in those in a meaningful way
at scale so I think that that's that is
a reason if not to be cheerful to be
engaged okay so I think that that's a
that's what it's just another way of
looking at it it's you know all the
tipping points will add up to a tipping
point but I think the reality is that
there are many and so it's you know
sometimes granularity helps prioritize
how we respond to things as individuals
for as you know at a cultural level yeah
Jesus you know love not lost I guess
it's the way I look at it and I felt
personally and I can only speak
personally grief is for me is a very
poor motivator when I have been grieving
I tend to find myself disempowered it
doesn't make it does it's akin to
depression for me
and not clinical depression but I guess
low mood and in the sense that if if
this is gonna require a collective sense
of higher mood choosing to embrace grief
in that regard it might be necessary but
it won't necessarily be productive so
just again personal decisions that we
have to make collectively about how we
engage the challenges their challenges
that we face but it's iterative right
these things you know
although the pace is rapid the sense of
decisions is cumulative and I guess
that's where I can watch use to engage
with it so I think that is actually a
term for it's called anticipatory grief
and it's being used a lot in terms of
climatic change and there's even like a
special word for the uncertainty that
you describe about where we're going
with climate change there are things
that we can pick up on that we have seen
before
so one of these being the light carbon
spike so when we approach what can
happen is the methane being released
from the permafrost and I think a couple
of weeks ago it's reported that there
were bubbles of methane coming up from
the deep end of us that were about
kilometers across like this serious
serious beasts
and so what happens that is open to when
you have a biological thing right it
ever actually takes in the lighter
carbon when it's building and so methane
is one of those things if you're
building a mineral exactly the same
thing is the case it will preferentially
take in the lighter carbon because it's
easier it's lighter it's less energy so
if you are building a load of methane
hydrates underneath the permafrost and
you are blocking it all in it's going to
be lighter so we can actually see that
the amount of light carbon in the
atmosphere is rising and we can see that
we are therefore on the trajectory that
we have observed - it's the conclusion
in the past we also know the parts per
million of carbon in the atmosphere I
think it reached 400 at the last kind of
extinction so there are things that we
are aware that we are currently in a
lifetime because the temperature of the
planet if it was in relation to the
amount of carbon ppm okay beyond 400
then we would not have ice our poles in
quite the same way that we do now so
we're we're aware that we're in a
lactone and there are things that
scientists know
and again it's you know we know it but
how would we tell people and how come
you make that make a difference I think
that way I just rephrasing critique is
impotent it's important but it is
impotent because you make a critique you
and in Occupy Wall Street but they were
there that everyone was there the Gulf
War and they were saying stop this and
the bankers had come up to my office
tell me what you want me to do with your
granny's pension and there was no answer
they cannot thus it is important the
minute you can say I want this you have
power and I think this is a real think
about how change evolution happens it's
it's not it's the editing and look it
happens one way there's eugenic editing
okay we kill the youth of this area okay
we said a meteorite killed wipes this
out but the real errors these little
proposals these propositions these
errors these changes in the script and I
think that is equivalent to proposition
and and the question is how finally and
how completely can we harvest errors
from humanity that we can we are the
error s we are the mutagenic function in
this garden near the garden what is the
gardener to well they have to go on they
have to eat that they cut the thing it's
wrong they did it below the leaf but
instead of on topic okay that's what we
are that's our free that's what we are
we must be doing these things and
proposition and that so another thing is
that the temp we we as humans take
templates for our operation if everyone
is starving and there's no food around
we become we adopt the template of being
cannibals and eat each other some of us
some of us would reject that to the end
but it's important that we we don't we
appraise the conditions realistically
and say we are so powerful and
able and it is actually empower yourself
as an architect as a thinker you are the
errors to us disaster cast proposition
about what could be what should be what
might be and
truly the lack think as a scientific
mitosis the lack of these inventions and
it's not necessary oh we don't have a
carbon spooler to stick in the back of
every card and make graphene ballistic
electrical cable and but you know but
these are exactly it's the lack of that
is the money we need to try this of
attraction that shows has two components
a physical structure like the city
that's a tower block is a trellis and
all those lifetimes grow up that just
but it's also the harvest of the error
we need a much finer harvest of error so
we're not clapping a huge down there
this but we're accumulating all the
arrows together and designation so these
two things that the money to matter
chemistry so that all the money the huge
amounts of money that are sitting in
Facebook's and ETF seen all these
fragile wasteful formations could easily
flow into a better one but it simply
does not exist yet so there's a lot of
into invention in these zones we have to
grip as it the creator as an error is it
group on the technical realities and the
sacred cows and I go there and bring
your error ISM the apocalypse there were
all cannibals you know we just don't
none of it Putin doesn't want it either
neither does the Mohammed bin Salman
trust that and then just just that is
the the production of proposal and that
is the only purpose here I just like as
if community of cells was dying that
well a few hairs of one thing and how
find the latter they're out they've
needed without that cook invention it's
the creation of these forms of the
accumulation of realism in these
physical structures is the latter out of
this threshold conditions to a new scale
of attraction and clarity about that
power and all these formality formality
it's of informal it's such a mess we
need formality
form because all the good things get
washed away in the catastrophe and were
left with this hard and situation
where what was it how would you do well
a lot of informal conversations and
mores and and careful things that we did
not formalize and we need to build those
into the actual structures of economics
and we have to think about vernacular
not as in oh this is how we need to make
public these things with our forms so
the granny can't understand money and
make like boom they and all these I'm
not I'm sorry I'm still adjutant I'm
just like I spend a lot of time alone
you know talking we have so many skilled
people with knowledge and testing and
you know you can have a really
discussion about it it's um how do we
actually construct something that
doesn't exist with which we can use an
experienced team of professionals to
bring it to reality and I feel what you
say and yeah and I think that why can't
we work together
to bring this and I mean it's something
that I wish I could as an artist that I
had an answer right now like I hear that
frustration and I think that yeah I'm
frustrated I have all the answers I'm
just
[Music]
you know the answer it's not you just
wants me to be civilized and I'm a total
savage but I think at the same time like
within the table right there are so many
different characters and different
specialized skills and I think that is
the brilliance of the discipline
personally I'm really fascinated by this
idea for a call for a collective new
enthusiasm that you're bringing in in
this room which many would say it's the
most important room in architecture if
you because of everybody who's come here
and we are now discussing a sort of
reset sort of necessity to actually
maybe reevaluate all of that enthusiasm
because it has led to the 30 trillion
tons of stuff of the Technosphere so the
discussion is not one of where the two
thousand needs to lead to a new
expansion of you stuff being made but a
reevaluation of maybe the beauty of what
we are doing
look at this room it has a full ceiling
it pretends to be decorated but it's not
really it was a metal beam across there
this door is put in in the immediate
aftermath of Second World War we have so
plastic draped there there's a
particular notion of the material
structures of architecture which i think
is important in such a discussion and
rather than thinking the scale are
conditioners the next scale will be even
bigger or even more of planetary
governance what I think is an
interesting condition here that you're
highlighting Hilary's one of
consciousness conscious or unconscious
consciousness but I'm interested in that
condition of the Technosphere because it
seems to me that what is driving it on
the contrary is really the unconscious
it's really the condition of what we
call the infrastructural unconscious
where instead of reaching out to friends
with a road instead of and we know the
protocols of having to build and
maintain a road in the enthusiasm was to
reach out and difference so I'm
interesting this duality of the
discussion because on one side we need
to reach out and we need to be
enthusiastic about solutions and we need
to reorganize qualities around
conditions but at the same time that
enthusiasm is facing out the faculty
haters thirty trillion tons of stuff and
it's it's like this it's not crazy
leaving behind there's not a tree
leaving behind an amazing civilization
we're leaving behind stud walls with
aluminium partitions in them and painted
over 30 times its cables there that I've
never been taken out since getting
together making something new as if we
will be discovering a new land but the
land that we have is so different and
the formation today was really I think
an important one because it has to be
the revaluation of models you know just
junk and intensity manche process you
keep it onto some elements you're
evaluating entire idea of it's not
checking it out it's a readjustment a
recalibration I mean pretty interesting
the multiple recalibration to see
whether the enthusiasm that you're
advocating for I'm interesting how that
is a real value Asian and I think that
the initial call that started the series
was one of reevaluating the impetus of
an institutional addition to
foods for modern architecture at the
moment of environmental crisis the fact
that the students really started this
initiative we have to rethink what we're
doing it's not a notion of importance on
the contrary there's unknowns
intelligence and all creativity in the
question for Arsenal in this same
territory agencies how do we start
asking questions that can bridge that
can bring a young sedimentology is
discussing with them as cap turned
terrorist with an activist with a member
of the most obscure bureaucratic
institution you can imagine introducing
working with
- that opened this is really what we
want to do here and I wanted to say one
last
element before I really would like you
to enjoy all of us here and that is that
we would like to dedicate the evening to
the memory of a very enthusiastic person
that as tragically died recently our
student our FSMA and i wanted to say and
this because many of us have been
working with rafael and we're still much
touch to this come over at the table and
join us in celebrating her enthusiasm as
well as the enthusiasm of the people
around this wonderful white table and
also joining me now in thanking amazing
panels of Decision Kathleen Russ so
Charlie chronic obsession and of course
the answer a series that
[Applause]
you
