um the the series itself brings together
leading voices from our graduates our
graduate program directors and of course
experts from related disciplines and the
aim is to bring them together to discuss
their positions around a common topic so
tonight's position is recursive or the
cycles of change that shape the design
of spaces cities landscapes and as
you'll hear from the seven of them so
much more I'm just here to introduce
them very briefly and you can read much
more about them online but what we're
gonna do is basically have a short
statement by each of them to kick off
tonight's conversation and then after
that we'll ask them a few questions and
they'll ask each other some questions
and I hope all of you have questions
prepared so that we can all have a very
exciting discussion and following the
conversation there'll be drinks in the
South story room so please stick around
so to introduce tonight's speakers cm
Oceanus and Paula Kadima up co directors
of the sustainable environmental design
program which operates at the scale of
the individual building as well as the
urban block and aims to achieve zero
carbon by natural means
Madeline Kessler graduated from the AAA
in 2013 and she's a project architect at
haptic architects where she's working on
a smart city in Oslo as well as
strategies for us how the UK can engage
with Europe in a post brexit future
she's also one of the members of the
recently constituted young professionals
panel as part of the National
Infrastructure Commission Jim Coleman is
the director of Oxford policy policy
management's global urban portfolio and
as a trained economist his work
addresses rapid urbanization and
population growth particularly in low
and middle income countries and how does
impacts the sustainable planning and
design of cities Edmund fouls is the
co-director of the practice field and
Fowles architect and graduated with
honors from the AAA in 2009 for his
thesis on food urbanism he's currently
working on a new food production campus
for Charlie Wickham's educational and
office facilities for the Ernest cook
trust and several other projects in
collaboration
with local communities Lawrence Barth
and George fury run the housing and
openness and graduate program at the AAA
which investigates the complexities of
urban transformation across different
scales with London as their laboratory
so without any further ado please join
me in welcoming tonight's speaker my men
to start okay my position this evening
it's quite mundane in our program at
their Graduate School a sustainable
environmental design the Masters of
Science and Master of Architecture we we
look at cycles that are natural and we
study those and we look at the
interaction that this circle have with
human activity and we study ways in
which we understand this interaction and
ways in which we can perhaps modify them
in order to achieve better environmental
conditions for inhabitants of buildings
and citizens of cities we deal with
concepts processes and tools that allow
us to predict and the ability to predict
and therefore potentially to modify
becomes quite important can have the
next place under normal conditions the
the outdoor can offer a pleasant
environment for human activity which I
mean I'm hesitating to say that which
does not necessarily need any
architectural
intervention and and and we realize that
we have the capacity to modify the
amplitudes of these cycles in in ways
which in the short term makes them
predictable next type is morphology is a
climate modified so great climate
modifier in combination with geography
weather and architecture it creates
micro climates in cities that are both
much more complex than the regional
climate around the city and much more
unpredictable or much less predictable
and this is one of the problems that we
have to deal with next slide please
this slide which I have found
fascinating and I would try to describe
to you very briefly it shows temperature
measurements that were taken on one
single week in January 1999 in four
spaces of the building that you don't
need to see the image of what you what
you can see is the results of these
measurements is a measured temperatures
the outdoor air temperature fluctuated
between minus three and ten degrees
centigrade yet the bedroom kitchen
bathroom temperatures in the house
remained very stable around 16 to 18
degrees centigrade you can see the lines
the reddish line in the same period the
temperature inside the dwellings large
attached conservatory which is shown in
yellow fluctuated between six and twenty
nine degrees centigrade
remember were in fall winter in a cold
winter so it's a great lesson on how
architecture can change the climate by
chance and dork by design so here with
the one space which appears to become
too hot and and others which appeared to
become quite stable at temperatures
which are relatively low but tolerable
so people can survive in those
temperatures and in fact adapt to those
so we find that we can create adaptation
acceptable conditions in a space with
the outdoor climate
opposing quite a challenge and at the
same time not just that but with huge
fluctuations we can create overheating
and what does that is the fact that the
solar radiation is coming into the
conservatory again I'm not showing you
the conservatory to see the effect of
the solar radiation you see that on the
first and fourth and six and seven
states the fluctuation is very high with
significant suggests that the solar
radiation is very strong I
there were the sunny days whereas day
number two three and five the
temperature drops close to the outdoor
so we have a great lesson there about
the fact that such things can happen and
in fact we start to think about what it
is that makes them happen and perhaps
how it is that we could modify the
conditions to our lurking have next
slide please
and to my final slide which is meant to
illustrate what I call here it tarah t'v
attunement that is the use of dynamic
thermal simulation to predict situations
and to bring them to levels that we
desire and this is quite possible in
most climates today so that in fact we
can dispose of mechanical heating and
cooling and the chief comfort conditions
by design thank you hi in addition to
what you must just said can you show
maybe first no thank you
another way of recursive approach to
help in our design is to look back to
history into the past and we use very
often adolescence from traditional
architecture to get inspired from some
elements which have worked in responding
well to the climate and we try to use
those elements to and adapt them to
today's technologies today's new new
life of new styles of life and and try
to integrate them in our new design so
this is another way of recursive design
[Music]
this other way of recursive approach and
well this image I I decided to bring it
here twofold two reasons one first that
it's recursive to the hokusai a drawing
from so this is this is the photograph
of jeff wall taken in in 93
but it's recursive to the Hokusai
painting from hundred and sixty years
before called a sudden gust of wind and
the second reason i brought it here it's
because it's an image of an open lens
and I think it illustrates quite well
some of the resources we have and here I
use the recursive 'no sin the sense of
from the latin word rico harris so to
take and to take advantage of or to make
use of what the local environment has
there to give us it can be wind it can
be water it can be landscape local
materials or the sky i mean there is no
sun but this is also typical here in
london
we have over seventy percent of the days
that are overcast or partly partly
overcast so the sky can also make a lot
of uses on the resources to integrate
and to help in in in adding additional
energy that we may need for for for
running our buildings well this is just
another image which you know i just adds
to what Seema said so we use a lot of
one of the approach is to use recursive
functions in our simulations to test the
cycles of season it can be yearly
seasons they can be weekly seasons or
daily seasons but also cycles of
occupancy an occupancy during the day
which can be different from another day
or a week on the weekend occupy
different buildings differently so we we
test and with we fine-tune our design
with the help of these consecutive
simulations that's all I have to say
and say thank you for having me here um
and that was really interesting and I've
looked at recursive from sort of more of
an urban point of view and I think it's
a really exciting title because when you
think about successful cities for years
they the successful cities have been the
ones that sort of continue to evolve and
change and adapt but often they're do
they're sort of changing due to these
repeated problems and it's almost like
we have this repeating cycle of problems
that cities have to continually address
over the generations so for example
housing housings always been a problem
in cities in the industrial revolution
you had like a mass migration of people
creating a need for housing after World
War Two where the city was sort of
demolished after the Blitz you had a
massive need for housing right now we've
got like another mass need for housing
so it's almost like we know that in the
future there will still be some kind of
need for housing whether that's about
redefining the kind of way we're living
or there's not enough housing that will
always be a problem and you can also
look at that in terms of infrastructure
or transport or sewage like there are
certain problems which sort of
recursively always occur and I think
it's really interesting to think about
recursive in terms of these problems
that we know are going to occur but
we're just not quite sure how we're
going to address them in the future and
that's especially interesting when sort
of looking at the smart city which is
something that I've been looking at over
the past year or so and I find smart
cities really interesting because it's
an incredibly unpopular term and when
you say smart city people sort of switch
off they think of some really anonymous
kind of dystopian futuristic city which
is really cold it's kind of got this
it's kind of synonymous with political
jargon or an expensive marketing ploy
rather than any meaningful urban
advancement but actually a smart city at
the core of it it's just a successful
city that's integrating physical digital
and human interaction in the built
environments to deliver a sustainable
and livable city and essentially we're
all we're all already living in smart
cities and so
this image here that I'm showing is it
on the left is kind of what people think
of smart says yes but on the right is
actually what a smart city is I mean
that's a picture from Sheffield's
there's an app called Sheffield good gym
which allows people to get together and
run to places around the city and do
bits of gardening for people or to help
tidy up the city and that's a
functioning smart city and I think
there's a sort of real problem that
people and there's kind of this
miscommunication between what a smart
city is that people think it is and what
it really should be and then also
thinking about cities in terms of scale
so I think over and over again we've
seen this problem of people designing
sort of really anonymous master plans
and not really considering the
streetscape and that's given new cities
a really bad name often and I think it's
really important that perhaps we take
this lesson and sort of sort of continue
to input it that it's really important
we're designing at different scales at
the same time and and then also the
importance of events and cities so I
think events are really important ways
to ensure that cities continue to evolve
and that they're constantly transforming
they provides a way to sort of testbed
different ways of using sites but also a
place for people to meet and gather and
that very sort of human interaction
which I think again is often lost when
people are just designing from a very
big scale and then thinking about policy
which I think it's something which is
probably could affect the way that we're
living is one of the biggest things but
often people just switch off when they
think about policy and it's actually
something really important to get
engaged with so I'm pretty sure probably
none of you read the national
infrastructure assessment but it's super
relevant oh you did it's super relevance
what we doing there's some really
exciting ideas in there and it's all
about trying to get the government on
boards of supporting nodes and one of
these is actually developing these
principles for national infrastructure
design which is something which is is so
relevant and I think we should all be
engaging with more and I wonder if
perhaps we need to rethink how Paulo
he's communicated almost to get more
people involved and then finally when I
was at I I sort of did quite a lot of
research into what recursive actually
meant because beyond the sort of
mathematical term and that use of it I
hadn't really come across it that much
and I found it quite interesting that
when you google recursion is like a
little googling joke that did you mean
recursion and then it made me think that
actually the whole idea of debate and
sitting here in the lecture hall in this
kind of almost like a safe zone to
develop ideas and the importance of
debate within our society as a way that
we develop ideas and anything that
something really important that we
should sort of continue to do and look
back upon and a reflect upon oh yes
is that okay good evening everyone it's
a pleasure for me to be here at the
architectural Association it's my first
time here so thank you for the
invitation
so I'm going to talk about I guess one
thing that to me is recursive about
cities and that is the fact that most
cities in the world right now are
basically getting bigger not all of them
some cities are getting smaller cities
in Germany cities in Russia the reason
some other places are getting smaller
but most cities continue to get bigger
and this is a recursive thing people
move to cities because they are the
places where the economic opportunities
are the places where your income can be
higher where you can provide more for
your family or you can have a better
education a better way of living maybe
and this has always been the case with
cities people have always gone to cities
because they are the places of economic
activity and the places where you can be
economically more successful I think
there are a number of differences now
when we look at growing cities when we
look at urbanization across the world
and the first thing is really which
cities are getting bigger very quickly
in the past
it tended to be cities in the developed
world in Europe in North America then in
Asia cities which industrialized very
quickly but if you look into the future
if you look into the next 25 to 30 years
the cities which will grow very very
rapidly the most rapidly in percentage
terms are mainly cities in Africa that
is African cities which will get bigger
very quickly and some of these cities
are extremely poor cities their cities
with very challenged situations very
challenged conditions they are very very
poor infrastructure they have a terrible
housing they have lots of slums they
have political conflict issues all sorts
of things
but the growth is going to be
concentrated in the future in cities
which are not really equipped right now
to deal with very rapid population
growth they are poorly designed already
beyond their historic urban cores yet
they have to accommodate a lot of people
and this is a big challenge
it's a big challenge for those cities
for those countries and it's also a
challenge for the architecture
profession for the planning profession I
think how to deal with planning issues
planning these very rapidly changing
cities which have lots and lots of
challenges the second thing which is
different now in our era with city
growth city change is climate change now
we have to plan and design cities to be
resilient to shocks which are engendered
by changes to our climate this is not
something they worried about and the
Industrial Revolution of cities got
bigger and they had to plan and we had
to build houses as Madeline said but
they didn't worry about climate change
it wasn't a thing then it's a thing now
it's a big thing now you might have seen
headline today the top story in BBC news
website today
is a new report by the IPCC that we need
to have very radical changes to our
behavior if we're going to achieve any
kind of restriction to carbon emissions
and the actual extent of of temperature
rise which is caused by climate change
so climate change means we now have to
think about cities being resilient so
these rapidly changing cities in Africa
they're getting bigger very quickly and
somehow they have to accommodate more
people and become more resilient and
what does resilience mean for these
cities what does it mean for any City I
think Arbonne resilience at the moment
is still driven by the physical by
physical intervention but resilience is
not just about the physical it's about
the social it's about the cultural a lot
of cities are getting bigger but they're
not just getting bigger they're getting
younger and they're getting more diverse
a lot of cities in Africa they get
bigger because people are displaced from
another place maybe by conflict those
people are culturally different they're
ethnically different yet they're all
bundled together
in a city with very poor infrastructure
with inadequate housing so there's a lot
of things to think about there
the third thing which is different but
it's the same but different in terms of
city change urbanization city growth is
around technology now this is a
recursive thing because technology has
always driven people in to cities in the
Industrial Revolution people went to
cities because that's where the
technology was you could be more
productive if you worked in the textiles
or the government industry in a city
because that's where the mechanisms were
that made you more productive if you are
more productive your income is likely to
be higher one of the key theories in
economics for anyone who studied
economics there's a direct link between
productivity and income your income can
only really go up if you become more
productive societies are more productive
generally incomes on average go up
that's what drove people in the
Industrial Revolution into cities
technology is again changing how people
work how we work how we balance our work
our lives have we balanced different
ways of making income but the difference
now is that that technology is changing
the types of jobs which are available in
an expanding urban economy they're
creating some new jobs some very high
value high skill knowledge intensive
jobs but they're taking away other jobs
jobs which are maybe about basic forms
of production basic forms of service in
some of these rapidly growing cities
where the challenge is to get people
into the labor market into formal
employment of any basic type maybe
technology is removing some of those
jobs and therefore removing the
opportunity for very large numbers of
young people in low-income cities to get
into jobs in the first place the problem
with technology is we do not know where
it's going to end up we do not know what
automation and artificial intelligence
will do to the jobs that we do you're
all a lot younger than me I think by
looking at you
and you don't know what job you'll be
doing in ten years twenty years thirty
years time that job doesn't exist yet
it hasn't been invented someone hasn't
developed the app or the algorithm
that's going to yield your form of
employment in twenty years time we don't
know it's very difficult to predict it's
difficult to predict in this city of
London one of the world's most
prosperous cities one of the world's
most organized cities it's extremely
difficult in some African cities some
Asian cities which have more and more
challenges it's great to be sitting in
front of her an audience of young
architects and planners because these
are problems that you guys will have to
deal with now if you spend your time
doing large-scale urban development in
practice in private practice in the UK
odds on you will probably end up doing a
project somewhere in a rich country like
a Gulf state because in these countries
they have finance they have funding they
can fund urban extensions they can fund
newly planned developments they can fund
new cities but in other parts of the
world they can't do this so how can you
bring your skills deploy your skills in
some of these places which will change
very rapidly where the populations will
grow they become more diverse they need
to be housed they need to have access to
jobs that we don't really understand yet
how does that happen
how do you do that
so while waiting for that how many of
you are students in the room okay that's
a good show mostly students I was once a
student here too
misses me on the top left here I'm
standing in that corner just over there
giving my final presentation and the
reason I ask you all about you know how
many of you are studying here now is
sort of to think about what are you what
are you kind of pouring your time into
you know what interests you at this
point because what struck me when I
began thinking about recursive is those
ideas that you are kind of drawn to as a
student you know your your points of
life now often come full circle often
kind of stay with you those interests to
kind of sometimes doorman but will kind
of bubble away and find their way into
projects that you will do in the future
so I'd like the idea of kind of
recursive in the sense of kind of
education my project here at the AAA was
in my final year studying and Carlos
here had it fantastic couple of years of
him was about food urbanism I was very
interested in food production systems
both from the large-scale production and
bringing it into cities but down to
their kind of the human interaction you
know how we kind of interface with food
in the cities and eight years later we
ended up doing a building for Charlie
Biggums who are kind of food production
company they make ready meals and we
designed this production factory for him
in Somerset so it sort of interesting
those themes follow you around and and
work can emerge or themes of work can
emerge from your kind of interests as a
student and stay with you sticking with
the same projects their ideas I think
about recursive architecture which
relate to typology the site that this
building was built was actually an
aggregate score II so it was a site a
brownfield site that was well-suited to
industry and so that idea of kind of the
of land use I think is very
testing and the kind of recurring uses
of land and also this idea that you
might borrow typology z' you know
although it's an aggregate score II that
typology was fitting for a food
production building as well some of the
structural systems were similar so
there's this sort of recurrence in that
looking back and really kind of aid you
and assist you in the design process
that kind of leads very closely to
looking at kind of vernaculars and rule
of necklace this house on the right was
our first projects it was a project that
we were designing and making during our
during our time studying here at the AAA
not an AAA project I should know but a
project on the side much to Carlos is
this grace that we were very interested
in making a house making a house in
Wales in a rural location we weren't
going to start from scratch because it
had been done hundreds of thousands of
times before a house on a hillside there
are certain ways that you would place a
building there are certain kind of forms
there merge over history years and years
of craftsmen making buildings sitting
the building into the hillside embedding
it so that the north prevailing winds a
sheltered it opens up to the south to
harness solar passive solar gain so
there are all those sort of clues that
you can get I think it was it brought up
earlier that that are brought to bear on
buildings and I think as you as you kind
of develop designs for buildings and as
you kind of experience spaces and
experience the city there's an idea here
about kind of memory I suppose and a
space that I visited maybe ten years ago
which was the drawing studio at the
Royal Academy had a very distinct memory
of this north facing window which later
found its way into our own studio
building which we made a couple of years
ago that's both an environmental idea
but it's also a spatial idea it's also a
memory and I think these memories of
spaces that you experience kind of
collectively and will
they with you over time and may kind of
come back to you as you prepare the
paper and you you design so I think
that's also interesting kind of
recursive and then finally this pair of
buildings on the left is a building we
made a couple of years ago in Waterloo
which is a city farm it comes back to
that first theme about food urbanism
this interesting kind of how we use the
land in the city can food become more
sociable can we use food to generate
kind of discussion about food production
can we use it to educate children and so
on so this site has been a kind of test
bed for us to kind of explore a theme
that began here at the AAA and has now
become kind of a testbed here in
Waterloo but there on this site it's
allowed us it's enabled us to make three
buildings each of the matumbo frames
each of them has a set of iterative kind
of recursive theme of being a timber
frame and stepping up in its refinement
let's say as we've learned more about
the way that you make timber buildings
so it started with a pig shared
essentially the second building was our
studio the third is this barn but we're
now working on a building for Cambridge
University which is a dining hall again
food-related what's interesting is that
kind of kind of recursive theme of
making buildings of making timber frame
buildings has found its way through all
those projects and into this Cambridge
dining hall so I think coming back to
that question of kind of all that points
about kind of education being a kind of
recursive process I think it's really
important to kind of choose carefully
what you study here because you never
know what might come of it in a few
years time
actually Medellin you can just leave it
on the loop because the I think you'll
all recognize the the images they it's
Greenwich Village and you know of course
Greenwich Village has appeared over and
over and over again in the in the kind
of pantheon of places that one should
learn from so there was a there was an
argument of course between Jane Jacobson
and Lewis Mumford about how one should
learn from what happens over and over
and over again in Greenwich Village and
and in a way the problem for the two of
them is that it's an unresolvable debate
of Jane Jacobs says that you know we
should learn from the fact that there
are these really nice small blocks there
and it's so our blocks ought to be small
and and Mumford says yeah these small
blocks are nice but so are a lot of
places with big blocks and the the the
point is that when we look at it at
different scales we realize that the the
question is perhaps not a does not
deliver a determinate answer it becomes
a matter of argument and choice and it
becomes a matter of making associational
based decisions now this is this is
where I think the the recursive becomes
interesting for the urban condition
because one of one of the things that
we've been hearing is that we recognize
that cities are based on a recurring
pattern a recurring process a recurring
series of forces which are uncertain and
unpredictable we might say when what is
most fundamental to the idea of the
recursive is its incompleteness so
originally formulated in gödel is the
fact that we will never under we will
never see the complete system and it's
for this very reason that determinate
kinds of equations are unsuited to many
of the things that we need to fully
understand about the city so in some
ways it was actually social scientists
who
kind of recognized this so so Max Weber
you know defined the city as something
that was in a way the the kind of
crucible of permanent revolution and
Weber looked at the question of the city
and its relationship to revolution from
the point of view that only here do we
develop the kinds of associational
practices that allow us to deal with
this problem of continual change under
conditions of certain uncertainty in
fact change that we ourselves create and
I think George is going to talk about
this a little bit more as we as we try
to sum up but these changes that we
create generate in fact what Jim is
described as shocks in the system and a
lot of what has been going on in
recursive arguments in or arguments in
favor of recursive functions in
economics have to do with the fact that
we continually have to deal with shocks
to what we thought were relatively well
understood systems and once we recognize
that shocks occur in fact disrupt this
in many of the the state of our
decision-making and the components that
that have relationships with in a
particular state as soon as we recognize
that then our computational mode by
which we approach these kinds of
problems needs to go through both a
shift in terms of how we prioritize and
understand the set but it also has to
undergo a shift in the mathematics in
the computation that we use to to try to
define the function that will will
characterize our choices in the future
now there are several things that our
colleagues have said that I think are
really quite important to this seem us
began by pointing out you see his first
word says where this is going to be
mundane and in fact this is actually one
of the most important aspects of the way
in which economists tend to look at the
recursive function
because what we're really trying to do
is to understand very big picture kinds
of processes but we do it on the basis
of micro foundations where we actually
try to experiment with the way in which
things differ from one place to another
or different kinds of outcomes are
produced through recursive iteration of
what seemed to be relatively similar
processes so when we're looking at
cities like this we can see that a
tremendous variety of different outcomes
occur from a process that seems
relatively simply it iterative the
closer we investigate these iterations
the more we realize that the
accumulations are never linear or simple
but they produce dramatic breaks in the
system now it's it's for these reasons
then that we might also gain some other
kinds of knowledge from the social
sciences and and the social sciences
look at one of the fundamental solutions
to the problems of uncertainty are
rooted back in an understanding of the
ethics and the politics of an
associational life this is why Weber
looked at the city as such a in a sense
promising set of institutions so the I
think that there's a kind of strange
correspondence if you will between the
the way in which we might look at the
city as a social scientist ocean
scientists and others interested in
computation might see patterns and
States and variables that can be
described in vectors I think one of the
things that the position I would take is
that we need much greater conversation
around the relationship between the cult
of the qualities that we're talking
about and the the efforts to try to to
establish computational vectors for
characterizing possible changes thank
you
I don't know if I'm going to be
addressing what Larry said I was going
to address let's change our mind about
who is going things that never I was
thinking general comment and I would
like to start perhaps with two very
depressing news when Jim made reference
to before that appear in the media today
mm-hmm perhaps just as a note of caution
in relation to some of the things that
the discussion or recursive raises when
is the report of the UN today on climate
change it makes a very bleak reading
indeed but perhaps the most frustrating
thing is to see that what is being
suggested what needs doing and Jim again
made reference to some of those things
are things that scientists have agreed
for over 20 years and so I think one
should ask ourselves why time and time
again things that in some respects could
be predicted and some of the responses
from a purely scientific technological
point of view we're available we're
clear and nevertheless we are far from
it no stretch of the imagination can say
that we have moved along those lines and
I think this challenge is a great zero
discretion of no prediction and an
action in relation to those predictions
the second perhaps even more painful for
me and for a good part of my compatriots
know you might know that yesterday there
was an election in Brazil for president
of Brazil in which surprisely
and in many ways and predictably almost
50% of the population vote for a self
declare extreme right fascist and these
a few weeks ago seemed absolutely emboss
and we might say here we go again
the Brack said the tramps etc etc but
the fact of the matter is that I was
reading this morning an interpretation
that makes reference to Steve Bannon and
the Cambridge an elite seeker and they
knew actually recursive informational
loops and systems used to manipulate
minds but I don't think that explains at
all the depth of the transformations the
nature the unprecedent nature of the
challenges we are facing which in many
ways challenge our analytical categories
our no prediction models and in some
ways perhaps what we need is to really
think afresh in ways that far extend
beyond questions of repetition and
recursion no processes that really
challenge the conditions of laboratories
know the question of climate change
again to try to understand why we seem
to remain quite paralyzed in dealing
with that it has to do with factors that
far exceed those predictions and the the
the technological models to deal with
those situations so my general comment
is now if we think if we understand
recursion as many authors argue that
recursion basically occurs where a
thought to a procedure is defined in its
own terms
and they're repeated in a
self-referential self-generative loop
that keeps adding complexity now is this
idea of a process that adds continuously
complex it's him we can think perhaps
know just as
as as a way of looking at it as cities
being absolutely the epicenter of
perhaps the recursion of all recursions
know which nevertheless is interpreted
in very many very different ways and
with very different consequences in
terms of action in terms of work in the
field of city making architecture
urbanism etcetera
perhaps we can think of modernity as a
long history self referential recursive
history ok at the core of which lies a
processes that is compulsively recursive
which is that of accumulation of capital
now there is quite a lot of writings
about how recursive that logic is you
might be familiar or not with marks
formula of capitalist accumulation being
essentially a recursive process and an
endless recursive process okay and a
process that goes to crisis but each
crisis in the issue of capitalism the
way forward has been escaping forward
intensifying the logic of the recursion
and at the center of that of cities this
is a part of this recursive loop of
modernity accumulation urbanization now
they had front a kind of modernization
discourse is seen as almost limitless
virtuous recursive process in the
process of construction of progress
another reading nevertheless that could
lead to a very different in not just
interpretation but at very different set
of actions could be encapsulated for
instance in a concept that many of you
are familiar of the Anthropocene
introduced by by Paul Crutzen
at the beginning of the 2000s as a new
epoch in which humankind becomes a
biophysical force and the driver in the
process of transformation of nature and
the planet and the perspective of the
Anthropocene is a thesis that is shared
by most scientists and philosophers this
day there is perhaps a difference of
opinion of what that means though a
group of that are often referred to as
eco modernists argue that in fact is an
epoch full of opportunities where modern
technology and modern science can help
to address the problems generated by the
introducing in terms of destruction of
the of nature and the depletion of
nature and and the planet but most
scientists and philosophers today have a
very pessimistic reading of that and
find that in fact is exactly this kind
of compulsive recursive self generating
process of modernization accumulation
urbanization that's at the root of the
problems we face today and that in fact
we are approaching more and more the
edge of a precipice that leads not to
crises because they believe that we are
in crisis leads to a mutation a point of
no return no sort of no escape and no
redemption kind of situation is a very
different reading okay and I'm present
it is in very general terms but I think
if we think of cities as being at the
center of that disjunction then they're
too many ways frames our professional
and an academic practice and out Lee now
and the question then I think becomes
the challenge is to try to see how do
you understand exactly the nature of
those recursions know from virtuous to
quite destructive and how do we act upon
that and perhaps in fact I think there
is
of mileage in the idea that the concept
of recursive and recursions can be quite
useful in that analysis in understanding
the nature and consequences of the
current recursions but also using the
recursive as mainly in the literature
suggest as a tool of analysis as a tool
of experimentation and some of the
things that you're suggesting here point
in that indian direction as a tool to
try to identify possible alternative
self-generating self-propelling process
and loops know that can be virtuous and
can open at alternatives in between
those two extremes of ways of
understanding the recursive nature of
modernization capitalist accumulation
okay so I stop there and I put that for
neo for our discussion and see how we
can look at those issues thank you all
very much for your statements
I guess following on from George's
position I wanted to see how you some
more pessimism given the precipice that
we might be approaching
yeah office try to be optimistic I think
one of the things that I am took away
from George and Lawrence's and the words
here I think one of the things that
underpins the the recursive 'no sub
cities and the extent to which they can
and cannot achieve what they want to
achieve is really the politics of the
city sometimes it's not the politics of
the city it's the politics of the
country as you rightly pointed out and
politics is also recursive in democratic
countries it runs on four and five year
cycles and rarely sees beyond that and
every four or five years politicians
reinvent things they don't like the
things that previous guys did so they
invent their own version of the same
thing and I think there's a constant
struggle for cities yeah the actors in
cities rather their political or
non-political to try and get beyond the
cyclic or nature this this particular
recursion is not helpful when you have
to deal with big problems and there's a
constant the cities are always trying to
become more autonomous either either
explicitly or implicitly either
politically or non politically and
they're in a constant tussle I think
with national government because
governments don't want their cities to
be too powerful because then that's a
threat to the national government yes
cities are getting generally getting
bigger and therefore as contributors to
the national wealth they're getting
bigger they're more and more important
but national governments don't want to
give them too much autonomy it's this is
the case in London for example the Mayor
of London complains continually he
doesn't have any he doesn't have enough
fiscal autonomy he can't raise taxes but
the national government of the UK is
never going to let the Mayor of London
raise taxes because they want all the
taxation from London to pay for
everything else in the country
so the Mayor of London is never going to
get that but I think this does this
constant political cyclic Ulrich
that also interferes with our ability in
cities to try and to try and achieve
things and I think I think you should
always be optimistic but I think you
need to be realistic about how far their
political and the organizational
structure or cities gets in the way of
our attempts to change the physical
nature of cities or to improve the
physical nature of cities the next talk
in the series is on this topic of
autonomous so it's like I planned
I couldn't planned it better myself but
I'm George please know what was gonna
say I agree with dream it's is obviously
it's about finding you know in an
optimistic way finding ways of
generating kind of scaling up quite
virtuous positive optimistic ways and
alternatives to those extremes know that
we were talking about us encapsulated in
the concept of the Anthropocene for
instance but I think you touch on the
crucial questions perhaps the most
important one which is the politics of
all that and how difficult it becomes to
actually model and and control those
variables politics is an absolutely
essential part of the recursions but
make it much much more unpredictable and
the literature in fact very interesting
on recursive governance and recursive
systems of political communication point
exactly to that how unpredictable the
whole process becomes and so that's I
think that's the challenge we are
talking about recursions and the concept
of recursive is used very much by exact
Sciences mathematics the computer
sciences logics linguistics etc etc but
often in a much more loose way in social
sciences but referring to processes that
far exceed those that we can control
technically that's why I referred to
this they were going beyond the logic of
the laboratory and how to understand the
nature of the recursions we are
certain engaged with and how to find
alternative hope to be sick way
obviously and it is very difficult it is
very difficult and becomes quite
unpredictable that's why I was starting
with this thing of what happened in
Brazil but we could say the same happen
here it happened in an area it was
completely unpredictable and it is
nevertheless a reflection I think of
totally unprecedented things that
processes that I have extreme complexes
that cannot purely be explained by
recursive informational systems for
instance there is something much much
deeper and the resurgence of nationalism
the return of no fascist is just a
repetition of what happened in the mid
twentieth century that's where the
complexity lies is a much more complex
combination and to equate with a
fascist president of Brazil it has
nothing to do because trap is associated
with a political economy with an
economic strategy and economic policies
that are exactly the opposite of what
the fascists in Brazil present so what a
surface appears as just a repetition and
predictable repetition of something of
these researchers of a national is but
is an extreme extreme neoliberalism and
result of fascist relational is in
schools so the complex is such that I
went to sometimes if the recursive as a
tool of analysis and experimentation
really proves to be an useful tool
that's why I started with those very
pessimistic news because they think I
think they call for something that's
outside the box that really is is
breaking away from categories of
analysis and professional practices that
have been in extra blue shaped by the
logic of modernity and discourses about
modernity development growth
accumulation etc central ok and perhaps
we are facing something that is much
newer than what we knew before
I guess that brings me to the kind of
question of scale I think based on the
different presentations I think each of
you have brought up all of these
different complexities when dealing with
the city from activating a streetscape
to designing buildings around kind of
production and communities to climates
to politics to patterns of resilience
and growth so I was just wondering what
matter you raise the question in your
presentation of how we can change policy
or how people more people can be
included around that table but I was
wondering is if as a group you could
debate what are the strategies to
actually take on this this very complex
and kind of recursive problem especially
when so many of these factors are
unknown or changing or impossible to
predict and I was just since we have all
of you here so there's probably not one
right answer but I think thinking of
ways to tackle something that's as vast
I mean you brought in the Anthropocene
that's like even beyond the scale of the
city that's looking at a geological era
in time I think I mean I think in my
experience like policy can also be
really problematic and that's almost why
I brought it in for recursive because it
takes so long to get implemented that
often it's almost outdated by the time
it is implemented and you have to go
back and rethink it and there's
certainly things I think we could be
starting to think about now that we know
will be problems in the future like we
know pretty much for certainty that
autonomous vehicles will probably be the
way things go and then there'll be a big
problem what do you do the parking
spaces of today and and things like that
and like we're not really considering
them now in policy instead we just
consider exactly what's in front of us
and I suppose that's why I wanted to
bring it in because I think policy
really yeah like you say like it really
affects so much
about why she happens in the city oh
it's just thinking about your previous
comment with recursive it's almost like
we need to rationalize things that are
happening and maybe recursive allows us
to do that in order to sort of take in
what's going on with these cycles of
change even if it perhaps isn't exactly
the right term or what's going on and
yeah it just sort of made me think I
wonder how it is that we can always take
in what's happening in the world it's
really you you began by asking the
question of scale and part of part of
the reason why I included the scalar
differences in the slides was to point
up that problem in a sense if we come
back to this sort of Jane Jacobs game in
a sense it starts with the proposition
neighborhoods ought to matter
they ought to matter in a way to
questions of livability smartness
comfort you know a range of goals
everybody's been talking about things
that are kind of goal driven and then
there's a sense that we ought to try to
aim for these and that there might be a
policy or a kind of technology to that
what I find really interesting about the
recursive formulation of things is that
it is is defined precisely by its
opposition to something that is
determinate in fact the way that
recursive functions are characterized is
as creating a field of choices where and
we may not be certain about the outcomes
of the choices because of the
incompleteness and uncertainty that
rules and so it's a stochastic
environment where we make we make sort
of decisions on the basis of probability
knowing that all of our predictions will
be wrong right now it's in that if we
know that in a sense
that what we are trying to do is learn
in spite of the fact that all of our
determinant predictions will be wrong
then it comes back to the question of on
what basis do we flexibly learn and and
what are the what's the nature of the
associational patterns that allow us to
learn now to me I think what we suffer
from a lot of the time is that a lot of
our policymaking is based on the notion
that we ought to have we ought to be
living in an environment of determinate
functions and so when you know even
today even though it's quite palpably
untrue that smaller blocks are always
better you know we continue to try to
generate policies that would uphold Jane
Jacobs version of things rather than
looking for Mumford's more
intellectually curious understanding of
the nature of the problems that we
should be looking for and so I think
this is one of the big challenges we
have is to change our point of view
about what should drive policy and what
should drive learning I think often it's
very disjointed as well and it's not
really enough conversation happening
between spectrum of people say I need
the National Infrastructure
Commissioner now they're doing a report
on planning infrastructure with housing
because no one's ever looked into that
before even it's really crucial that
they are actually plans together and I
think perhaps that's something that we
need to do more of is opening up and
broadening the conversations between
different disciplines but I think to use
again the example of Greenwich Village
now I think the problem of scale and
scaling up and articulating the multiple
scales of the seeds the city region and
central
is exactly that when always search for
this simple repetitive way of
replicating quantitatively there were
certain logic which is often associated
with a certain recursion when in fact
the fundamental challenge to ask a lab
is the change not quantitatively but
qualitatively of the city which by
definition involves a multiplicity of
systems operating with multiplicity of
dimensions articulating multiple scales
where when it's dealing by definition
with multiple recursions now how to
understand from within the moment at the
context which are they and how do you
articulate those things this is the big
challenge I think you know and in terms
of teaching and working with students on
that and how to identify those different
logics and how to articulate those
different processes multi-dimensional
multi-sectorial mouches Scala is very
difficult but I would add in in in
relation to that another very
interesting challenge for the spatial
disciplines and design disciplines is
how to invade the logic of those
processes not just by using other
disciplines and topology sociology
economics but can we use this line
itself as a tool of analysis that helps
us to understand what are the recursive
processes in operation energy system and
understanding how can you articulate
those process to gain a scale now so
scaling up and mouses culeros becomes
absolutely connected but there is no
possibility of doing there to purely by
replicating one particular recursion
even if that could be an interest in
recursion but the moment you try to
reach the scale of the seated loss
meaning no repeating Greenwich Village
it's going to lead nowhere to a
nightmare
and something I think the discussion of
scale is partly around adaptability I
think and that occurs on different
levels and is scaled to different levels
so there's the adaptability of the city
as a system as an entity which is partly
about its physical nature its physical
ability to respond to shocks and to
changes but it's also about the
governance it's about the organizational
system it's about the the philosophies
and the ethics of the organizations that
help to run the city and how adaptable
they are cuz you're quite right nothing
is deterministic you need to be able to
adapt quickly to things if you're if you
base your models under the deterministic
outcome you will fail because it's not
real it changes but I think there's a
need to balance this this adaptable
capacity on the the part of the city
itself of author of the adaptability of
the citizens and our own adaptability as
people within the city to to adapt to
change that one of the challenges with
modern economic systems I'm an economist
I'm partly to blame you
is the industrialization of all sorts of
processes whether it's industries
themselves or whether it's the food
production process or whether it's the
the construction process things are
industrialized they depend on global
supply chains they depend on
just-in-time processes and if something
fails is somewhere away from you far far
away from your system is suddenly going
to break down because you don't know how
to to respond to that so there's a need
to think about how we as individual
citizens are able to adapt and Paula and
Edmund both talked about something which
I think is quite important when you
think about the construction of the city
and is really around a vernacular
architecture so in the past people built
houses or dwellings with whatever
material was around them and it was a
natural material so it responded to
their natural environment but now
everything is a industrialised and I was
involved in a very very big book about
molecular architecture and which is a
very interesting thing to look at for
an economic perspective but that is
something that is about the the
adaptability of buildings but it's also
about the people themselves of you if
you utilize vernacular approaches you
also have to develop a skills-based
locally an artisanal skills base is able
to physically adapt or physically build
process and it also means you can all
maybe literally rebuild your your
environment if it collapses for some
reason due to shock industrialized
processes possessed by some other entity
don't don't allow you to do that so I
think scaling is also about adaptability
and our the city's adaptability in our
own citizen centric adaptability and I
think you raised before that thing I
think becomes very very important for
instance sitting with the issues of
environment and the Anthropocene
etcetera that is the question of
resilience I know it's very much to do I
think with that kind of ability to adapt
in your presentation of how do we bring
design to the poorest cities that are
going to be growing over the next
decades when there's not necessarily the
funding to hire architects to or
planners to design them and I guess
maybe that could be tied into the
question that you've posed on the
vernacular and how can we impart empower
local communities to actually have the
skills to maybe do some of that design
themselves I don't know if paulo or ed
if you want to jump in to talk about how
your work in a different context could
be applied maybe elsewhere yeah I mean
very different contexts but I think
vernaculars a really valuable learning
tool I mean as a young architect not
qualified trying to grapple our way
through a project kind of looking to the
forms that preceded projects were was a
kind of useful starting point
and that kind of importance of the
availability of resources and of
materials I think is it's really central
to that I think how you translate that
though is really sort of challenging on
a bigger scale this idea of sort of
scaling up ideas that might be practice
Abul and a kind of one-to-one scale at a
singular scale is one thing but when
considering these sort of grand
questions I think it's very challenging
for architects oh my the points raised
earlier about kind of getting more
involved in policy oh really interesting
and I think quite often framing the
question carefully enough is is a really
important aspect of that so for example
the housing crisis it's called the
housing crisis in London is it really a
housing crisis or is it an economic
crisis like there are houses we know how
to build houses but the issue is that
they're not affordable so is that not a
kind of slightly different challenge and
our architects
I mean architects in the traditional
sense don't have the power necessarily
to intervene there I mean we can come up
with wonderful solutions for how to fit
more units of dwellings it's a small
amount of space but that's in a way not
solving the problem it's just sticking a
plaster on and people shouldn't be
living in houses that are less than 20
meters squared
you know and just add a few things about
traditional models it's true that we
have to have a start a starting point
and and tradition can be we can get
inspired by them but we have also to be
recreative we have to recreate them we
have been talking about processes and
about iterative recursive processes but
what is it that why then some things
don't go well is it that the our
equation we are doing something wrong on
the equation or is it
we are purely using just an intuitive
process which can go on and on and on
for loops or is it that we should
rethink our starting point and our model
our first model and then from then apply
this recursive process so I think also
it's important just after the discussion
what is our base case for continuing
these processes and sometimes you can
get inspiration in in tradition in
relation to their disinterest because
it's really the concept of the recursive
is interesting exactly because it's not
just an iteration it's not just a
repetition Society of the growing
complexity and the gradual
transformation in quality that starts
happening through recursion but I think
linking back to managers point about
about scale and replicability and
scaling up no I think assembly that with
Larry and in the work we do we have
discussed a lot particularly relation to
innovation environments innovation
classes etcetera and how to replicate
that how to plan that how can we design
for that now and fix that Larry knows
very well and has worked with by Niko's
Caminos has written a lot on innovation
and cities what is interesting is that
he says that those processes of
innovation those virtuous recursive
processes happen in ways that often are
totally unplanned and predictable in a
very and he argues that in fact when
when when we unveil the nature of those
recursions it is already too late to try
to
yeah so that has this two more complexes
there's not just two unveils it and then
you repeat that it's exactly that the
complex the multi their new dimension of
those process everything that's
happening quite a kawatte sickly and
unpredictable manner and when you
understand what actually happened it's
too late to repeat so it makes even more
difficult question of the scaling up
through simple replication I just wanted
to take this opportunity to open it up
to the audience if you have any
questions just raise your hand I'll
bring you the microphone a comment
really on of the way George Villiers
phrase things I think that he is
interesting that you have that
conviction that the city is way but in
earlier discussions the word architect
seemed to me very odd its consequences
without the word architecture and you
seem to be very convinced that cities
should be part of that equation I wonder
whether they are or not I like very much
when you said that we probably need a
new way of assessing and I think it
really raises some questions because I
think the fears that you've expressed as
well are we that relevant in terms of
space making and I think it's is a good
time to really begin to understand that
even in policymaking you know we all
fight incredibly hard good space space
makers into policy where there is
reconstruction
to have the space maker there but I
think it really does raise some serious
questions whether the space making is
actually removed or not and I think the
chains of production that convention so
I think the I'm in agreement with you
I'm not so sure about the cities but I
think actually that that big issue is
very important as global and I think the
global lot of political issues that have
arisen that you talked about are the
same so in many ways I feel that the two
initial speakers had are talking about
you the environment and I think that's
very spot I think it's very smart
I could I follow up on that manager yeah
I I think Carlos is pointed that the
last thing you said I think is really
quite critical how how clever are we
being on this and I think if we come
back to this question of the vernacular
just as an example what is the
vernacular now if we look at it from the
point of view of trying to formulate a
recursive function one thing we would
have to do is to D is to declare what we
think the elements are and so in a way
what what ed did was to focus on the
side of starting to pin down elements
nature of the materials that might be
used and so on and and Paola kind of
took it in the other direction what's
the function that defines a progress
through time series in a state now even
in those two things if there's a kind of
logical question that I feel in some
ways we don't do enough within the
school to clarify when we speak of
something like the vernacular or when we
speak of the city how good are we at
understanding the components and
elements that matter on the one hand and
versus the the kinds of functions that
we think define progress through time
series so what I value in some ways
about this discussion I'm the recursive
is that it's inviting us to be more
careful and in how we establish the
relationship between the the description
the categorization and description of
things that matter to us as architects
and Urbanists in relation to those kinds
of accounts of how the world changes
that comes from many other disciplines I
think what we need to do is to be
participants in that conversation by
sharpening our under
standing of how we're using the terms
yeah so I was just gonna be a quick
comment and I spend a lot of time
working with architects and planners on
big urban projects some of my best
friends are architects of this space
makers are very important very very
important maybe their most important
because you guys possess the power of
the visual the visualization you can
create an image of what someone's city
will look like in the future then the
question arises is that the right image
is this the right a vision of the future
because people love visualizations he'd
like to be able to see tangibly their
future that's why you guys are very very
important because you can translate
research and evidence and correct
thinking into what the future might look
like but I think the reality is that
it's it's a multidisciplinary integrated
approach that needs to be developed it's
lots of different disciplines coming
together to understand the nature of how
a city needs to be both particularly if
it is in one of these African countries
with rapid urbanization population
growing very quickly and the place is a
mess it's a complete and utter mess
people are extremely poor and nothing
works and the politics don't work it's a
complete mess if someone comes into to
with their visualization of the future
to someone who happens to have the money
then that will get done that will get
built it needs to be the right thing
I've done a lot of work as I alluded to
in the past in the Gulf states where
they have a lot of money and a lot of
the wrong things have been built they're
badly planned they don't work nor wants
to live there they're environmentally
disasters and it's because something was
visualized it wasn't rooted in the true
function the true understanding
understanding that we need to adapt we
can't understand through completely the
future needs to be
something that evolves with the
environment with the landscape it needs
to understand the vernacular if you go
to Gulf cities somebody said we want to
look like European and North American
cities but even bigger like Europe on
steroids and that's what they got is
that the right thing that the Gulf
states probably not but we saw an
example of go based Arabic vernacular
architecture that's what they need
because that's what worked for thousands
of years so I think yes the space makers
you guys are very important but in
relation to to Carla's comment which I
agree with but I would say that most
scientists that put cities right at the
center of this the Anthropocene and the
distractive moment we are going true I
think the things that they identify are
very much related to spatial and design
questions so I would say immediately
cause for the work of Architects urban
its planners its centrally but the
question is if we connect towards
symbols and power who were presenting
initially and a conversation we have
seen was the other day talking about
questions of housing design and how to
deal with issues of air condition of
insulation etc they were and very
interesting projects that you go to in
jail and try to convince the developer
to use that ok it's immediately discard
that for exactly the reasons we were
saying because from their point of view
economically it doesn't make sense so
it's well those things it's not sort of
interacting and we have to know to be
realistic in that and I think that's was
also what I was trying to emphasize that
the initial is that there are many
things that furna technological and
scientific point of view we might have
under control
but the economic interests at play no
this argument for instance of lat
isabell stingers etc that the year we
are going through is one of winners and
losers then they are very powerful and
conflicting interests permeate entirely
our practice in the field of spatial
disciplines design etc and we have to
put that into the equation and there
becomes less predictable thank you very
much very big topics for a very late
night we keep talking about policy but
what you're talking about in Africa is
no policy yeah so it's just an open
question do you think no policy chaotic
urban city growth in Africa could
actually prevent the destruction of
their natural world if chaotic growth
can prevent destruction we know that
population growth is one issue that's
never really discussed yeah so we have a
perfect storm of rising population
growth so massive and consumption yes
yes that is what you have I mean
creating policy is not that difficult
usually it's you know there are policies
and guidelines for all sorts of things
in terms of development all over the
world it's the implementation and the
consistent implementation of these
things which is the challenge and that
comes down to the capacity and
capability of whoever whatever entity is
is in charge of a city now sometimes the
the problem is that the the national
government doesn't enable a city to have
enough autonomy in the application of
its policy sometimes there's too much
autonomy there's always a balance to be
struck
I mean you there are there probably are
examples of where I kind of a naturally
evolve in chaotic process is better than
something which is wrongly planned
wrongly developed a role
we plant so maybe in a better of two
evils but I think there are too many
pressures on some of these cities they
they grow too quickly with the extremely
poor infrastructure and the cities just
get bigger and bigger you know they
don't African cities are nor the very
few tall buildings in African cities
especially the poor African cities so
people come to the city new people come
to city and they come to the edge of the
city then the next lot come to the edge
of that lot edge you know they just
sprawl and sprawl and sprawl and as we
know you know one of the principles of
good planning is you don't let your city
sprawl you use your land holding as
efficiently as possible but if you have
a sprawling population in the city with
no public transport and the only jobs
are right in the center it does become
this perfect storm and it does it
doesn't need to be dealt with
sometimes it's about doing something
that stops the people coming in the
first place
sometimes it's about trying to host a
new population and sustainably but I
think in the African context as well a
lot of the time the population grows
because something awful has happened
somewhere else and people are forcibly
displaced they don't actually want to be
in that growing city in the first place
and they're of a different culture a
different ethnic group in and you know
there are conflicts there are tensions
all sorts of things I don't I think it's
difficult to to just allow it to evolve
naturally and hope the dress may be that
certain something senses that probably
is better than what somebody actually
decided to plan as a solution because it
was no solution but I think we need to
try and understand in each city there's
some kind of system at work whether it's
explicit or implicit and we need to try
and understand that and it may be that
the physical intervention is actually
quite light in response to that system
but kind of works in this hallway
we have time for one more question if
anyone has one otherwise I have a
question so I wanted to pick on
something that edu said in your
presentation because you started with
you presenting your diploma project on
food open ism and then you showed the
kind of recursive nature of ideas and
how that kind of leaked into the world
of practice and the project that you've
been working on now for the Charlie
Biggums Center and I was just curious I
think something also that George said
about how with talking in the context of
climate change how can ideas leave the
setting of the laboratory and with a
mixture of academics and practitioners
around the table I wanted to ask what
are the strategies to allow discussions
like this or experiments were doing in
programs to deal with some of these
complex issues how do what are
strategies to let them leave the setting
of a kind of academic discussion and
actually become implemented in policies
and designs in areas that don't
necessarily have access to good design I
think it would just be a nice note to
kind of maybe end this conversation
perhaps start new ones to suggest what
are ways we could move forward I think
there is a feeling as an architect that
you ought you are quite powerless to
have an impact on a huge scale on a
global scale but one thing that for
example this interest in food and
urbanism has led to whether it's a
production building for a company or in
the case of the city farm it's a very
very tiny project as a small
intervention on a on a piece of disused
land in Waterloo but in doing that I
think it comes back to Jim's point about
kind of being able to visualize an idea
so we presented some ideas to the
hospital who owns the land and said
wouldn't it be good if you use this
disused piece of land for local schools
to learn about nutrition and
agriculture and so on a resource which
lots of the schools in in a Lambeth
which incidentally is one of the poorest
boroughs in the country let alone in
London they have no outdoor space so it
so just in in as much as an architect
has this tremendous ability to
conceptualize to kind of physically
produce sort of visuals to entice
policymakers landowners and actually
make something to have to generate kind
of funding and make something happen and
so I think then of from a kind of
grassroots up approach architects can
have the ability to sort of make an
impact in a very small sense which can
then be going to scaled up so we're
interested now in it's been recognized
by the Mayor of London for example we'd
like to explore moving it to another
site when the land-use is over you know
lots of schools are struggling to build
more space you know with the cuts and so
on there have a very limited kind of
ability to kind of grow their physical
infrastructure so finding ways
innovatively to kind of expand their
resources
I think these yeah a valuable tool but
about the question is how how is that
sort of scaled up I mean hat how do you
kind of advance that maybe you use it as
a kind of case study which then can
become implemented into some form of
local policy you know missus within a
city which is relatively well organized
and it's still really bloody hard to
kind of get nothing done so I'm sort of
both talking for a optimistic hamper
something for you because I think you
can do things you can make change but
it's how you scale it's a process
whereby you concluded that that was the
correct intervention in that space and
it's enabling others to be able to go
through the same process so you came up
with solution to something which is a
popular solution to something and it
uses a piece of land well but the you
know they're thinking
if that skill can be embedded in in
other groups then that is something
that's you know even though you think
it's a small intervention actually the
journey that you went on others can go
on that same journey did following up on
this you know there's the the idea of a
of a food economy of food ecology food
city there's someone in the audience way
he was following in your footsteps and
being interested in this theme and and I
think this is one of the things that in
answer to your question we need to
exploit more at the school because there
there are many crossovers that we should
be looking for but the there's another
answer to your question that we haven't
touched on and in in some ways it comes
from my disagreement with Jim about what
architects are useful for and it's it's
not because we're good at rendering the
future I suppose but I think it's
because we might be we might have some
capacity to address these questions of
what is the scale at which processes
matter and what are the fundamentals to
a process if we want to explore it in a
set way in a synthetic way so I think we
have a fairly good understanding of
questions of critical synthesis and I
think that's probably what in fact and
enabled you to feel like you had had a
strong grasp of the food systems that
you were looking at interestingly I
would think what this points toward is
less a kind of site focus and it's more
almost about the promiscuity of the
application of our ideas that we should
be really be exploring and an example of
this what our one of our graduates from
last year decided that well it might be
interesting to look at the scale of the
neighborhood the over focus on street
culture was clearly wrong and what we
really needed to do
to think much more about changes to the
insides of multi-residential housing and
most fundamentally to the service
provision associated with neighborhood
living now that led her to kind of
completely to introduce something that
was would have felt rather alien in
London but she argued for it in a London
case now she was hired or offered jobs I
should say in London but couldn't obtain
a visa to stay in London so she went
back to Beijing where in fact her ideas
are being used not for a central city
London environment but her ideas are now
being used in the rethinking of
peripheral Beijing environments as they
try to consolidate new understandings of
well serviced residential environments
that have characteristics of compactness
walkability aren't based on street life
and so on so it's this it's this
recognition that by understanding the
fundamentals we may have something to
apply in a wide variety of cases and
that we should be talking more widely
about the about the fundamental themes
that are driving our explorations of the
innocence the goal driven nature of our
problem-solving can I add something to
this I think well we need to be able to
communicate with our students who are
coming here from many different
countries and then going back or staying
here to be able to implement what we
teach them and I think that the the
scale of allowable interventions might
be small for various reasons one of
which is that the full complexity exists
already in a very small scale and so
even a very small scale is difficult to
deal with but then we can multiply the
intervention
successful and the cost of failing could
be small for a small intervention but if
it's successful we can multiply it many
times
and and there can be many of us
multiplying it we've got thousands of
students coming out of here at the
grassroot level vernacular architecture
offers a model but applying it like it
was is a non-starter in fact it would be
much more expensive than a contemporary
building so essentially we're not
applying the we're not going back to the
Reg though we're trying to extract the
principles underlying it environmental
and other and and build on those at the
grassroot level and then multiplying
those coming to the developer that
George mentioned we have to have enough
technical knowledge that allows us to be
able to create several options to offer
to the developer as part of a
negotiation we want to gain something
out of them to apply certain solutions
that we consider have social and as well
as environmental architectural
advantages we will look at our lexicon
of possibilities and we offer what we
think will allow them to give us back
the things that we wanted and again we
can multiply I mean I don't think that
it is possible to make a huge
intervention on anything anywhere but
I'm certain that we can make a huge
difference with this multiplication of a
small intervention I just say I think
this is a really good question how do
you bring the conversation out of this
room so you think architecture it can be
an incredibly sort of insular profession
where everyone just sort of socialized
with other architects
and especially once you leave University
before you know it you're just in this
world where you're just designing door
details endlessly and you kind of forget
the bigger picture of the conversation
and I just think it's really important
that we as architects like continue
dialogues with other professions you
know we've we've also got I think I
don't know any other profession which is
so critical of its own profession as
well you know like a carbuncle cup for
example like voting for the worst
architecture building of the year and
you know all the other professions sort
of helped to promote themselves and
aren't so scared of having dialogues
with people who might sort of have
contradictory opinions to them like why
are we so scared of sort of being seen
as too commercial for example and when
in fact if we're in dialogue with
developers who have the money and then
perhaps perhaps we can work with them to
give something back to the community and
I mean it sounds a bit cheesy but I just
think it is a really important question
that people sort of are too quick to
sort of consider property and I don't
know what the solution is off the top of
my head but I think it's just something
you should really all think about it's a
really good point I've drawn from the
sleeping is this idea of no we can learn
from recursive processes and look at
patterns and so on and kind of use
recurrent processes such as vernacular
architecture to develop our
understanding of a problem or a
situation but um I'm not sure you raised
this point but kind of the idea of kind
of introducing I think it was George a
kind of a disruption to the recursion or
kind of a sort of friction to the
process I think it's important that one
of the roles of an architect is to
insert that friction to a process I
think it was some Daniel Kahneman who
was talking about kind of quit working
and group mentality and when you you get
into a group you kind of tend to want to
work in groups where everyone has the
same opinion because it feels really
smooth and easy and but actually it's
proven that the outcomes of group
working where everyone has their
same opinion this is actually not nearly
as as beneficial as working with people
with completely different views and you
know with real diversity so that idea of
opening the door to other people such as
economists and broadening our kind of
understanding is so important and
actually processes shouldn't be simple
and easy and smooth flowing but we
should be kind of introducing a kind of
a wild card and and maybe shifting
things off architects whereas when
you're at university like you're
actually learning so many different
skills which can be applied in so many
different ways like you know coming with
a business model or mace for your food
urbanism and I think we're all too quick
to sort of disregard that once we're in
practice these skills and that's where
and go back to the question that's the
great thing about education is that it
gives you that opportunity to not just
be kind of complying with the behavior
of architectural practice and going in
and doing doggies health in for example
when I was studying with Carlos I went
round a series of takeaway shops and
instead of asking for a takeaway I took
my own food into the takeaway shops and
asked them to cook it for me and to pay
for the service just to try and kind of
test a different sort of usage of that
kind of social space or an urban space I
didn't get dinner that night cooked for
me but that's the point is that one
needs that kind of space environment in
which to be a kind of experimental and
to kind of insert those those kind of
moments of different this I think part
of the answer to your question is that
in order for the profession to be able
to to make positive changes you need an
intelligent discerning client who's
going to require that of you and I think
that's why we we get planning which is
not good enough sometimes a client isn't
able to extract that from the profession
because of their own weaknesses on the
client side and I think part of the
challenge therefore is to to try and
improve the capability of the client
side family whether it's a national
government or a city or a private
developer whatever it might be and I
think that's I have an ongoing dialogue
and ongoing communication I think the
other challenge there is if if I look at
the the developing world low-income
middle-income countries there is there
is money that flows to these countries
from aid agencies bilateral government
to governments and donors multilateral
Basin sovereign wealth funds all sorts
of things in as funding gravitates its
way to to these places but I think one
of the challenges is that lots of the
countries that are recipients of this
kind of support they don't necessarily
understand their cities I think most
national governments don't understand
cities and it's the case here in the
United Kingdom we don't you know we
don't understand the system that exists
within and between our cities and how to
maximize the benefit that of that is
London versus everyone else which is not
really a policy I don't think and
there's I can see a trend known in terms
of UK government's support for for
developing world countries that are
starting to think about the role of
cities now only now they're starting to
think about urbanism the World Bank is
now starting to think about these things
so now is the time to I think influence
those debates about how to plan
sustainably and for a resilient future
and our to make sure that national
governments understand it's the cities
that generate the wealth and the jobs
and also most of the carbon emissions so
they have to be addressed properly
unsystematic I think that's a great call
to arms to end the formal part of
tonight's talk I think what I really
enjoyed about the discussion was how
many questions it raised rather than
necessarily coming up with solutions
because I think when I'd asked for a
show of hands of how many people are a
student I think majority of the room
raised their hand so I think it's great
for them to take forward these questions
and their projects and and and also try
and make them realities I think that was
a great comment that you made CMOS about
how you want them to go out and make
them real
real world so um thank you all very much
and for everyone in the audience please
come back on the 22nd of October for the
session on autonomous where we'll
hopefully stop kick off with the
question that you posed tonight Jim
where the cities can obtain more
autonomy but for now please join us for
drinks in the South three room and thank
you
[Applause]
