welcome to the architecture Association
this evening we have interesting
discussion with a very simple question
that we are going to try to unfold name
is John Palmas Eno and I running here
diploma for and this is an event that is
linked to the open seminar series called
plant the planet and we are
investigating in the series how
architecture intercepts and sometimes
diverges from preoccupations of
planetary change and in particular we
have been following the very awkward
work of this ambiguous figure at the
center of every single turn of modern
architecture
Jaqueline turret that was present in
every single important moment in the
making of what we celebrate as the
heroic moment of modern architecture
starting with the making of the
international congresses of modern
architecture in the 50s we're jacking
turret was the back seat organized for
secret Gideon and Sept all the way to
organizing the work of doxiadis
Buckminster Fuller the famous Delos
Impala that brought together the major
anthropologists and scientists of the
sixties and seventies all the way to the
establishment of the United Nations
habitat program with very complex
discussion about the role of human
construction and the ambiguous word
habitats this evening it's a real
pleasure
have at the table professor that will
read us and professor Allen potted Jim
Dever is a research professor at the
feet of Manson Institute which is one of
the most incredible organizations in
contemporary life because it combines
the ethos of Fridtjof Nansen the arctic
explorer looking at geography with his
other main preoccupation piece in
particular the entire work of the Fijian
Science Institute which is a Research
Institute mainly on law international
law and policymaking really combines the
initial ethos of Fridtjof Nansen of
exploring in that moment the Arctic of
course and his preoccupation with
refugees the famous non send passports
professor of Vedas is the director of
the law of the sea program at the feet
of national institute diver is you will
see the most striking sharp mind in
thinking how to rewrite the
international law of the sea and for
many reasons and they that are linked to
the space simple question that we're
going to unfold this evening he is a
working group member that means the
Anthropocene working group has also a
lawyer an international lawyer among the
accolade and that is double visas and I
remember very well in the meeting that
was organized the philanthropist in
working group at the house of world
cultures in 2014 when actually managed
to bring all of you together
only one person stood on the other side
of the table and that was that take
a very important position in that Davor
is a prolific also more than 10 books
each one of which is the opposite of a
little pamphlet it's a very interesting
intellectual condition and novel Vedas
is a major figure in thinking the
Anthropocene and he will discuss this
evening how it came about it and how his
presence in the working group can be he
also serves as the editor-in-chief of
the journal monograph series bridge
research perspective on the law of the
sea and the is also of authors of
popularizing books on the Anthropocene
so it combines high scholarship with a
more popular approach an imported from
the London School of Economics is
professor of law and before joining the
law department at LSE you were a
researcher at the local mission and a
lecturer in school of law King's College
the work of Allah is the most remarkable
for the discussion this evening in the
sense that you combine an insight from
law with
what we might consider our domain that
is an understanding of media and
mediation and we have an amazing insight
in your work one of the incredible
elements in the scholarship of its
really how he always manages to bring
together minds from all kinds of studies
and always bringing together different
lines in order to really make new
compounds I I like to think of your work
as creating compounds that give a new
insight the work of and is also linked
to that of colleagues like Mario Jolie
who is a critical study historian and
he's been working a lot in collaboration
with other scholars and tonight I think
that will have an amazing insight coming
from one of your most recent publication
on jurisprudence and they also seen so
you start understanding that the
question that we're going to address
tonight is whether law is from the
Holocene the evening it's going to be
structured in very simple terms in two
parts we'll start with presentations
from our guest and then we'll move on to
the larger debate and discussion but
before we get on with the presentation
please join me in welcoming governor
Allen to the architecture Association
double please thank you very much as I
was listening I was here talking about I
was getting embarrassed and indeed of
being obliged and I only have a few very
simple ideas to share with you some
notes which I I put down notes down
because otherwise forget so and then
it's important to put them down in 15
minutes isn't it 15 minutes less than 15
minutes but I must say first and
foremost I am very happy to be here I'm
very grateful for your and and Sophie's
invitation to come to an architecture
association which I never spoke in any
architecture school before I'm a lawyer
as you know but the question which
ascends the the title justin is law from
the Holocene but that one indeed
immediately resonates and for me it also
immediately revoked some memories and it
brought me back 10 years ago and it was
August 2009 and I know the date it was
28 August 2009 and on that date I had
one strange word written in my notebook
and I didn't know its meaning really it
stood there for about a year I remember
when I wrote it down
that was one conference which our
Institute free deference and Institute
in Norway convened in order to mark our
fiftieth anniversary and
the conference was about law and policy
for the oceans the title of the
conference was the world ocean in
globalization at about that time the
United Nations Convention of the law of
the sea which we international lawyers
often referred to as constitution of the
oceans it was about the quarter of
century old it was adopted at the end of
1992 it then entered into force in 94 so
it was a time to assess it and we
thought it was very appropriate for our
Institute to in a way to link our 50th
anniversary to the 25th anniversary of
the Convention the reason why it was not
really on time is that we didn't get
funding for the conference the year
before but what we want is really true
was we wanted to critically assess the
functioning of our constitution unclose
as we call this is the acronym United
Nations Convention on oversee we call it
applause we call it wrongly conference
the third conference really is enclose
in the program of the conference we
decided to formulate one hypothesis and
the purposes was that changes regarding
the oceans in the post-world War period
in general and perhaps even only since
the negotiation of unclose in the course
of the 1970s having a bigger then all
changes in the preceding history of
course human law the see history
less than all of the history but oceans
law if he could Saracino and then we
invited some 200 participants from where
around in order to discuss this and in
addition to lawyers and political
scientists with whom he usually white we
now indeed him with it was a marine
scientists and one scientist he was from
New Zealand in his speech mentioned that
a valid and I noted it down I never
before so that was the reason why I
wrote it down simply in order not to
forget it and then as I drafted the
problem for the conference including its
hypothesis I also had to edit the
proceedings and that was a challenge it
was 66 contributors two volumes thousand
two hundred pages and I don't need to
tell you about how the index book
old-fashioned way
checking page by page so editing took
quite some time in this very old way
fashion and the year after the
conference I came to the chapter by the
New Zealand scientists that was that
late August day of 2009 28 August and
when I typed to the strange word on my
PC the Microsoft Word of his program
underlined it we'd read this red color
indicated this was an error well but it
was written letter by letter as in the
manuscript I received from the author
so I spent it I looked at it a and teach
age ROP OC and
so Anthropocene I took from the shelf my
Oxford advanced Dictionary of English
I'm not a native speaker as you have
already noticed to check it the word was
not mentioned there now neither it was
found in a rather more comprehensive
Miriam Webster reference dictionary it
was found over
I checked various sources so I did what
was most reasonable to do probably I
would start that was ten years ago of
course now I would start from this I
googled the word and on that summer day
in 2009 it's only ten years ago they
were all together 64 hints on Google for
the word Anthropocene some of those were
also double hits so in fact they were
around 50 entries on the entire world
worldwide worldwide wide web wide if you
wish a try today is over 55 million but
on that summer day I was able to print
all of the 15 discoveries
and more than that I was also able to
read them all in a single day
you know Scandinavian days especially in
the region day since opposite to what
they are now but the texts are short a
few pages each so it was not difficult
to read all 50 you know the article by
Christian and pence timer of two
thousand to three pages two pages having
then you have crude since 2002 in nature
yawns Alexeevich and 21 other outer or
the stratigraphy Commission of London in
2008 but they were almost the longest on
quit for but there was one longer I
recall a very good very interesting
article by will Stephan Paul Crutzen and
John McNeil from AM Bo in 2007 that was
may be coming all the way to eight pages
well I think that until that summer day
I was one might say I kind of a normal
international lawyer an international
lawyer of of a rather traditional school
of international law in my earlier
teaching at the university of zagreb we
used the manual by a late professor who
established the chair in 1927 he rose
that classic treatise on international
law in 1948 it fast various subjects
various editions and I think that when I
was teaching it was the eighth edition
the structure was the same as well as
the one from 1948 and I think that they
use the same one with updates still too
we can change traction really but after
that summer day of 2009 my view on
international law which has been home
after working for around 25 years in the
field until that time has started to
undergo a change and I think this change
has been going on since that time so
this is also why I am redoing their
retexture Association and not in grace
in clubs so first I must explain why as
my view of international law of my
discipline has been changed you see any
standard definition of international law
this branch of law is a legal system
which regulate relations between states
and other subjects of international law
other international all subjects
recognized in international community
it regulates how boundaries
I did some harm again it regulates how
boundaries are determined between
different states how states emerge and
how their statehood becomes recognized
how maritime areas are divided where
does the server end in the ends also
[Music]
when we did determine how how far thus
when rights go then we also have to
regulate rights on the high seas so we
as pocky picking about high seas
freedoms we are speaking about enabling
global navigation and so on and so forth
international law determines or it has
the objective of regulating many things
of international life even in which one
thing is eternal and that is a political
change a key objective of international
law is to aspire at stability in
international relations those relations
are of course prone to a constant
political change and this type of change
is inbuilt in the system however that
system the system of international law
does not have of another type of change
in built at quite the contrary it
implicitly assumes that there is
relative stability in the data respect
that is of course the background of
natural conditions of Earth system
conditions those are with only some
exceptions like the change of flow of
rivers the changes in deltas those which
are based on experience perceived in
international law as being more or less
permanent so that system conditions
relative stability they always were such
from generation to generation and this
lack of stability is our experience all
since the dawn of written history in all
the changes of Empires and civilizations
that a relative stability has been with
us for several millennia and that is the
stability of the late Holocene
international law makes the Holocene for
granted as a lawyer you never think
about the policy
you are in the Holocene that is your
framework
those are your tacitly accepted
boundaries and then suddenly comes a
different horizon
that they might no longer be in the
Holocene
which means in the familiar
circumstances of relative stability and
that we are entering into something else
something different and that is the
Anthropocene the new period of
geological time which is increasingly
mark I change I'm pretty
unpredictability and likely quite
unstable conditions
upon realizing this horizon you have to
ask yourself a question such as our
seminar organizers joining our Sophie
but shortly here is law from the
Holocene limited to my legal discipline
is international law from the Holocene
the moment you ask that question as an
international lawyer you must think
about was this what this house is for
our attention since the question has to
do with architecture so now let me show
you one illustration of why this has so
profound implications for for
international law the picture here will
show what this one will not so much this
one will
[Music]
first let's look at the situation as it
is we have sea-level relatively stable
we have continents which are which
stretched under the sea so there is a
landmass there is a continental shelf
and this is the situation in reality but
then come lawyers come in the picture
and then they build one literature one
structure first what we do is we put a
territorial sea bass line at the
low-water mark from the baseline or
towards the the land these internal
waters base smaller segments of water
and all outside with nautical miles
stretching not only to the sea but also
in the air and submarine areas is the
territorial sea and the full sovereignty
of a coastal state we are not satisfied
with that we go further than we have on
jurisdictional zone which is called
continuous on the additional nautical
miles then we want no we want to have
sovereign rights over fishing but we
don't think this is sufficient so we
stretch this also under the under the
sea to the seabed and submarine areas
because this covers for you as well and
minerals so there are sovereign rights
here this is not part of the state
territory but there are solar rights
which are exclusive for the coastal
state for fishing and for oil and
mineral exploitation we like to secure
this more so we put continental shelf
which is not apply
to the to the scene receiver column the
water column but to the summary areas
again it goes 200 nautical miles in any
condition and then beyond that it can we
have extended continental shelf how far
it goes that is the longest definition
in in the law of the sea convention I
will not read it it has more than a page
so we would spend almost the entire rest
of my 15 minutes but it goes
approximately 350 nautical miles from
the base line with many nuances what
we'll do then beyond that we have high
seas sea free-for-all navigation marine
scientific research fishiness and then
down at the sea separate area we have
the area International seabed area the
area aware which is proclaimed the
common heritage of mankind there is no
oil there but there are certain minerals
now the cornerstone of this architecture
and it is architecture is and it serves
an important purpose purpose it serves
for the division of maritime zones of
approximately 150 coastal states but it
also determines rights on the Seas of
the rest of about 50 landlocked states
the the cornerstone is this baseline the
line of coastal stability the line
relying on coastal stability if that
stability collapses the system may
literally fall into water
and it took 400 years to build it at
least if we take kuba gracias meri
liberum as a starting reference point we
could go further in history but for
simplicity reasons this is perhaps the
best starting point so what we have to
do regarding this but also many other
aspects of in today's international law
such as criteria for statehood or some
Island countries human rights and
migrations interpretation of
international treaties in those
circumstances and so on what we have to
do is to look ahead and try to adjust
the system to this change characteristic
of the intrapersonal under of the
Anthropocene in order to prevent the
system from collapsing how do you say we
need a plan plan the planet yes we do
need a very serious plan and it's not
easy since if international law
collapses or when international law
collapses as it has happened in history
before then it is ultimate zero then in
other words we have little if any
mechanisms for the avoidance of
international conflicts and little to
assist us in maintaining international
peace this core objective of
international law must remain unchanged
when many other aspects of international
law we will have to change and we will
have to adjust
as the changing conditions verifier or
the intrapersonal require this
perspective of looking on international
law in which one makes a distinction
between the rules that emerged under
implicit assumption of the holocene
conditions of stability and that that's
basically almost all of the fundamental
rules of international law if you speak
about objects and connection and even
subjects of international there on the
one hand and their application and
adjustment to quite different conditions
of the Anthropocene mud by change mud by
less predictability and mark by far more
uncertainty that is a new way of looking
at international law but in my view it
is a credit lick rather urgently needed
perspective think of sea level rose
think of changes which are which do have
quite serious consequences that are
unavoidable in decades to come so let me
illustrate this what I've said so far in
a very short
physical illustration if you wish with
the help of two books which I brought
with me you know those two books of all
the books published in the law of the
sea those two are the bottom line so
when you wish to clean your library and
yourselves when you are all the sea
lawyer then you keep those two and then
also it's quite good with those recent
limitation on hand luggage
I passed elegantly region airlines have
introduced the waiting of our hand
luggage no problem
given half half kilos or maybe under
half is the first book and the first one
was published in 1609
it is merrily peron by google gracias
it's a lot of commentary in here but
Marie Librium is only 66 pages in a
rather generous font and as I mentioned
we can take it as a foundation or the
law of the sea as a discipline the
second book is far bigger it contains
what was adopted in 1980 to enclose a
summation United Nations Convention on
the law of the sea the constitution of
the oceans the legal framework for all
its uses and means in between those two
books I should put it up here there are
three hundred seventy-three years
in political thinking this is an immense
amount of time it's almost four
centuries there's so much about think
what has happened from 1609 to 1982 but
when we think about the Atropa scene and
the Holocene relations the two book come
together they are both written for the
Holocene implicitly it was an assumption
which was implied and we have no further
as yet there is no law of the sea for
the entire scene so before concluding
and with apologies if I have acceded
maybe 15 minutes or erm about 15 minutes
just a few three notes
[Music]
what is the interpreting we must start
any discussion from that and I just that
we might start by offering at least
three aspects for what it is first to
hold the intrapersonal is simply the
word the word
until recently not found in dictionaries
and considered to be an error in spirit
check
second and beyond words the Anthropocene
refers to our present-day reality it is
the current status of the earth system
in all its complex interactions and
those interactions include us humans
that is something you need for being
studied and also formally acknowledged
through the scientific process and this
is what the intrapersonal working group
is working on and there is also a third
aspect over the Anthropocene is it is
quite possibly one of the biggest
challenges for our future as a species
not only as people grouped in nations of
course states in that respect
in the last as long as we have
interstate relations we will have
international law we will need
international law for quite some time in
future
but what we will need is international
law suited for the intrapersonal because
with the earth Indian tropi scene we
will no longer be able to keep the world
meaning the political growth in the
policy and I guess I should at this
point really complete my introduction
thank you for being so thorough at
moderator and chair and thank you very
much for to all for your very kind
attention
thank you very much
I think it fell down we will have to
discuss what horizon is for a lawyer
Stalin up team first of all thank you
enormously to you and that's before
reputation to you guys for being here
and I look forward to the conversation
that will follow
I think the brief is to be brief and
simply to perhaps offer some crisps to
the milled of the conversation that
would follow and with that in mind I
have about three or four observations to
make which will be succinct
so John youth began with the sort of
discrete propagation of saying that this
was a simple question but then you
repeated it and said it was a very
simple question and I'm not sure about
that and my observations are in a sense
I think suggesting actually it's rather
complex in the answer is confidence
the question is complex so observation
number one which is rather banal and
rather pedantic and it might have
something to do with these books
you know actually in 1609 this would
have been very fat it would have been
very handsome Lieb and probably a
beautiful in folio addition I'll come
back to that but I like your
bibliographical strata actually so the
question is this and what do we mean by
law if we're gonna say is law from the
Holocene what exactly when we say law
what do we mean and I think there is a
sort of tendency to imagine laws being
this massive unitary social instance I
don't know who's responsible for that
historically it's probably Jeremy
Bentham but that's just my prejudiced
view could be Max Weber
and why do we think of the law as being
this unified system discourse set of
techniques field choose your theoretical
term but if you ask the question where
does law happen how does law happen it
happens in such a multiplicity of places
in such different ways and more
importantly in such different mixtures
when you are talking to your accountant
about your tax affairs and how to avoid
tax that's one kind of different kind of
mixture and sort of you know so law
combines that we combine that in flex in
different ways a second what exactly is
the stuff of law
is it semantics concept rules is it
techniques is it media instruments and
how do those how are those things held
together I mean I cultural technique I
mean that's a whole set of questions
there so is law and imaginary is it is
it sort of a way of thinking about
things like responsibility liability and
so on under law lawyers when they learn
the law tend to learn the law in in
frames that lawyers called facilitating
narratives little parables you know
which sort of offers famous cases which
kind of set up the law for you and I
think it's difficult to sever the rules
from those facilitating narratives so
the Anthropocene you know what I prefer
to call the Anthropocene hypothesis is
itself a constellation of different
perspectives and different idioms of
theories and depending on your
Anthropocene
a couple of very nice articles about
this sort of site the older one by James
Lorimer where he sort of describes the
same constellation of different
perspectives that make up the
Anthropocene is a recent French article
which describes the Anthropocene as a
forum in a sense different place where
different sort of theories and ideas
meet so depending on your Anthropocene
you may in a sense break law down in
different ways one vision of the
Anthropocene would present laws being a
kind of or maybe not think about law but
think about a sort of infrastructural
normativity of a certain kind the idea
that media spaciality and various other
kinds of forces condition or shape the
way we live even before we get to I
think you might could use the word no
mass one has to recall if you're within
when Schmidt said no he did not mean
equation of no Muslim law is actually
something more problematic so I think
what is law is my first observation as
Alan there I think it's a massively
complex question about what it is that
is supposed to be from the Holocene
second recently before the advent of the
Anthropocene if lawyers were going to
period ice law there would be more
inclined to construe law in terms of
some socio-historical period like the
Enlightenment or the Industrial
Revolution or something like that more
or less specific doesn't have to be
you're American
the point about these periods the point
about these frames is that there are
Astoria graphical artifacts so if you
went back in time and you tapped the
person you identified as a serf you know
on the shoulder and said you know hey
man you're living in the late feudal era
[Music]
it would not have made sense to them so
these these periodization czar inflicted
upon the world by subsequent historians
case of the Enlightenment of course is
interesting because you could say are
but you know people that can't at the
time in their various journals were
writing about themselves in terms of the
enlightenment of Africa but the point
about the Enlightenment now is that we
see it through the lens of theories of
public's and media and in light
what is not what it was for the people
inhabiting and calling themselves
enlightened and the same is true of the
Anthropocene the Anthropocene is an
epistemic artifact the distinction
between the Holocene and the
Anthropocene is an epistemic artifact
and one only needs to pay attention to
the question of how exactly the
Anthropocene the beginning of the
Anthropocene is supposed to be
identified materially symbolically etc
etc to appreciate the work that goes
into constructing that artifact and in
and in maintaining hasn't been done yet
you guys can tell that's been done I
don't think it's been done yet so that's
the second observation that the term
policy itself is also equally complex
third moving on to one implication of
the question let's assume that we've
gotten past thinking about that so if
this law is of the Holocene then an
interesting question for me because I'm
skeptical about the question of the
Holocene my own work is in intellectual
property so as it's like the property
person I was struck by the fact that in
Crutzen the article which is one of the
50 that you would have read in your long
day says that the beginning of the
Anthropocene was marked by the invention
of the steam engine or by James Watts
condensing steam engine he actually gets
the date wrong but that doesn't matter
later paper says it wasn't the invention
of the steam engine it was the patent of
the steam engine and then you roll
forward to a book by Timothy Morton who
says that somewhat Bala CLE that a
patent is bringing about the end of the
world
the steam engine patent
is the cause of the emission of all of
these gases that are bringing the end of
the world about now obviously is an
intellectual property lawyer there's a
certain kind of unwholesome feasel in
this idea that a patent is important
enough to precipitate the end of the
world so I thought we should pay
attention to that and think about what
if you take that seriously hyperbole at
all and how would that work and actually
it does work it's quite interesting if
you think about it because the invention
of what steam engine generated a legal
case Boulton and watt so Bolton Matthew
Boulton was Watts a business partner and
supporter against bull about whether the
patent was valid or not and it is the
single most important foundational case
in history patent law is is that case
which decides what a bot is a patent for
and what you get a patent for is pure
ingenuity the invention not the natural
materials not the forces of nature you
have to in some sense abstract from
those and it's that split that
ontological division that patent law
makes between pure human ingenuity and
the natural resources that somehow are
necessary for that but we can simply
transcend if you own an example good
example this is biotechnology you patent
a gene when you patent a G what you get
is the gene is supposed to be a pure
invention even though all you're doing
is cutting and pasting natural materials
so
the pattern James what's patent does
that work it's symbolically and
performative Lee subjugate nature
returns nature into a standing reserve
to use Heidegger's term a standing
reserve and for the exploited
exploitation of humans and so so what
steam engine exploits natural forces
natural materials but then forgets the
debt to nature represses the depth
nature by saying oh it's all an idea of
what and that idea can circulate the
globe and once patent law becomes truly
good advice the second thing the patent
law does is it says you get a patent for
whatever is useful utility in patent law
terms is defined purely in technological
terms completely externalizing the harm
any harm that is done by that invention
to the rest to nature or to the rest of
humanity so in a sense there are some
important constitutional things going on
in this patent and which have had
effects which manifests themselves now
one that called the Anthropocene so I
think that there's something very
interesting about the way that law was
implicated in the Halle sea is
implicated in policy and just one final
word on patents very body is read to Kim
Stanley Robinson's novel 23:12 there's a
page in there where it's kind of a
shorthand way of trying to convey the
passage of time in the future there's
just a list of inventions so you get a
sense of how the world has progressed
through looking at the list of
inventions that have been made in this
period of
whatever leading leading up to this
point and so in a sense that's the other
thing the patents do they project the
symbolism of progress innovation and
it's open-ended way in a sense they they
perfectly sum up the temporalities of
the holocene as being the temporality of
a society that assumes itself to be
immortal and that assumption of
immortality I think is precisely what is
problematize now with this existential
crisis of the so a final point and this
is a totally somewhat ridiculous point
but it's this is a serious point at the
end of it I just read your questions and
it kind of called to mind a sort of kind
of pastiche of a Hollywood b-movie law
as the thing from the policy the law is
this kind of uncannily anachronistic
entity you know something that is
actually out of place in the
contemporary the contemporary ver of the
Anthropocene is of laws like this kind
of revenant or the undead but is kind of
still persisting quasi vitally through
its own kind of innate sort of desire
and the the serious sight of that image
of the Hollywood b-movie the more sober
view is that it is in the nature of the
law to be always already anachronistic
incensed what law does is it generates
its own epoch generates its own epoch
ality and how does it generate it it
generates it because law has its own
innate capacity to personify a gent if I
if that's a verb it isn't to schematize
time and space of the principally time
in a sense to generate a world to create
a history and it has it's always done
that what law does is it is powered by a
set of technical technical competencies
and there's a sort of maybe a very basic
reason for that that is the fact that
law is normative law in a sense it
necessarily implies at least in its own
self description a certain kind of a
moment of transcendence in relation to
the reality that inhabits and that
distance that dica - that normative dica
- I think its inherent to law and maybe
one of the the reasons for this always
already being anachronistic the lawyers
and
time
I mean you started with with a personal
anecdote not just of business because
the books I want to end with one which
kind of is is a reviewer who kind of put
me in my place many many years ago when
I edited a book on Lourdes anthropology
which I felt was and this reviewer said
she said well I'm so very well maybe
about worn anthropology but this person
writes like a lawyer and I think that
going back to this question of what is
law and what persists and you know what
is the this kind of uncanny undead Lusa
vlog would be to actually look at the
sort of techniques of reading writing
passing on knowledge that are between a
key this is another law book I'm going
to disagree with you about that I think
it's a political theory book in a sense
but that persists between this and this
these two strata so let me just end
there and
I just pick up from your last point
point under the track between the
normativity many levels the distinction
between law and Sciences on how the
world is versus how the law ought to be
and this distinction is somehow
stronghold in the two fields the law is
out the world ought to be how you ought
to behave and suddenly you start
listening to scientists and they're all
telling us how we should change our
lives and that is a normative injunction
we should change our lives stop flying
around why did you take it and I have
planed to come to London you should come
by a raft boat it's raging that the
contemporary conjunction is taking that
distinction of normativity and somehow
either fold it back to itself or
blurring the conditions of the
distinction between politics and science
I know many levels you are indicating
eva's no that's not no it's only to go
theory so there's a further distinction
there between blowing politics and which
is a really an interesting condition and
you mentioned
the piece is ultimate stability that we
ought to we can discuss with
international law in particular the law
of the sea has achieved any of that
conditional whether it has enabled
contemporary warfare or different level
but it seems to me that that distinction
between the law as normativity and
science as any inquiry into how things
are is we can assume for a second that
that is disputed at the moment so it
seems to me that the question then
becomes exactly like you pointing out
one of semantics one of Geo semantics
and of a particular kind where there is
no longer a distinction between say
assigning a reference there is a more
complex circularity of that and because
you mentioned in your point one Nomos
and of course the way to read the
normals is through starting from scratch
and camilla Lisbon and the very complex
understanding that law does nothing else
them have an impetus to archive and
constantly write actions
so my question starts being about the
relationship between writing law and
practicing law and trying to detect law
because it seems to me that the three
conditions are very different and I'm
really curious about understanding these
three elements writing law writing about
law and just practicing with maybe not
more declaratory condition what is the
practice of law in that sense how can we
distinguish it from any other practice
what is the mode of existence use
and Bruno's jargon of law in particular
in relationship with the working of
scientists in contemporary terms how do
you go about the scientific work that
this book this was practice of very very
reason this was but and it wasn't the
intention of that this book was not to
be published in such short form it is
part of a manuscript which was 800 pages
long so this was a short book reading
that manuscript was published 250 years
later it was not suitable anymore all
the pragmatic purpose why this book was
published it would take a lot more than
those 15 minutes rather put it in about
one to two sentences a 22nd February
1602 8 o'clock in the morning in the
Strait of Singapore three Dutch vessels
wanted to leave already because they
were waiting and waiting and waiting and
no Portuguese Carrick was arriving and
then in the logbook of Admiral function
it was written they were blessed at 8
o'clock in the morning
a wealthy Portuguese Kerik appeared and
then we were shooting at her from the
morning until dawn and to make a shot to
make a shot what they took from Santa
Catarina the keurig who was comparable
to the English annual budget in 1602 or
3 and this book was written with the
purpose because gracias was young
advocate at the time I'm 21 years old
when he started to write so the book was
written as a legal pamphlet s apology
but it became an ideological book it
became a book of ideology of
globalization really over time it was
not meant to be it was meant to be not
what this time for his freedom of
disease Marie Lieberman it was meant to
be
what did subtitle says a subtitle says
the right which belongs to dodge to take
part in the East Indian trade so in that
sense you could say the book is highly
economic book about profit participation
in profit but you can also say of course
it is illegal and the legal aim of the
book was there or in a way to express to
legal means the ultimate wish of
participating in profit and then when we
come to that then I would say no the law
is not anachronistic also in its
contemporary development it brought the
see at least if I was big problem sua is
has been developed since the Second
World War by anticipatory approaches not
anachronistic for very similar reasons
in 1945 Truman declaration Truman
proclamation about continental shelf
which led to the continental shelf as
the legal regime actually which led
ultimately to development of the Lord
seen enclose in very long was a letter
by the prospect by anticipation of the
development of technology which would be
which would enable different deeper
reach to the two oil resources in 1967
Arvid Bardot's famous speech in the
United Nations General Assembly about
common heritage of mankind was about the
need for redistribution of minerals
because in future they will be missing
on land and then we will need to go
under the sea so this was very much
anticipation anachronism and then the
legal machinery was needed to enumerate
there are other examples 1973 started
well turns out the minerals the story
lasted until 1991 almost 20 years and
why did it stop again for in this
anticipation it stopped because there
was a ideological debate in United
Nations about fantastic minerals about
antarctic treaty the treaty system as
being an exclusive club and the treaty
parties themselves legitimized the road
they have as custodians of the antarctic
by adopting the antarctic environment
protocol the reason why the protocol was
adopted was anticipation there was a
report an american report at the time
that in the next 50 years
there is no likelihood of empathic
mineral exploration union and this led
to law in the proper environment the
protocol which is the crucial element of
the system which indeed was a political
instrument but also legal so when you
look at international law development in
the Holocene it has been led by
anticipation but now there must be a
certain difference i believe now what we
have been led by was the anticipation of
economic profit what and that is the
velocity an anticipation what we
probably needs to be led by in this
Anthropocene which we say has many
meanings we should return to that we
should be late led by not by maximizing
profits but by minimizing losses
minimizing losses which are real which
will emerge with I mentioned the example
of sea-level rise there will be serious
losses for many countries not only
Ireland small island countries also
mainland countries like Bangladesh you
can name many many of those because a
good part of that development is in
built already in the relationship
between the atmosphere ocean and ice so
we could mitigate yes for some later
progression of this oldest phenomenon
but with certain amount of consequences
we certainly will have to deal with this
means will happen we will need to have
some anticipation again towards
minimizing losses so I don't think that
law or international law at least is
always an attorney sticker I think it's
anticipatory but we would need to think
what is the what is leading this
anticipation what should lead this
anticipation what should motivate it
so there's a lot on the a lot on the
agenda so maybe I could sort of pick up
your initial questions and turn to those
comments so you know absolutely I mean
lawyers don't have a monopoly on
normativity in any sense I was very
careful to say it's lawyers
self-description
which would have generates the kind of
epistemic posture of that kind of moment
it would of course I mean and that's one
of the reasons why in law you see a kind
of shift to kind of infrastructure
studies because of this idea that there
is a kind of functional analog in
everything from the design of your
iPhone to to the systems that are in
operation to decide whether you are on
the no-fly list on a law or not and so
and so on and so forth so the law you
know something like 'old always kind of
happening so the median able to science
enable and in all sorts of ways I think
the question of what is legal practice I
think is very very interesting and it
does connect up to the question of
anachronism I think and at the moment as
many people will know lawyers are very
anxious about the rise of AI
and the projection would be a lot of
those jobs in city law firms are not
going to survive for the next five ten
years and the rubric under which lawyers
are in the UK are talking about the the
influence of the eyes under under the
label legal operations legal operations
are tasks law tasks that could be
performed
obviously by software it turns out a lot
of law could be done by software
coincidentally legal operations is also
the title of a book by one of the
theories to have in mind and talking
about anachronism yan to a man whose
work is collected under the in french
under this title this would be of a
streetwalker and I'm not sure the title
was chosen by him because it's a
posthumous addition I don't believe it
was but the idea of these operations is
these operations are technical maneuvers
that law in a sense is not driven by
society or by
even if there are inputs but in a sense
everything has to be translated into a
pass through this kind of technical
machinery I think that sort of gets of
what I mean by anachronism I absolutely
take your point that of course law is
all over the world this is being
presented of questions for resolution
for anticipation and so on and so forth
that's that's necessarily the case but
the anachronism is kind of like an
acronym any kind of art historical sense
in a sense what you have to think about
is the construction of these two things
the beat of the moment was not being fit
and the not being of it is precisely to
do with the technical core of those
legal operations those legal operations
have a genealogy a history and
archaeology that in a sense detached is
that is I'm not gonna go so far to say
autonomous but is not of the world is
also millennial in the sense in its in
its in its curation so I think that what
you called legal machinery you said of
course it has to go through the legal
machine is that legal machinery I think
that is the moment that is of
anachronism so again think you've
anachronism of being of the present
without being all present in the present
without being
what the phrasing will be I think maybe
up dressing is a sort of a current
interested in there's not enough
anticipation because in architecture
anticipation is often misunderstood know
when you plan you know textual it's
nothing to do really with the future its
how your plan enables conditions of the
here now to be realigned to be sometimes
disassociated with previous conditions
so architectures in many ways thinking
of planning and the future not as a
fixing in in time and place conditions
to be attained
but mobilizing conditions and so it
seems to me the the way through which
are described in anticipation is far
most similar to what media theory would
call feed-forward not feedback the
feed-forward that means that you are
already somehow modifying your practice
in anticipation of a possible reception
that is yet to come but doesn't
necessarily have to ever be achieved so
it's a condition of modifying
the present and I think it's how I
understand it from my perspective in our
protection the type of the series and
the planet is all about this inversion
of planning and how we mobilize a sort
of what we call an infrastructure
unconscious of planning and we always
have to revert to normative 'ti within
planning so the question is really
whether in your practice in your
operations that you're in particular
when you meet other members of the
working group the geologist you see
other ways of projecting and I'm very
interesting understanding from how you
come to their projection of time the
anticipation from your point of view and
then I've got to follow up in this with
what is your understanding of their way
of keeping time so to say of measuring
and recording time they're measuring of
time if you speak about majority of
members of any working group in
stratigraphy hello sangeun's represent
working group is a stratigraphic working
group
there and this understanding of time
should not be anticipation it should be
reminiscence of passed away so they open
the difference of the entropies in
working group is that this past has come
to the present day
all the previous working groups dealing
exclusively with the past the holocene
working group dealt with eleven thousand
seven hundred years before present
counted from year 2000 plus minus ninety
nine years they still for us looks acid
fast in any any legal understanding or
sociological some historical but the
Anthropocene working group as an
anticipation you might say it is a
contradictory terms the Anthropocene
working group is looking at what has
happened not what will happen it is very
tempting politically to look at what
will happen but this is not the Mandate
of the intrapersonal can group the
mandate is very clear and from that
Monday also what is the Anthropocene can
be derived
now there are many understandings of the
Anthropocene but the Mandate of the
Anthropocene working group is really
clear on that and it says and if there
the country much doubt about it what the
hypothesis is he says that this is that
the group needs to investigate then he
didn't productionvalue establishing the
Germans reversing but for and this is
the bigger pot Aziz is the period during
which human modification of natural
systems has become predominant so they
don't need to anticipate in that way
they needs to establish what has
happened and go when it has happened
when has the human impact on the
modification of natural systems become
predominant
you mentioned the article by Crutzen and
steam machine and Industrial Revolution
and so on but that was his his own
initial view but the group and kreutzer
included has accepted and voted he'll
divide the binding worked on the mid
twentieth century as the time when the
human modification of natural systems
has become productive so my view on
anticipation is very different as a
lawyer I really am less interested in
this aspect I'm interested in what it is
for what it is for development of legal
scholarship so in that way is it is
anticipation and I've mentioned several
times the example of sea-level rise and
this is what we are working on in terms
of anticipation how can we anticipate
the change of international law given
one manifestation of this natural change
which still arise how do we plan for
this and what do we do what do we
propose and also how do we make period
ization of those proposals because we
can't have one single proposal
you will have short term and then winter
to longer term proposals short term
proposes four different international
law based on this anticipation have been
formulated here very happy to give you
this this organizer in a token of
appreciation for invitation this has
been recently published so now the work
the the International Committee on civil
rights and international law is working
on meet to longer term proposals related
to the question of statement to
international or personality to human
rights and migrations here anticipation
is very what you would expect from
lawyers freeze everything so freeze
legal situation regardless of the
changes of the coastal zones or the
coast basements the entitlements are
considered the legal and that means
suppose it indoors when the zones will
already proclaimed and established in
accordance with the law of a circulation
so this is as much as today's
imagination of lawyers go in in terms of
near near future anticipation I was
fortunate enough to be able to attend
one your preliminary meetings
the National Nurses Association in
lockwood's when you were debating this I
would like to come back to one of the
aspects that la
you mentioned in the beginning of your
point it was point number
what intellectual property number three
in the pattern there's a particular
aspect of what you said which is really
remarkable and how what is patented is
ingenuity but of a particular kind in
fatigue it's a function it's almost a
mathematical function and mathematical
functions to nothingness and transform
effects it's a transformative element
that needs to be addressed and
interested in understanding from your
point of view the condition as an
external you mentioned the source in one
of your writings the work of the
Anthropocene working group at the moment
in particular with the introduction of
the intrusion of the world of the
Technosphere the techno for students is
somehow looking at the function of the
Technosphere on the earth system and
somehow in a similar way as the
invention of James Watt trying to
understand the impact of human activity
of the through the Technosphere on the
earth system but there's a mediation
there of the technically of the function
so you're stuck it seems to me that the
Anthropocene working group through your
through the breeding your work is
somehow condemning in the study of a
function of a transformative action of a
completely different kind in particular
the relationship between a fossil and
fertilization in relationship to the
function is there
difficult to grasp its may is not really
fossilized yet is just a trace fossil
it's not not undergoing processes of
compacting and chemical and
transformation it just leaving traces
and recording traces so the question I'm
getting to is can you tell us more about
how you read the function in the
Anthropocene and how is it different in
your mind if at all from functions that
have characterized in intellectual
property in from its outset in James
Watts time
that's that's fantastic
I mean before before we turn to that can
I just go back to your planning question
and all I want to say is going back to
the first point I made about what do we
mean by law I think depending on what
version of law you are inhabiting I
think the approach to planning and time
is of course different if you're in
adjudication and certainly for common
lawyers the the presentation of the
decision is always as though the past
was simply that the future was simply
repeating the past the logic of
authority in adjudication picking the
common law and say well it happened
before this is like what happened before
so the future just gets folded back into
the past through a kind of trick
obviously because obviously that's the
that's the sort of laws like a time
machine in that and then in that sense
if you're talking about laws regulation
for example the closer law gets to
regulation then you get away from that
logic of temporality and you get much
closer to a kind of Foucauldian version
of what you were talking about in terms
of the feed-forward and and the sort of
reflexivity that's sort of so I think it
I think just very quickly I think it
really there could be a whole very
interesting analysis of different kinds
of modes of
of have a time making of chrono poiesis
whatever you want to call it in law
which would be which would be you would
be incredible I I don't know what to do
with your last questions it's so
fantastic and it sir just because
absolutely so with the point about the
patent is that what you get is a patent
relates to the ingenious inflection of
nature it's as almost as though you can
precipitate out the inflecting curve
which of course is nothing and say what
you get the pattern for is not all the
stuff it goes through and the trampling
through it's just that it's just that
the curve of transformation so the word
transformation is key in in in discourse
to describe that and so what you're
saying is there's a similar kind of
inflection being mapped but mapped
recorded yes in the in the form of this
this thing undergoing fossilization and
that makes me think of this kind of very
old connection between a certain kind of
the legal forensics and history and
geology that point where it geology
splits from history where when in the
17th century of the 16th 17th century
people are finding these things called
monuments home battalions or medals
which are basically saying look the
fossil is exactly like a coin an ancient
coin that you find in the ground
the ancient coin is sort of Carl
Ginsberg sense fantastic evidence
because the coin doesn't lie the coin
has impressive the king's head and dates
and some information and that sort of a
numismatic information is ultimately
corroborating you know more of this
fantastical stories about this king or
whatever same thing with the fossil the
fossil is a similar kind of I think it's
it Hutton calls them written with God's
hand so you have this idea of the fossil
doing so in a sense you have this kind
of wonderful connection between a
certain sense of the quasi textual
forensics if you see what I mean of the
recording and that goes back to that to
that early period but I need to sorry I
need to think more about that I think
it's such a stereo discussion about time
and anachronism we are running quite
late there but before we open up I have
one last question for both of you it has
to do with the simplicity of our
questions we always ask very simple
questions
we know that the answers are so
difficult one of the questions that we
like to ask and our students know very
well is how heavy cities are hand
I can't stand it I think the question is
about horizons and it's interested in my
understanding you both thought the word
arise in a different point it seemed to
me but maybe I'm wrong that you were
describing horizons as time based as
what might happen next something to look
out on well as someone who's from
prosaic and secular I always thought
that the horizon is nothing less than
interception of gaze with the surface of
the planet it just over there it's not
in the future I know that maybe things
come from over the horizon to you or you
might disappear if you run away too far
but the question is really how do you
imagine the making of law when the
horizon is no longer given you a
capacity of describing the polity urine
has been similar to you when the horizon
is not just who you keep away from and
some compact no but somehow models
things and so how would it actually
operate when you have to imagine a
planetary condition where you no longer
look compacting
versus a fix arising you mentioned that
the baseline is gonna be unstable and in
this book you show that you have to keep
it in spite of sea level rise so you
have to mark it my understanding some
rocks at the current low tide even
though the low tide will be much higher
how do you imagine that how will all
work horizon here
in the connecting Phoenix now with base
nice and we Tolleson we talk about
frontiers but with this change which
conditionally the Anthropocene the
horizon is it this time fusion
that is one meaning of it but
essentially it is the horizon of
consequences and consequences which in
terms of what we are doing climate
change and sea level rise which are
conditioned by ways and proposals for
legal mechanisms how to avoid how to
prevent so the reason for near-term
horizon to be freezing of the current
situation is precisely that this is the
an attempt to minimize the likelihood of
cognitive conflicts about the change in
zones but we also know that this
freezing will not last that long how
long we don't know because there is a
conditionality not of time but of
consequence at one point those frozen
zones will generate more conflict then
then prevent them or help in avoiding
them and that is also the horizon
so horizon here ultimately is related
two means of complete bridge so to
understand correctly you are freezing
the baseline because the frozen ice is a
melted
there is no freezing of business there
is freezing of diverse discussion which
you have seen was still about baselines
it is the freezing of maritime
environments entitlement of frozen
sweets but their eyes have melted yes it
is it is a consequence of ice of ice
change of person and the impact of those
changes so it's interesting that there
is a transfer of semantics because when
conflicts become too hot then we will
have to unfreeze and then you mentioned
the lowest semantic construct now I
start understanding here I think just in
terms of the horizon I'm not quite sure
how I used it but I think just to give
you a very small illustration which goes
to the question of sea and the gaze
meeting the surface so that was case in
Australia
almost 20 years ago where the indigenous
people were claiming land rights in an
island and so the question was they were
claiming these land rights did they also
get a certain amount of the sea seabed
and so because this was a time when the
Australian courts were pretending at
least to you know take seriously what
indigenous people will see so the judge
is go down to the seashore with the
elders of the of the group and they say
so so what are you guys claiming you
know I have thought now can you tell us
they cheap says well as far as the eye
can see
what is that what is as far as the eye
can see how many how many miles is that
how many and so if this is a transcript
because button with this absolute mutual
in comprehension of what as far as the
eye could see could possibly mean
exciting for me horizon is that it's
it's in the case of euro-american law it
is a phenomenological horizon it's it's
a scheming scheming is amorous commute
ization time work space and in the case
of prognostication around climate and
sea level we know that I mean anyone
who's read the work of Paul Edwards no
it was just how much infrastructural
complexity there is behind any
particular
horizon that is in play
friends come and ask questions
hi I've had to write this down because
I'm very conscious I'm speaking or I was
going question two to two lawyers on
that side of the table so I want to pick
up on the ship from maximizing profit to
minimizing losses and perhaps frame it
as a shift from anticipation to
precaution in a way channeling the this
protocol we call the precautionary
principle the question then is what and
how is this enshrined within a risk a
lien in enshrined with the newest
failure notion of sovereign Dominion and
domination that still delimits and
indeed patents us what would customary
law bring to reforming ir and indeed IPR
in this other is this another way
another habit of mine from the Holocene
in fact as well that shows alternative
ways of projecting time and property I
think that the little reading I've done
around this this issues that they arctic
Inuit circumpolar Council and how it is
thinking with the sea might indeed show
a way forward and I would you know could
we really interesting to hear your views
on customary law because we've spoken
about all the other kinds of law which
relate to property in very Westphalian
modes of thinking but we haven't
mentioned the customer at all
I would certainly agree that the shift
as you described is from anticipation to
precaution is well put there I would
very much agree with it in terms of our
sources of international law what we
will have to look at there are several
alternatives treaty law of course big
ones open that much about to development
because the Convention on the law of the
sea
please written as a treaty law but in
reality he discussed the gorilla
it is codification of customary law
presented in a form of a treaty
a good part of what was written in the
convention in 70s and early 80s who was
customary law and some of this was not
but it became customary law over time
like exclusive economic zone for example
it was not customary law at that time it
became so but whether customary law will
be sufficient that is a big question
because we have inferred category of
sources of international law beyond
treaty and custom and in these are
general principles of law
I believe that when we look the China
the challenges which are coming India
traversing or Indian traversing
conditions if you wish whether whether
Italy whether there will be
formalization of the intrapersonal other
we don't know but we do know that
changing rapidly changing conditions in
certain spheres will happen so the
question is in terms of legal sources
whether we will have to look at very
general principles of law whether we as
Alan mentioned anachronism very much
agree on that lawyers to look very much
and what has happened in terms of
methodology and then you look for
instance for statehood or if there is a
loss of territory what would be the East
it of international lawyer is to look
for residence and analogies and then in
that sense the first analogy would be
oh yes diverse certain examples like
Maltese order for government-in-exile
but then here we are talking about
island states where families live not
the multis order which is a very nice
villa in Aventine hill about real needs
what are the general principles of law
which could be used for safeguarding
their rights for identity keeping the
the nationhood and so so
customary law perhaps will have to be
developed for that purpose it probably
will lead to some treaty law and if not
then it will lead to conflict
more than that I don't I don't know
whether I can say really but I think
that we owned customary law general
principles of law the broader category
will probably have to have play a role
as well in this development
I can only offer sort of historical
aside which is to say that the
precautionary principle is definitely of
the Holocene because geologically all
archaeologically it can be retraced to
the French notion 16th 17th century
notion of la police in the sense of the
mode of conduct of conserving a
population security in health and safety
so there's a definitely on the Holocene
line there
perhaps but because we will not be
cautious behind the Anthropocene
no one would not to be still inhabiting
16 17th century Paris I think video just
a bit on this plane and bring back maybe
a bit of the chrono paresis aspect I
think it's not sure where its reference
but it's work from from ul on around the
relationship between history and geology
and the kind of question of of timing so
on one aspect it's kind of marking in
epoch also thinks about or let's say
also constructs a form of synchronicity
of synchronicity between places and
times right and so in a sense it seems
to as opposed to like history making or
questions around kind of a series of
events in places and times places a kind
of homogeneous point in which then
things before and after regardless of
context so regardless of other facts of
a margin I think this question around
what seems also kind of the elephant in
the room around the kind of the colonial
construction around you know it's a
shame that for example we didn't talk
about in terms of ocean law the question
of the western Indian Ocean other ways
in which you know from the eighth
century in the birth of Islam
for example the what is considered a
cradle of globalization right operated
in terms of nations still trade between
different cities across a literal that
are kind of an extremely expansive in a
very kind of developed form of written
law right through sir and Sufi jurists
etc the operated and not operate I mean
actually in in some aspects it's the
present day but my question directed
actually more around the intellectual
property point or the patent which seems
pretty kind of curious as a form of was
a kind of mark around you know the kind
of question of the mode of operation
which is the thing being patented right
the invention and this kind of
infliction something that you know what
the the patenting of genes begins to
disrupt is this notion or like a notion
around not being able to put on what is
natural right and I wonder if there is
if you can just expand think and it's
more of an observation but something
that looked like to him more around his
insofar as what is natural within this
whatever pristine hypothesis is also
shifting right and so in a sense there's
the rupture in terms of what is natural
what might have deemed to be natural
being patented but then at the same time
that frame is also expanding as a kind
of double Hooven I wonder if there's
something within that within this kind
of
intellectual property of what could be
controlled what begins to define let's
say those terms in Reverse
thank you for absolutely fantastic come
over here listen city fantastic
questions and I just sort of there's
there are too many questions in your
question so just to pick up on about a
couple of points so and I think that um
alongside the patent I think one of the
legal forms it's not just illegal forms
it goes but actually does go back to
this to this focus on just a legal form
in terms of the the story of how law is
implicated in the in the holocene and
also in the bringing us to the point of
the Anthropocene one of those legal
forms is what Sean Harris and a
beautiful article calls the long
distance corporation company or British
version or the French version and that
legal form of the long distance
cooperation with the way it distributes
risks and enables these joint ventures
and that has the lobbying power etc to
come up with etc is precisely one of the
things that is as an agent in the in
that colonial expansion and that
particular representation of people's
absolutely in terms of the pattern just
very briefly you are absolutely spot on
that what's happening now and is
happening right now in the u.s.
unsurprisingly is a sort of attempt to
completely ditch this distinction
between ingenuity in nature well we
don't know what that is any longer so
that's just argue that what we want is
utility plus not it's not excessive
monopoly we even forget this attachment
to nature any longer I think that's a
very interesting move precisely one
situated in the way that you situated
there are of course the right of the
Dutch to
participate in the in commerce in the
English is the rights to colonize the I
think the question and the job closing
what opens up a slightly different line
of thinking rather than the relationship
to nature in colonization it's one of
assuming which lineage of history has to
carry further Authority on other
lineages
it's not clear whether in your question
about the Indian Ocean and the practices
of Commerce and that long-established
policies that were raised from the Gulf
all the way to both sides of the western
Indian Ocean there is a formalization of
nature that is against the formalization
of nature that we have seen but what we
are definitely seeing is that one
argument has to be stronger than the
other so seems to me that yeah
overlapping different operations of law
different normativity
well we're not yet eliciting what that
nature my feeling so maybe we have to
hold for a second the colonial moment or
the post-colonial moment in order to
unravel the question that we started
with about nature and then it was
followed up with what is low and seems a
very interesting way maybe that we need
to start making distinctions for at
least pro tempore in order to that I
really would like to come in join us
it's not just a formality and
it's how we would like you to all come
and enjoy some of the benefits of having
a round table is that you can enjoy some
food and drinks and please come here and
let's continue the discussion for at
least for a while in a formal term and
record it and then I hope also
informally do we have further questions
there was I so I guess I'm interested in
this distinction which is coming out
around common law and whether this is
really the law that anticipates is
wonder aspires to be code ultimately and
whether there's really actually a threat
there's any other kind of law which goes
extinct other than the one that is other
than the one they're supposed to be had
anticipate and I don't mean any kind of
like politically motivated
we're but weather sort of code is this
pharmacon in this complex as something
which does anticipate that make sense
when I think about this anticipation as
I said it was always for economic gains
anticipation in Truman's declaration was
about royal anticipation in part of the
speech was about minerals about
redistribution also so if I have put
your question right
[Music]
yeah well I guess put it simply is the
law that anticipates one that aspires to
be towed and in that sort of moment that
aspiration to be code is there a
conflation of the practice of law of the
reading of law and the write on the
floor and is it not really the case that
we're actually trying to preserve other
kinds of law alongside that because I'm
like interested in the fact for instance
that like the word justice never came
about in this entire conversation and
that if we're thinking about the
instruments of law surely it is to the
service of justice yes definitely
justice was referred to in both cases in
justice Voss to secure the rights for
the most developed nations to get the
whole of continental shelf resources a
reference to justice was definitely made
what sort of justice and that's that's a
different page questionnaire the Justice
was much more prominent in the call for
common heritage of mankind as a deep
seabed resources
but again
the anticipation was there for reasons
of economic redistribution not justice
when we would now look forward justice
for countries which won't be having
their territory black Tuvalu
incidentally the smallest can't ordinary
countries we have in terms of population
like Marshall Islands which is slightly
bigger like killing us justice deer
comes from very different angle justice
to continue not as individuals but as
people that is a very different sort of
anticipation of justice in compared to
the red distribution of economic world
this is not only economy we are speaking
about this is not only politics they say
these are a very basic human rights
evolved and it brings us to the question
of what arm
the inherent rights there are deaf
different understandings of what is an
inherent right in international law
one understanding is in the law of the
sea and then I became in conflict so far
but we can foresee they they might
happen in conflict one understanding of
inherent rights in the law the seam was
defined by the International Court of
Justice in a very famous case in 1969
Nazi continental shelf faced the
limitation of the continental shelf in
between Denmark the Netherlands and
Germany and there it was said and became
customary law we were talking about
customary law that there is an inherent
right of a coastal state to continue to
sheriff and this means a sovereign right
to exploit its resources and this
translates to exploitation of oil which
is done by of course oil companies so
this is one inherent right but then
there is another inherent right the
right to life under international law of
an individual is an inherent right
and that is a part of treaty and
customary law and then there is a third
understanding which comes to this
justice case of violence countries the
right of state to self-defense and
self-defense can be interpreted in
various ways is an inherent threat the
right of the continuation of statehood
if you wish those understandings of
inherent rights especially the first
inherent right of a coastal state to
mine for oil an inherent rights of an
individual in a state even of existence
can come in conflict in perhaps not that
far the distant future and that could be
again due to consequences of sea level
rise as one example so the question of
justice
it could be to a certain extent
translated to the question of what is
really an inherent right and can we
really think that the state has inherent
right to contain yourself
in those circumstances or inherent right
to mine for oil is this an inherent
route if it hampers in of an individual
to life or inherent right of a state of
remaining a state so we could anticipate
this type of complicates can you say
very very belief I think picking up on
you Anthropocene epoch yeah I think what
what you've both put on the table for us
wonderfully is is really what should be
a question for the Anthropocene age the
question of legal imagination in some
sense and that is what idioms of justice
should be in play given how one reckons
with these unprecedented sort of in
implications of time space history that
are presented under the rubric of the
Anthropocene so I think the question of
but even whose justice but but what
idioms of justice and that connects kind
of with your question about code because
I from one perspective a code is always
a work in progress it's always being
fabricated even if one imagines it in a
Napoleonic sense and something that is
finished once and for all and that
process of fabrication is one that
inherently risks alienating justice or
that the justice that is supposed to be
objective so a little bit a further
difficulty in thinking codes in
contemporary architecture codes are not
an aspiration to a stable condition but
on the contrary conceptualize as
precursors to our to design we and
that's maybe to add to the anxiety about
artificial intelligence
I wanted to ask about the role of
transformation because the the way in
which you were mapping out what what I
heard of this discussion the law has the
ability to cope with change so that it
can different different changing
circumstances can then be met by various
kind of legal shifts but what we're
experiencing now around climate change
around questions of environment in the
Anthropocene it's actually imbued with a
huge transformative shift so the ways in
which large scale large segments of the
population are encountering knowledge
encountering a kind of dramatic sense of
crisis becoming familiar with language
gaining a little bit of access to
scientific and other kinds of knowledge
around these these kind of crises
that's transformation and not change and
so my question is to this particular
moment which is very distinct from any
other moment around let's say questions
of the plan
when suddenly populations have accessed
the planetary knowledge which they
didn't even two years ago that's a
transformation and how does the law
encounter transformation
it certainly is as you say a huge
transformative shift I really good
agreement can agree with that
how will the Lord deal with it
not easy of course we have spent six
years of intensive discussion in this
International Committee which is under
the International Association as a
senior
it doesn't compete in international and
save our eyes
only to define that for the near-term
future we would wish to freeze the
current legal situation in face of
really huge transformative
transformation
so the questions are very very complex
and my own belief in ability of law to
be timely is in a way
I wouldn't say pessimistic
I will perhaps not waste a skeptical
cautious
cautious of
we'll be be really able to propose in
advance because we need to do that
certain transformation for the intricacy
and I can respond toward the practice of
longer because I'm not even nervous but
I can't respond to who is it is the
utmost responsibility of international
law scholarship to focus its energy on
this type of endeavor in the law of the
sea which is my field in the law of
statehood and all human rights that this
type of challenge which we are
facing us really huge transformative
shift which is very quick deserves or
dictates responsibility of international
or scholarship of adopting different
conceptual perspectives different
methodological approaches
in terms of treaty interpretation for
instance and with awareness of the
ultimate goal which really is
what every miss or the Miss Universe
will say on the context
saving the world peace but really
preventing comebacks
that is the constant of international
there is no transformation in there and
I don't think everyone wishes to
advocate transformation in that sense
but transformation in terms of scholarly
paradigm shift is very important why is
this important for international office
as practice he said I'm not dealing with
practice however for the practice of
international law international law is a
scholarship of international is somewhat
different standing in other disciplines
international law scholarship is
included in article 38 of the statute of
International Court which lists the
sources of international yes together
with its Russian judiciary SMEs of
interpreting the content of the sources
of international this means
interpretation however the role of
scholarship should be stronger towards
contributing to the development of this
is my connection
so in that sense I am I'm not skeptical
but in the sense of how much this will
really be translated into practice of
international but we have to do what
what we can do and this is our
responsibility as colors so when he also
asked me what in my practice I don't
have any protection I'm a scholar
research professors they say I didn't
even teach
catalyst questions yeah I think you very
kindly showed us your diagram put it up
and release it to institution I think
it's very important and I think you've
got the interesting things about it in
comparison to discussion thank you Steve
you know everything changed and you very
quickly put forward its the conclusion
changes
- dissenters
so we'll need to see things about that
is actually that this diagram incense
for licensure it delineates what
international law was trying to do and
give it an eight hundred five so that's
what it was and we need to change that
so does that mean that in a sense this
diagram is actually implicit because in
a sense it facilitates at the
possibility of the exploitation of
minerals and so on in a manner that
actually avoided conflict and there's
different type of conflict that we're
trying to look at but one of the
interesting things about it that is so
precise that in a sense allow to happen
that economic model may happen in the
way so therefore I mean a lot of
marketing plays please don't get me
wrong on that front says it's quite
interesting with the internet or has
something do is I think it'd be quite
hard to take patent law and say oh right
whereas I think the territorial one
becomes very very very interesting d in
the sense if one element of it is fixed
in a way I think the whole thing has to
move it's because all the relationships
all the other lines that you're putting
down to do the exploitation of nature
yes it is so of course so the question
really is for for some future of our
love the sea is how to organize
activities which stretch through those
zones we don't have that that movement
and price are very clearly cut here
serenity sovereign rights exclusive
jurisdiction and then free-for-all now
one could think of regulating certain
activities through those zones in a
uniform way that's a question
and there might be a need in the time to
combat
the architecture itself indeed has
facilitated the developments but they
were facilitators even before this
architecture here we have one so that
that that even without the architecture
which we have has given the ideological
framework if you wish for the
globalization which which appealed
[Music]
even though it was not meant to do
[Music]
maybe just put that in context of
oceanographic studies it's quite obvious
that the recent development show how
deep ocean activity is fundamental in
it's called the up well of nutrients
onto land so in the great part the left
were highly dependent on the group from
activity happening on the great part on
the right of the diagram so questions of
responsibilities of internal waters was
that it was fighting impressively
shuffled up by research by scientists
like Tim Lenten that was recently here
and under the title he was freedom of
the sea the main title but with
understanding of the consequences which
we have today we have to speak not about
the freedom of the sea but about the
responsibility for the sea
and under view of those zones in terms
of space responsibilities would need to
change about how to regulate activities
across
but the question of decorate
deconstructing reconstructing those
zones is a very difficult very serious
very far-reaching and we have not come
there in terms of proposals that do they
[Music]
it was supposed to be 15 minutes short
statement and a long discussion but
everybody still attempted it's about
time that we close so maybe we have one
last question with anybody so that's it
yes why nobody opens those wines because
if you as well please join me in
thanking
[Music]
[Applause]
