first of all thank you very much for the
invitation it's really always nice to
come back here I remember the last time
I was standing here was mtech student so
it's nice to be here again
show him what happened so far so I'm
here today to talk about
bio-inspired kinetic structures I'm one
of the main research topics at the ITP
insta-bed which is an engineering
Institute was in the Faculty of
architecture led by Professor Dr Octopus
here at the Institute about 15 PhD
students working on all kinds of stuff
one of the traxxas as I mentioned
genetic structure segmented chase wood
construction and fiber binding so one of
the main research topics is related to a
fabrication nasur the fiber composites
in general we're here for a stone called
aggregation mr. ICD pestle Mangus mr.
dependable Qualis fiber binding so how
can we use robotic fabrication methods
to create fiber composite structures
without the use of form work and several
examples I want to show just a few here
now the research pavilion 2014-2015
where we had a plume attic formwork and
robot the cooker robot placed inside a
inflated bubble and it was placing
fibers from the inside under membrane
and also no more applied projects like
this first and we buried a couple of
years ago for the University of
Stuttgart to present our research at the
trade fair in Hermosa where we had also
a cooker over robot at the fair who was
which was showcasing this whole process
and the
other main thread will be used fibre
composites those adaptive applications
based on elastic deformation of the
material where we have quite a few
research projects and a couple of years
ago OSHA the geometric Pavilion at the
expo in South Korea that brought this
approach to actual architectural
applications so if we talk about
adaptivity it means broad adapted that
adaptivity means that having the ability
to change to suit different conditions
which is a common phenomenon and
biological systems such as evolution or
changing its appearance to height for
predators or also insects use forming
strategies to adapt material and
adaptable structures to the colony size
into their needs and especially in
plants and we can see a lot of movements
in in the plans to serve different means
to the carnivores plans to feed or to
follow the Sun or to minimize their
surface during night to be not that
obvious to not be eaten and so on so for
adaptive architecture one could argue
that every architecture should be
adaptive and it has to be adapted to
suit different conditions or so during
the day to different needs of the user
but as adaptive architecture we would
understand maybe more structures or
system with systems which are designed
to can actively be altered to serve
different needs and either their
environmental conditions or structural
behavior or programmatic views so they
are also a lot of examples which
reconfigures ace or recently we consider
nitrile pavilion
and the ICD and ITT last year in London
the the movement of the people was track
during the installation and influence
where we would case the next component
based on the movement patterns or the
smart shell which is done at the ELA at
the University instructed which uses
this active support points to contact
vibrations in the shape therefore - I
can be much synod in it you should be
you should be so if you have this
structures that's to vibrate those
columns support conditions and contact
this vibration and stabilize the whole
structure
another main topic of adaptive systems
right now in architecture facade so can
be controlled environment inside of a
building by changing the opacity of the
building but most of those systems right
now are based on straight or planar
component components which tied it along
straight rotational squared translation
excesses this leads to very tight design
constraints or if it comes to more
complex geometries like here this
example done by Renzo Piano and for
zucchini Passaic engineers that if you
have double curved geometry star systems
are not applicable anymore and due to
the high mechanical complexity they also
in various various they can be applied
they need to be mounted in the inside
which leads to a sufficiency for Sun
shading then their membrane structures
which can be basically adapted to more
complex or to a higher variety of
geometries but the disadvantage of those
structures is that they can be either
open or closed
and in between state is very vulnerable
so the state needs to be changed very
fast there are only two stable
conditions when
folding structures as pochamma
applicable to curve the double curved
geometry select the hybrid cars per
ADA's shows the potential of penalizing
those structures into and in a different
way in a new way but this example relies
on Richard body mechanics each of those
panels is made of high amount of
different parts and that also leads to
vulnerability so that's the background
for the reason why we studied the spire
inspired kinetic architectural
applications was the use of compliant
mechanisms so to complete mechanisms an
engineering or craftsmanship in the
human history nashing use of examples
both used also complaint mechanisms
which means that they use an elastic
deformation of the involved parts to
fulfill a certain function leaded
functionality in contradiction to
richard body mechanisms where richard
parts are linked together which
basically frictionless joints we focus
on how can we achieve from generality by
functionally distributed materiality to
concentrate the deformation in parts and
we want to have so that's also a huge
research community which applies to
oceans for creepers from a particular
purpose of design research set of this
name their bertram and i measured how to
create a movement person than to arrange
basically material in nevada that
follows those movement parts and
bio-inspired compliant mechanisms i
studied and stood already since 2007 and
dr visa martini started with this topic
at the University in Stuttgart
which was followed by the dissertation
of Simon Schleicher
where there's a martini followed more or
less a top-down process that he defined
architectural functionality and tried to
abstract movement principles for the
nature seaman's work was more the
bottom-up approach we really tried to
understand the movement principle plants
and simulated those movement principles
on the spinet element analysis and also
tried then to abstract the certain
parameters so what we ever came from on
right now and with my PhD research is
focused on is how can we establish a
design framework for compliant
mechanisms for that adaptive
architecture functionality and how
scalable could this be and also on
finding suitable materializations photos
so while commonly those structures found
in nature categorized in a very
biological race or based on how can the
movement and be produced and they said
to ago pressure or is it an external
actuator or is it and movement of
muscles and bone structures we right now
try to implement more technical view on
those classifications and how this
movements can be amplified so that the
small initial movement leads to a larger
change of the geometry and also in if we
can change the direction of curvature in
the elements so that leads to this
overview that we we define our very
logical role models and at the same time
we define
try to work on a technical descriptions
of how those biological systems would
behave or how they are to their shape
to categorize them in a new way and also
them to have designers to say okay I
want to have a certain movement or a
certain degree of freedom in which kind
of biologic assistance I could find them
and then how they basically utilize for
this movement so first of all we want to
look into the pending behavior of those
systems they're several ways so we can
manipulate our structure pens so if we
just bend any sheet of material or what
that always follows elastica curve but
if you start to alter the material
distribution we can differentiate the
bending behavior also by the way how to
actuate them how at which point we
introduced contractions or displacements
and control points manipulates the
bending behavior but also how we fix the
boundary conditions of the irritation if
we or if they were fixed in certain
points and so and so we can manipulate a
lot of this this leads them to what can
we do with this and if we can manipulate
the bending behavior we are going to
show some slides of the master thesis of
a student of mine from FSM from last
year and Witten who this research was
focused on how to how can we assemble
bending active segmented chairs not
limited anymore to the elastic refer you
can see that every isotropic uniformly
deformed distributed material along our
plates that will always follow the
elastic curve but if you distributed in
a way we can basically design our
surface and arrange the material
according to our design criterias
so here it would be possible that we
even can bend an arc that we go from
there's a koliseo stiffness to very high
stiffness it doesn't follow any modern
elastic a curve that we can end
circa of course and reality is not
possible because we cannot have zero
stiffness but we can broaden the design
range quite a lot so you can see we can
draw the curves we can see here in the
left side and then distribute the
material along our strips according to
the needed stiffness and distant based
on a lamination process of tape plane
measured where we have discrete elements
along our strip and you can orient the
fibers in a way and the sickness and the
amount of layers to fit exactly our
design criterion we can and a lot of
shapes and at the end he developed this
design tool you said can create a
free-form
share structure then why not then this
surface gets discretized into strips
which plenum the eight develop a plan
erasing the cuts along the strip which
is followed by the stiffness
distribution and this whole chain to
prove the concept was exported to a unit
element analysis program here sophistic
you can see a field and just pour
basically the endpoints of the strips to
the final positions of the structure we
bent almost exactly the shape we
designed and if you forced and the
strip's together in Herman will you
reach the surface and we overcome also
the weakness of pending active
structures in general they need to be
flexible enough that we can bend them
but we achieve in this way very
sufficient
shade structure and another master she
says in a similar topic was done by I'm
Kenya takahashi
he basically investigated the
scalability of bending active
take plates for roof constructions and
he made a lot of experiments and
analytical and simulation right of
studies in how we can scale and by I
Turing the support conditions by how can
we add torsion into the element that we
bent those systems out of plane to
create an opening and closing and tested
them under certain loading conditions
like wind and snow Lord and basically
came up with each of the systems of this
nirvana site supported cable actuated
structure you can see on the left a
range of size we can use a system like
distant unrelated strip in the middle
and the cable supported lamb plate on
the right which would be large enough to
spend a distance of 45 meters that just
actuate in her contract indicators below
those plate structures then as mentioned
before another topic which we are
investigating is the motion
amplification of the system so meaning
we only have a small displacement in a
very discreet position and this should
lead to a large geometrical change where
we especially try to define the mesh
words where we can find her concepts in
biology which are very closely related
to craft line folding for two straight
line folding for example insect wings or
to lecture torsional buckling um like in
this it's a short later in more detail
again we abstract the principles how we
need to distribute material if he the
whole surface is spending of the penile
system is bending or just in local areas
and how we could picture it those
systems then get in the next step
translated to
fiber composite structures together with
our partner Institute and of and now I
just want to give an overview about the
research projects in this we're looking
and self that started off with this flag
- which was done already before yes
before arrived in Stuttgart which as I
mentioned was based on this still Edina
that was landing on this stem of this
flower and then two petals open due to
the pending deformation of this stem and
so those petals are connected to it as
we can see in the bottom or basically if
we bent this what the the plate parker's
to the side and this is the whole secret
behind it basically that we have this
chief appeared as glass fiber what bris
lamellas from decided if it produced
bending into this and what the lamellas
opened to the side so that's the usual
process those concepts are investigated
that we have the whole model we try to
figure out the kinetic behavior of it
with simulations and then we translated
and we work on the capability to more
complex geometries rather than two flat
surfaces but this effect often had some
challenges which we needed to overcome
so the materiality of this element is
very much homogeneous and this leads to
very high stress concentrations and also
to very high activation forces so that's
why we by looking into how can we and
create similar systems but was very
distinct hinge zones which were flexible
and we could we'd use this stress
concentrations and also reduced
activation forces which led to the
development of the so-called flag toward
will be again work
Fryeburg together and with the material
developers of the idft
and then enough to finding solutions in
nature to where to develop systems with
distinct flexible instance and one of
those examples would be the I'd wonder
basic Palooza which is a underwater
carnivores plant genetically very
closely related to the Venus flytrap but
the movement is based on completely
different behaviors where the Venus
flytrap has this snaps fruit buckling
effect and this example the whole motion
is triggered by bending this mid-trip
and then adjacent ropes close so if you
have a closer look tat we can see that
there's a zone which is very sinned and
similar to a fault line to a curved
fault line so which led us to the
investigation of curved forum which is
nothing new and design and studied
already at Bauhaus and various
applications from heart objects to car
design but what was relatively new as
how can be used as for kinetic systems
than to understand the king kinematic
behavior of their systems we needed to
define and to studied parameters it's
romantic parameters we can change to
manipulate the bending behavior the
closing behavior we developed a
kinematic model based on the reflection
plane method which says that if we have
curved geometry and the forward line
would stay within one plane we can use
this plane to mirror
the surface and the approximate
left4dead geometry so in our case that
means that in the midrib the introduced
bending deformation and based on the
spending deformation we can simulate or
approximate the holding behavior of the
system so as we can see here we have a
very close relationship of the radius of
those falklands to how much displacement
we need or how much venom deformation we
need how much activation we need and so
on so in short you can say that if you
have a smaller radius we have larger
displacement in our control points on
our support points but also higher
curvature and thus higher curvature
could be used for stability reason
Sophia for higher kravitch and the
elements and we gain more geometric
stiffness which is especially if you're
looking on facade shading systems very
advantageous than later to wind loads
etc and in the next step then this
models gets inserted by the kinematic
model gives us only insights of the
geometric relationship of all those
parameters but we don't know the
structural performance we don't know how
much force we need to actuate them we
use this model and translated into a
finite element model where we apply
glass fiber reinforced plastic material
properties and different sicknesses
Tudors and different areas developed the
midrib and our distinct hinge zone and
we also can simulate the actuation force
which in this case no would be a
parametric aschen that just placed
behind the mid-trip to introduce
depending to the mid quit and then again
we can make study with different radius
different hingeless etc to see um how
much force we need how much curvature we
really get because it's not one-to-one
propagated along the hinge etc or the
hinge is spending and so on and so forth
and then you can make the study we can
swim in defined areas where we have high
stress concentrations of a female change
the geometry slightly in this areas how
we can reduce this and another important
aspect is how a different arm activation
methods also could influenced at once
and the bending behavior but also the
the stress concentrations as we can see
here the first graph shows the deviation
of our structure the simulated structure
to the purely geometric models the
kinematic model versus perfect arc like
shapes how much our bent geometry
differs from this in dispute and if you
go to the second row of graphs where we
see the stress concentrations along the
hinge we can see that we have they're
quite corresponding and where we have
large deviations of our perfect geometry
we also have very high stress
concentrations so the next step here
would you know how can we adjust
activation forces to get closer to our
kinematic geometry to reduce the
stresses or we can rearrange the
material in a way that we compensate for
this button then the next step was how
can we really materialize this and
another track we were investigating the
ring folding patterns of beatless which
basically know some of them in a really
very sophisticated
Pattin able to fold their wings finish
their four wings and also with a very
local activation they unfold them very
rapidly and even they are very small
they can take what hide loads was very
very same materials and then we were
looking especially closer to the forward
lines they're basically two ways or to
reduce the stiffness in those four
lengths
so in short it's the sickness of the
material but also the composition of the
fibers and protein matrix in this areas
then rich I've been collaboration with
our material scientists we were able to
develop material a up again with glass
fiber reinforced composites and a last
Tamiya um layers to create those hinge
zones which allowed us to even not just
work just to have this fold in behavior
so at the end we can say that this
element took the geometric principles
from one biological model the curved
folding system and depending of the
midrib and how the Scots propagated to
this large traumatic change of the whole
system by the materiality or the
abstraction of the new reality came from
a completely different neurological
model so it's not a translation went to
one of what we see in nature that we
take inspiration of different phenomena
we find and try to we combine and this
led then to this um large-scale
demonstrator which was designed and
constructed by my colleague Samantha
Fabian which can be seen right now in
Stuttgart at the Museum
Natural History Museum there's a
exhibition about biomimetic in building
industry
it's posted me anyone was interested and
each of those elements has one of those
climatic Russians which spent this
metric and by been intimate with home
flat surface flat surfaces fault
so then we were talking a lot about this
geometry that ability of the system to
complex geometries and there we run into
one problem with this left falling
element because it always needs to have
a certain preferred condition so that we
know that if we went the Midway that
falls in the right way and not bends
just the whole surface so we can't
isolate the surface into quartz and we
need to make slightly anti clastic
shaped what's out of those pennies and
we can translate them into our component
and perform our deflector folds that are
useless as production data for
fabrication so again we see order
surfaces tessellated how we need to
adjust slightly the surface and to
populated with these elements and then
we have our kinetic facade system but as
I said this always needs this before and
we need to alter a traumatic condition
so therefore we're looking awful way so
we can start from a flat surface or we
can change the direction of curvature
even so one possibility would be to
actuate the hinge itself so we can start
from a flat condition and by actuating
were inducing our bending in the
discrete hinge zone we can go from flat
to left or if you have two actuators and
the interest on video even can change
the direction or we changed on geometric
variation which leads to the element and
the white board I said you just rotate
the whole system by 90 degree and
actuated the x axis of an under laying
mesh and
editor's left folding elements where we
also can go for mass and classic
romantic lastic surface without altering
the surface which we then built as a
prototype in a workshop last year in
Tehran and also it was interesting but
it's interesting to mention years that
we don't have any stiff connections to a
fixed substructure that we have this
sort of compliant connection points
between all four complete sub structure
so if we shorten those extra spare
inflate in them the whole deformation is
compensated in the extras and we don't
have any moving parts in the whole
system so we just tested the whole
system on a again double curved surface
we tessellated into a triangulated mesh
and yeah like some experiments in how
can we optimize the structural system
populated with our element and we're
then bending the edge Chester facade
opens and closes H and wasp it so as we
can see here when we inflate in the
actuators the size of each edge changes
but we have no not one single moving
connection in the whole structure and
then the last topic um would be the
change of curvature direction which can
be also found in various um biological
role models as mentioned before the
venus flytrap with justice snaps will
behavior basically as a speed boost to
catch its prey but for example this fan
on the right side undergoes very similar
to a metrical change but in a very
smooth transition so it's a question for
the biologists how this can happen
so by one snap screw the other one not
for us it's interesting because snaps
through behaviors always accompanied by
a very high release of elastic stored
energy which can be quite dangerous
period of systems up and also the
fatigue in the material is very high so
we were shrinking how could this work
and we had an idea so maybe the initial
geometry of this fan is actually not
clear but it's flat and by trying out a
way of collecting whatever cell
expansion in different layers it can
change its geometry then we tested this
again and if any element analysis that
we have a quit of fiber bundles and says
which can expand and contract and we
considered in this way we can go from a
flat to a curved position and if you
know have two layers of cells so you can
easily imagine that you can change the
direction of curvature of a system like
this and this is quite interesting
because then you can imagine that you
can inform or so the geometry you want
to achieve by the arrangement of your
fiber bundles and where you contract
where you expand to control also the
geometry between system like this could
change which and again leads me to the
master chooses a flat hiding and choi
geumja gravity we just finished one
months ago their master thesis on
tailoring cell formation fabrication and
simulation of membrane iterated
stiffness gradient so the idea of them
was to place glass fiber or carbon fiber
strength unto a prestressed membrane and
after releasing the tension it formed
the geometry so inspired there lot of
projects which were done before like the
adidas future
she's the fiber tailored fiber placement
to manipulate the bending behavior to
bend this shoes into a predefined
geometry or the active shoes at the
self-assembly lab at MIT which was a
similar principle a print material onto
the membrane and then releasing the
tension and it forms this and the last
example which was developed here a
couple of years ago by M Tech students
and was presented this year at ISS in
Hamburg which also used this
pre-stressed membranes and by cutting
out certain areas of her stiff material
to form sheets so they wanted to take
this worker trying to lift up on this
previous work which was done to
basically define formation rule so how
really can be in manipulate pattern of
those fibers to to fit to a given
geometry which we want to achieve so
they had this design intention they did
for more than six months a lot of
physical and digital experiments and how
we need to shape those cells to achieve
to allow for deformation into some
classical inter clastic geometries and
then use this data based on the
fabrication constraints of tailored
fiber placement to allow for designing
of the surfaces in a sunglass type in
the entire class division so as
mentioned they used in this fiber tailor
placement so they figure out the
curvature and certain areas they
influenced how those fibers Valley laid
up how those cells are formed to
contract in different directions then
yeah so they suit those fibers onto the
membrane applied the resin that it cure
let it half cure it is also important to
say then they released attention
it bends into shape then it cures
completely and it gets a well as rigid
structure and justice measured so at the
top row we can see the design so they
wanted to design a sim clastic dome-like
shape cordis saddle shaped and they're
applied their design rules and
information woods and on the bottom or
we can see that the physically resides
actually pretty close to the design
intense and then also this Bergson
combinations and transitions and they
also developed and sort of design tool
that we can design this changes of
curvature curvature direction positive
and negative Gaussian curvature and the
pattern gets applied to it and they're
able to showcase Thyssen above RIT of
some physical exam dress and yeah which
this area first went to mention it all
the work we're doing this no PhD
research also the pavilions would not be
possible without our great and amazing I
take students which really bring a lot
of input and work into our environment
and wish to say would like to close and
any any questions thank you very much
first of all for a very interesting
lecture and if there any question is
yeah yeah they made yes I mentioned I
mean they're a really short is not very
very briefly because I should we didn't
publish anything about this so far but
they yeah I mean they made experiments
with a lot of different membrane
materials for much quistis especially in
the simulation how much elongation
uniform pre-stress or directed
pre-stress different stiffness of the
fibers different densities of the fibers
different orientations yeah so I have
two questions one is that basically you
use a lot of this by inspiration so how
this transition from biology to
architecture is happening you have your
architectural ambition and then you are
trying to find let's say the biological
principle to it or you're inspired by
biological principle and then you apply
to architectural idea which can be
suitable that's one question another one
maybe it's quite done but for the last
project you showed you have add I agree
right to change the curvature what will
happen if you will put different pattern
like a triangle or a hexagon will it
work no will it change it somehow
triangle is it doesn't work because and
it looks okay and
so the clock based patterns move quickly
on the first question it's maybe a bit
more difficult I think it's it's also
not possible to answer isn't very clear
short answer because it's a false
context or I mean redefining a problem
and we are looking for a solution but
then we don't get a look at this plant
from the biologists as the answer for
problems right so it's I think it in the
day to day work it's swimming in
swimming out all the time so here we
want to find certain principles which
enable a certain behavior but and we
have a broad range of fun systems which
are doing this more some of the more
suited or some of the my less suitable
then we analyzed one role model but can
not find the immunization today I mean
it's just you cannot find the solution
of our problem in one role model but we
can extract certain principles and
combine them as principles we found in
another role model and that's also why
so my personal purpose related to
identifying let say some how to put
categories on those phenomenas we find
in relation to what we would need in a
technical application and discussed the
Standish and the colleagues from biology
also which helps them then them to have
a new or a different look into the very
logical systems because they lookin into
Gnostic movement so
movements based on microscopic behavior
but that movements which are triggered
by this can be found also certain
animals or can be found triggered by a
completely different mechanism or
different purpose cross links all of
this logic and one question please first
of all thank you for a very interesting
presentation um regarding biomimetics
principles
um you just mentioned hygroscopic
movement I wanted to ask there seem to
be a trend moving away from using
natural material to synthetics when
applying a biomimetic principles um
could you maybe comment about the
material of choice how come it is seen
more from I see DNA tech using synthetic
materials as opposed to natural ones in
applying biomimetics principles I mean
it's a first of all this first I mean
there also to research tracks but in the
ICD and idk if we want to have negative
materials which um that actuated by a
hocus copic phenomena compared to having
a system which is actively controlled by
any sort of control mechanism then the
choice of material that we use Technica
composite materials is based on the
quite now availability that we know if
we use certain
seriously yes research dan roden proven
to have certain parameters but at the
same time professor Han I died here at
our Institute is researching into
bio-based composite materials to replace
those them synthetic materials more and
more with very logical fibers or bio
essence so it's just research which goes
in parallel on different levels to quite
now we have met you we have this
material if you define how we can
produce it with that he will hey we can
use this knowledge to apply to another
material but at this moment we have
basically not so much choice and
material components we can use filler
systems release he has to exhaust the
air or you can feed it back into the
system like a like a hydraulic system
in Syria could be back but it's not so
um there's one Inlet but the air gets
pushed out put up in this case we have
stored elastic energy in the whole
system if we release the pressure the
elastic energy is just used to let
material so it's the nice ring on those
systems we have this dramatic actions
which are very light don't need a lot of
energy and could use still quite high
forces but in the examples we show here
we are below 1 bar range and we just
need an impulse in one direction we
don't need a controlled movement and
also what I shot with this example today
works have been tellin that we also
don't need the site accuracy of
controlling each movement in a perfect
choreographed way because all this
elastic parts working together allow for
distribution of those and inaccuracies
um just a question about the mechanics
of it in your research are you also
thinking about how these structures will
be powered like how you will act the
movements all of these things how what
kind of energy you'll use to actually
make them work um yeah we do in general
it's not part of my personal research
but yes so first of all as I mentioned
we use a lot of cinematic actuators
because they don't need so high amounts
of pressure and also quite now we are
working on how to integrate different
functionality in those elements such as
solar cells and ago solar cells etc so
too was okay and again energy okay cool
we need energy too okay yes a source
[Applause]
