[Applause]
so just very briefly because I'm sure
we're all anxious to hear what our
speakers have to say I'm just gonna
quickly introduce our panel platanus is
the co-director of projective cities and
unit master of diploma seven and he's to
kind of take forward this theme of
forward on how we used the past and
present to design cities for the future
next to his left
Patricia Roy kenapa is an a graduate
from 2017 and she expanded her interest
in kind of cataloguing as a form of
practice to then embarked on a
curatorial project to bring together a
historical Arctic exhibition expedition
and a reenactment of that expedition by
Oxford University students which is what
she'll be talking about this evening
Sian Cheng next is a graduate of both
the projective cities program and the
city is a project ph.d program and she's
going to be talking about her current
research project collective forms in
China that challenges the
western-centric kind of understanding of
urban design Zoe's fencin designs
participatory performances such as the
recent we now know we know now what we
may be at the Barbican Centre and she
speculates on how economic and political
systems can respond to change for the
future through the medium of performance
Marie Louise Rao is an a graduate from
2015 she currently works at Hertzog and
Iran in Basel but she's here tonight to
talk about a self initiated project
called a hundred minds that inspired by
historical conversations like cm and the
data is so more recently I Weiwei she
tried to reach out to her kind of
friends and networks to encourage a new
form of conversation collaboration and
exchange and last but not least marina
Lahiri is the director of the history
and critical thinking program and is the
author of the appli title city cultures
contemporary positions on the city among
others and she'll talk tonight about the
power of words across time so we're
going to kind of run in that order each
speaker is going to briefly state their
position and
then we will open it up to a wider
conversation and stick around there will
be drinks afterwards to continue the
conversation more informally so please
join me in welcoming tonight's speakers
[Applause]
I will of course I have no idea how to
answer this question right I mean I
actually want to say a few things that
are not related with the program or the
Diploma unit we had a conversation about
what the program does
last week when we present it actually
the different graduate programs in the
school so I I just decided actually to
throw a few ideas and I also selected by
the images that have apart from one have
nothing to do with architecture at least
in the first place so they are not
drawing representations of architectural
projects and it don't come from the
program either so I kind of messed up
with the event first of all I mean I'm
somehow reluctant to talk about the
future because I think there is not one
future there are multiple futures right
and I think these are always product of
social conflicts and struggles right in
the city so I don't think that we can
actually even within a kind of
pedagogical framework to agree and
that's actually a very good thing where
to take the scholar wait to take
architectural photo where to do with
architectural theory or how to do
architecture at large so we should first
of all accept that there is not one
future but multiple worlds and we should
also accept that whatever comes out of
this kind of power play of different
imaginations wouldn't necessarily
actually hopefully wouldn't make
everyone happy
so which somehow embrace the fact that
we are producing forms apologies
thoughts words images that are
[Applause]
conflicts so we shouldn't try to find
you the future maybe we should discuss
what everyone believes about you know
towards where we want to take something
instead of just trying to embrace one
common possibility now the other thing
that I want to say very briefly is that
I am very much interested in the ways by
which what we do in a way today distorts
the past so nowhere the past is never
given actually the contemporary the
current production Rhea probe I mean
reorganizes every product every text
every word every image we produce in the
past and I think we actually and that's
some that I try to show with these five
images quite often we work with
anachronisms so what displacing images
we are appropriating images we are using
a typical let's say situations for
example that is one painting by a Hindi
will a where in a way imitates a
painting by exactly the vid with a
representation of power of course it's
Napoleon leading the army over the Alps
but in the case of Willie it's actually
a african-american male right so it's a
again a play with conflicts with
problems with identities and with
different imaginations I think I will
leave it for now I'm also used a very
safe image in my selection which is of
course the very famous painting by Clair
the Angelus Novus and we come back to it
okay thank you
hi so I graduated a year ago and I went
to architecture practice like most a
students and then I came across this
film called speed spec and retraced in
which two arted expeditions to the to
the North Pole actually happen a century
apart so there was this film telling the
story of how this came to be and my
position in this or my way forward in
trying to understand what I could do as
an architect after leaving the a was
a question in the four months so the
material is really interesting I was
asking myself what the media should be
doing and how it should be communicated
so the whole exhibition proposal
curation came across a stage
collaboration with the expedition
members telling them my my idea of how
this should be shown and the expedition
art especially something I'm clearly
foreign to so I became interested in
being an outsider of something that's
very built and so I looked at scientific
research and how these things are shown
generally and by by being outside of it
I think there's a there's room to play
with other things so as an architect I
think we come into the intersection of
many disciplines and I think in terms of
going forward or my method methodology
it's an important thing to do to
actually remove yourself from a comfort
zone and actually look at things in a
different way I think this is why I came
to London and this is why I also look
back at home in a different way there's
how if I was saying there's a condition
of looking looking at the features also
looking at the past so one of my images
actually this is money my images so when
of the photo there's four photographs
from alleged yesterday which is an
architect from from you where engineer
sari from Uruguay and being here allow
me to see those buildings in a different
way and actually understand them from a
different perspective so I think this
separation either temporal like
Spitsbergen so seeing when landscape
through the lens of today and seeing a
building from a different geographical
point like here in London I think that
sort of allows a different way of
traversing things or understanding
things and in terms of my approach or my
interest in cataloguing I think it
becomes relevant in the context of the
references I been building upon so
there's water benjamin and georges perec
and I think the methodology of pantora
and when constructing the present
through the past so what the Benjamin
was actually doing a catalogue of his
own life which is pretty much what I'm
attempting to do with 22 lists that I
carry about everything I eat everywhere
I go and everywhere I travel so I think
this kind of way of doing things is
actually I'm retracing of my own life in
sort of real-time and I think it it's
building up to some somehow in the
future look at my past and try to
understand certain things so I I think I
don't really have a way forward I'm just
trying to build the present to somehow
in the future be able to look at it in a
different way and maybe yeah the last
thing is the importance for me of this
removal of always becoming a bit of a
stranger to looking at things in a
different way
some Sian and that's actually about work
so for me it's quite it's a quite
difficult question like forward it's
quite difficult words so for me for its
power like alternative ideas directions
positions that depart from or challenge
traditional norms so it's unnecessarily
to say we create or invent alternatives
I would rather say discover acknowledge
or simply be aware of alternatives as
they often exist and have just been
simply overlooked so I'll try this role
several pairs of terms to explain what I
mean by this type of alternative the
first is the public and the collective I
think acropole the public space and the
individual subjectivity are among the
most predominant ideas in the Western
conception individual subjectivity is
something like fundamental to one's
identity in society and in this sense a
public's
space is for individual expression while
addressing a larger society but however
the individual in China is largely seen
as a constituent part of a larger
collective so rather than a dialectic so
individual and collective are understood
in the relational unit for unified or
associational terms so in this sense
shared spaces are actually collective
spaces which just facilitates everyday
activities for a group living closely
around it and through which the
association between individuals and the
collective are reinforced so that why
this matters because we can see
conventional public space or increase
lean commercialized homogenized and
dysfunctional so maybe the Chinese
collect activity based collective space
can offer an important alternative to
understanding how shared spaces can
function so the second pair I would say
is the urban and the rural I think in
the discourse of architecture it
wouldn't be going too far to say that
the modern movement was largely aligned
with the processes of industrialization
and urbanization and thus have roots in
urbanity
well the rural is however considered not
just economically but also culturally
and intellectually underdeveloped so
what is reality so in the Chinese
context reality can be understood as an
elastic form of Association but relative
not about whether or not people live in
the city or in the countryside rather is
about a distinct form of living
arrangements and social organization so
for example the dissolved households
emerging from families of China's
floating population actually manifests a
self-organized position underpinned by
associational relationships so why this
matters
because we see today the disappearing
nuclear family the disappearing
traditional idea of the masticity as
well as an aging society so what arises
if the need for intergenerational living
and the need for new social networks of
care so in this sense I argue reality
actually anticipates some of these
global discussions around alternative
types of social relationships beyond the
family norm so this two formation pairs
of terms are closely related to my work
the idea of the collective is from the
project collective forms in China and
currently working on and the idea of
reality is from my PhD thesis but the
third thing is through working on these
topics I've gradually came to realize
that actually how to put forward and
move forward with critical positions are
also different in the West and in China
which is the third pair of terms
confrontational as in the West and
relational as in China but I won't
expand on this so those comparisons are
actually very very simplistic maybe we
can talk more during the discussion but
the idea is that to move forward we need
alternative discourses of architectural
history theory and practice so I just
hope I touched a bit on one potential
perspective derived from China
Thanks so I'm a theater maker and
thinking about going about I'd say that
my work is very much of the moment in
the context of climate change and I
often say I make work not about climate
change but in the context of and in that
context it's a kind of mixed-up mess
between past present and future both
because of the speeds of occurrence
climate change and I've been kind of
thinking about this kind of thing for
about 10 years now I think you'll
probably have noticed my tragic or epic
slide up there at some points it's
rather large and that's just by way of
saying I covet it very much from a kind
of set of questions around narrative
rather than this was it from I've become
ou've towards environmentalism from the
perspective of questioning who we are
and who we might be in this context
so there's speeds different speeds of
awareness that complicate the question
of what forward might mean but also
different speeds of occurrence and what
I'm doing at the moment is trying to
think about how we go about playing at
the future in order to address some of
these questions so it's a very difficult
question when it's such a serious matter
but I'm convinced that it's only through
creating an imaginative space of play
through creating many futures actually a
multiple multiple relational space as
far as they're interested in this
question that's about read every kind of
radical redistribution of power that we
can start to imagine my way forward but
then when I thought about this word for
word I thought it's something
interesting about it and perhaps tricky
which is related to how we situate
ourselves between the present and the
future we're thinking forwards implies a
kind of predetermined goal and if with
conditions of the present are allowed to
set the terms of the future then we are
are limited and are in the space of the
imagination so the question is how do
you produce a gap that enables this kind
of playfulness that then enables a space
and so those sort of coming back to that
question of you know are we tragic or
epic do we take the tragic form that we
go down in flames and take the planet
with us or where are we on an epic
journey where we can take different
forms forward and move onwards into a
future that we we don't yet understand
and I just in relation to that I just
want to finish with a quote from amitab
gosh from his book of essays a great the
great derangement which i highly
recommend if you haven't come across it
before because he's doing very much
about how we might look back on the
present from the perspective of the
future and he says in a substantially
altered world when sea level rise is a
has swallowed the Sun Durban
and made cities like Kolkata New York
and Bangkok uninhabitable when readers
and museum goers turned to the art and
literature of our time will they not
look first and most urgently for traces
importance of the altered world of their
inheritance and when they fail to find
them what should they what can they do
other than to conclude that ours was a
time when most forms of arts and
literature were drawn into the modes of
concealment the prevented people from
recognizing the realities of their
plight quite possibly then this era
which so congratulates itself on its
self-awareness will become so known as
the time of the greatest arrangement
okay I would like to share with you a
project I initially I initiated together
with my partner called 100 minds it was
inspired by a set of books the black the
white and the gray cover books produced
by AI weiwei
in which he asked artists to explain
what was behind their activity and the
dissemination of these books in the mid
90s in China revealed a large
underground nough Network basically of
contemporary artists at the time and in
2016 we sort of tried to do something
similar by sending an email to 100 minds
and in our case we were prompted by a
deafening silence amongst architects but
also a lack of exchange between all of
our closest friends who must get it all
around the globe following very
different trajectories and we were also
critical of the architecture profession
and it's inherently competitive DNA so
we compete for university positions we
compete for projects for competitions to
get projects and as such we have
increasingly become an isolated and
fractured profession
so in opposition to this trend we send
the following email Gmail inbox dear all
at critical moments in the last 100
years people from all facets of life
came together to discuss enquire and
articulate points of view in 1945
Roosevelt Churchill and Stalin met at
the Alta conference to discuss Europe's
post-war reorganization in 1933 Siam met
to ride the Athens Charter and in 1916
the Dadaist initiated the counterculture
movement as an experiment we'd like to
conduct a survey of 100 minds in 2016
and we invite you to respond to the
following three questions in a form of
text or image 1 what preoccupies your
mind right now number 2 how would you
define your daily encounter with the
city and 3 can you describe the most
vivid experience of a space you had this
year in the end 57 people responded
which is a statement in itself so we
collected all the answers and composed
the document which we send to all the
contributors and basically this record
represents a collective thought at a
very precise moment in time and at the
same time it's also like a section cut
through our profession and through
people's consciousness it includes for
example prophetic statements regarding
the me to debate the u.s. presidential
elections in 2016
comments on the aftermath of the brexit
but it also illustrate different
readings of the city from the map to the
mediated from the concrete to the
abstract and also from the real to the
digital so people noted that we don't
actually live in just one city but many
many cities we occupy many cities
basically at the same time and that
speed vantage point and touch beat your
iPhone or the stranger in the tube means
to experience the city so to conclude
this year we'd like to follow up on the
100 minds by hosting a
one day event hopefully at the a
wink-wink
the event will the event will be
entitled 99 problems and it will be an
event so Lily strictly about problems
the word problem stems from the Greek
word pub a line Pro means forward and
the line means to fro so it's literally
something you throw out there there will
be no answers no egos and there will be
no one upmanship moving on from the
rather subjective and personal answers
that we collected in the 100 Minds here
we want to collect and classify rational
critical and objective thinking in a
culture of rapid answering of
oversimplifications and uncompromising
dichotomies we want to conduct an
experiment without answers and a project
which thoroughly basically interrogate
the complexity of problems and in that
sense we are really looking forward to
hearing your problems yeah thank you I
would like to conclude that part pause
the question for the start of the
discussion which relates more to the
present rather than the future or the
past
I think I'll return to many of the other
things which have been mentioned it's
how do we hand something that Marilla we
said how do we respond to our time and
trying to think about that question I
revisited a text with a Gabon Georgia
Gabon wrote I believe in 2007 after a
seminar he gave at the European Graduate
School and the title of the seminar was
what is the contemporary and I thought
that perhaps that's a question with
worth pausing here
as a position within our time one's home
time and as a position towards the
present so I would like to say what I
would like to ask what does it mean to
be contemporary in his text just go to
the one of the quotes from the text yes
thank you very much
a garbin writes that contemporary Ness
is a singular relationship with one's
own time which adheres to it and at the
same time keeps a distance from it more
precisely is that relationship with time
that adheres to it through a disjunction
an anachronism which goes also back to
what Platon said at the very beginning
in one way a gabon was referring to yet
another text the a timely meditations by
Nietzsche in the late 19th century where
in that text need to try to come to
terms with his own time and situate
himself within his own time and what a
time an untimely signified was exactly
this disjunction this out of joy
tanana's that means that one then now
the present is that threshold is that
moment or is that ungraspable place or
in between where we are located and
where we are at the same time in time
but also out in in this time but also
out of time and for a garbin and also
for Nietzsche to be out of time to have
that Junction means that one can be
contemporary in the sense that one can
hold again a gaze on his own time and
then define that present so that also
means that someone for a Gabon those who
go inside too well with the epic those
who are perfectly tied to an epic in
every aspect they are not contemporaries
because they don't manage to say it so
what he poses here and I think it's very
important that in one way they they now
is that moment where we take a distance
a critical distance in order to look at
the present and of course that
particular relationship within now with
the time with our own time also
establishes a particular relationship
with other times with the past and
possibly the future and here where I
would bring the role of history in one
way as also plateaux measure in the
beginning every time we look backward
every time we try to read examine
history specific histories of course we
produce yet another past so we distort
the past it doesn't exist as such so the
present becomes this kind of account of
multiple times in multiple places and
this is where I see from my point of
view from my practice as someone who
deals mainly with text mainly with that
writing of history whatever that means I
mean the question for me is how one can
write history engage with history today
in one in one way how that critical
engagement with the past can help us
understand the present and also possibly
indicate directions of thought and
directions of practice in the future so
I I too agree that one cannot determine
predetermine in the future we cannot
even
project but we can perhaps anticipate or
we can open up or break through existing
words and existing histories and in in
this sense I would finish with yet
another thought from the text that the
historical investigations our
examination of histories or history our
journey in time it's always guided by
the theoretical interrogation of the
present and that's that the thing the
the position one can perhaps take by
situating oneself within the present in
order to be able to inter investigate
and indicate or anticipate thank you
great what thank you to all of you for
fulfilling my very difficult brief of
only speaking for a very short time
about your position so that we can
prioritize the conversation I I think
each of them were like a mini manifesto
and I hope we get to expand on them in
the discussion now to follow to kick off
the conversation I wanted to ask each of
you about I guess
across the six presentations you were
all talking about multiple paths and
multiple futures these different
binaries through which we can understand
directly the way is forward and also the
design project of landscape cities or
even environments but I was wondering
how when each of you work on these on
these projects how much you think of
their future impact when designing the
actual project itself
I think maybe I can say a few things I
think for me mm we unnecessarily
consider future impacts because as I
said I think the key word for me is to
find alternatives so I think forward
actually doesn't mean future to me I
think we can move forward just in the
present so that's why I don't think I
even consider the future impacts it's
like to be at the present and to maybe
look for is also to look around to see
what's around what was already there and
then that's like my understanding yeah I
think that thinks really well into what
you were just saying marine upon rather
than thinking of the future to think of
the present as the kind of expanded
territory yes from which we can stand
back at a distance or kind of move
forward within but I was just curious
then if we apply that kind of way of
thinking to what each of you have talked
about how would you see this kind of
territory of the present as a kind of
productive space for you to work well
maybe I didn't expand on that so much
but my whole exhibition the idea is just
just putting these two expeditions
together that happened a hundred a
hundred years almost between them and I
think what interests me was the fact
that you could understand better what
was happening in 2016 if you understood
what was done in 2009 1920s so I think
your question you're asking is how you
move forward is I think this is a
reflection of what scientific
exploration has meant in the past how it
means right now and I think it opens a
question about the future like why do we
keep going to these places why is it
relevant why we have to keep doing this
so we don't have to keep doing this and
I think in that sense it becomes
relevant to think about the kind of the
bigger context of of why these things
are being done right I think it becomes
very relevant
I think there's something interesting
about two different ways I found the
word feature be complicated one is that
if you ask people to what they think of
when they think of the future their mind
goes blank usually the what comes back
is uncertainty or so in that sense and
then but then when actually when we've
talked about scenarios more and often
been the word future becomes useful
because it creates a some kind of Brit
suppose it break between the what people
see perceive as being possible in the
present and what the space with the
imagination offers but actually what
they're really doing is doing what
you're describing is recompose eating
the present in a more imaginative way
but the word scenario allows you to have
a space that's that's imaginative and
forward-looking in that alternative
sense without being predictive and and
creating a separation between the
predictive and the dulling scenarios
also feels quite spaced I don't know how
that relates
I think there is a there's a problem
right because I I believe that the way
we understand historian time was has
been so far white Western and male so
progress development you know the idea
of going forward right
I was constructed through a very binary
colonial system of values of of
understandings of of progress and there
was a kind of you know almost like
teleological belief in development I
think in an era of climate very mental
injustice and climate change we cannot
think like that anymore it's over so I
don't know if we should think about the
impact to the future or we should ask
the question what's the right from the
future to what we're doing today right I
mean it's we we are we shouldn't measure
our act actions I mean the impact of our
actions in a way we should actually ask
the opposite question I mean how how our
actions will be measured in the future
in a waste like that I think it should
be a very different way of understanding
time any idea so we have to be and I
think it has been done anyway we should
do Dean architects husband but also is I
think a following on that is to define
the particular problem today because
otherwise I mean we talked about climate
change or the bio mentalism or the
environmental problem but it's not the
same as it was 50 years ago or 30 years
ago and won't be the same in ten years
time so I guess we need always to be a
bit more precise what exactly means
climate change now what that encompasses
what are the questions of the problem so
the the urgency we need to respond to
and that's why I said about engaging
more with the now
understanding the problem with in all
its parameters and all its implications
now as it is now notice used to be or it
may be because I don't think no one can
really predict that and also especially
in this context yeah and I also think
that what might look like a prediction
is already happening somewhere some
people like both dependent like I was
saying on awareness and on the actuality
of what's happening in different parts
of the world time is kind of getting
more complicated counts as the presence
and the climate crisis actually
exacerbates it makes more extreme that
situation so because it's not happening
at the same rate in the same way
everywhere and it's very much bound up
in the kinds of inequalities that you're
talking about as a one person's future
is another person's presence is another
person's past in relation to that
question I guess this is what we were
starting to try to indicate with this
matrix of 99 problems rather than
because I guess the problem is always
seen right now in this language of
efficiency you know everybody seems to
have problems like back problems mental
health problems I don't know money
problems so I guess it's always
considered in the language of efficiency
currently like when you have a problem
you need to consider already does the
immediate solution for that so what this
problem matrix was trying to do is to
actually first understand what are the
questions and to understand that there
is a complexity about these questions
that is in relation to time into where
you live and to basically sits first
state people become much better at
asking the right questions rather than
providing quick solutions so it's I
think that's also maybe part of this is
how you are you classify actually how
what are the many problems that we have
and one man's problem is maybe another
man's opportunity so there's also yeah I
guess something about that
I'd be really interested to hear more
about this model of relational you're
just describing if a problem isn't
individual like comes back to the
individual does it look like what is it
called when it's right because when I
talk about the relational or we say we
say associational relationship is it's
really deeply embedded in the Chinese
culture where I don't think if if I say
in a really simplistic way I don't think
the individual subjectivity exists in
China
it's always about collective
subjectivity so like to give you a super
simple example like in the
collectivization era when people meet
each other they don't say how are you
they say which work unit you're from so
this is a way to say hello this equals
hello so this already shows how the
identity is identified in society and in
that way there's a very particular space
produced because of this social
relationship and that and I argue that
that type of space is still working
partially working today which means like
the word community has a very specific
and administrative meaning in China but
it's totally different here and then I
feel so like when we consider the future
like there are different parts of the
world and then it's not just like
different parts maybe here is the future
that that is a past somehow is like goes
in circles yeah so it's like somehow
what we what the China has in the
collectivization era might be some sort
of future in Western countries
I think that we need to learn a form of
symbiosis how to how to understand what
success looks like in a nonlinear non
competitive non kind of individually
structured model which is something I
think is really complicated in the
current environments it was the
underlying structures those lot talks
about other ways of doing things but the
underlying structures within which
that's done is remain the same
[Music]
yeah I mean I might be the wrong person
from that perspective my projects taking
away longer than most people like but
even so much less probably the major
architectural projects but it's
interesting how when you try like I
suppose I'm trying I keep trying to make
work about what it means to be alive now
and and then what that constitutes kind
of changes often and the moment is
changing faster than the ability to kind
of respond to it perhaps but I think
something I was I mean I'm sure this is
a story for architecture that all of you
already know but I was really struck by
it when I came across as positive which
I think sort of illustrative of a kind
of flexibility within the imaginative
models that theater she's in different
ways but it's bound up with buildings
which is the way that houses are now
built with kitchens that where you can't
really cook your own food because you
know people have processed meals or they
need space to cook you go while you're
building into the architecture of the
future the incapacity those facial as
well as cultural to actually change that
model of how we live which we radically
and rapidly need to do so it was a
riddle for me like it really I keep
thinking of these kitchens but in which
you can't cook as big a kind of model
for for of how we kind of build into our
culture ways of doing things that are
fundamentally unsustainable and but it's
true in the future as well like we have
theater buildings as a fashion for
other ways of doing these but actually
conventions whether it's a physical
built convention or or an invisible
cultural convention structure our
thinking and structural are modes of
operation difficult to get out of say
and when you are model trying to model
it differently you have to kind of think
of everything is you have to provide a
different set of rules by which to
operate play so if you as soon as you
move the boundaries of the convention
you can't just take them away people
will try and find what the rule is
instead and if you don't provide them
and then people are either very confused
or they come up with their own rules
that weren't what you were expecting
sometimes delightful you're kind of yeah
I don't know I guess yeah it's about
time scales but I'd not sure that
underlines
I was interesting
Louise sort of describing this question
enough a hundred people through a
sensitive section of time because I
think that brings brings a light the
idea of the complexity of the now like
you know what's now for so many people
and I wanted to ask you a bit more maybe
about you know I think that the the mall
for me the most appealing thing is the
decisions you made to put that together
because I I don't know the reference
work but I'm interested to know a bit
more about you know if you actually send
this to only a hundred people and the
sort of a bit more how you decided you
know how that it was it on the
architects he said it was some a number
of friends because I think that if the
better sense of the work you're
producing is kind of what is what it is
reflecting it was a mix so it was
architects like a lot of architects but
also non architects like doctors lawyers
software developers of course it was
very subjective because it was our
friends
and we also said from the beginning that
this project was only intended to exist
in people's email inboxes so it was
never meant to be published which is
something that we have discussed many
times whether that is good or a bad
thing and what this means but I think
ultimately it meant that people could be
very frank very honest in their answers
also some people responded within hours
and some people took months so there was
a real difference in let's say immediacy
or consideration and in a way by I think
collecting the material in a way we did
very minimal we just wrote a simple
introduction to it to explain what
motivated us to do this and then we
compiled a kind of fact sheet of where
people were from what their jobs were
how far apart people lived to understand
the scope of it and then we send it to
each contributor which meant actually
all the people that participated formed
a mini temporary institution in
themselves there was never an actual
dialogue between them because they never
got to talk to each other but we were
sort of the thought collectors that
facilitated this exchange so I think the
question is how how do we move one from
this because this I guess was an
experiment but then you know we are
already thinking what is the what is
maybe what could be the next step
because really for us this 100 minds is
like a it's almost like because we be
considered as a survey but not in the
sense of like what is your favorite city
to live in survey but in the sense of
really extracting the knowledge that is
ingrained in the city and in people's
minds and laying it open so it's an it's
an ongoing thing it's like a living
entity and we were really inspired but
it's actually Scottish urbanist and
biologists is called Patrick Geddes and
he he says the city and the server they
are one they are one ongoing thing and
as the city evolves so does the survey
so that's why actually I don't see this
as a closed chapter but really like at
the first episode in many events that
are supposed to reveal what people are
interested in
maybe the first one was incredibly
subjective because it was our friends
and was there their subjective ideas
about city because both of the questions
were asking a very subjective way so the
question is how can we maybe expand
reach out and at the same time change
the way we ask the question to to
trigger other responses yeah so it's
it's that's the thing with the present
no it's ongoing in our case it's like a
living entity and always needs to be
updated this is already out of date two
years ago I read through it again
and yes it's prophetic I mean yeah at
this point I would like us to introduce
or to highlight another aspect the
aspect of communication and language
because you said that it's constantly
ongoing it's ongoing experiment or we
update it all the time and I think
language is a highly unstable system too
so we we talk about forward or the
future or binary so subjective or
collective forms of collectivity but we
still use kind of the same so the city
and just I would like more to open that
as a question because we do communicate
we do use multiple languages can be
words can be lines whatever set can be
drawings images so we we do work through
and we do communicate and we our
practice actually sees multiple
languages so that's another thing
perhaps one has to reconsider as part of
that kind of thinking about forward or
but present
why make it had a very specific
experience I think maybe what you'll
think about which is in the project that
we made we know not what we may be
we gave the audience scenarios to think
about where their postcards with
propositions on them all based on
different propositions with different
economic kinds of structures and change
at first they were called well for a
while they were called policies this is
done then they were called ideas there
really were ideas but what we found was
that what we want to be able to do is
imagine what it would be like if they
became reality that was the purpose of
the project but the word idea when used
to kind of block I mean we're already in
this you know capitalist realist
environment well you know the notion if
there is no alternative and it's not
possible it's kind of quite present but
the world idea also produces I think the
invitation to critique the kind of
critical discourse that um picks a way
of doing something and that say then we
called them scenarios which is kind of
like a mistake that's not what they
thought they weren't really scenarios
yet but by by kind of miss applying the
term we helped move like helped our our
audiences in ourselves movements were
spaces the imagination so there was a
kind of way in which we kind of yeah the
terminology slightly inappropriately in
order to kind of create a different kind
of space that would move from a kind of
critical structure which just felt like
it was actually bad moving backwards
into a space that felt like it was
moving forwards into the space of
alternative possibilities just quickly
follow marinus comments I think that the
language is really important in terms of
like the translation and interpretation
can be super crucial like in the context
you describe it's not just like
translation between different like
language so from different countries
it's also from different like social
sectors like what platform Asian like
male female and and white know why it's
Western or Western so I think that's
like really is a key key word
- - thanks listen can I ask office
Speaker a quick question could your
observation that the competitive nature
of architecture as opposed to the
collective will it make your forward
conference of a hundred Minds tragic or
epic would it the last sentence again
what is it if if you believe that there
was a competitive nature in architecture
where society celebrates the
individual's precedent for
self-satisfaction / collective good will
your forward conference of a hundred
minds is that going to be tragic or epic
I think very depressing probably I think
it will be a very but that's okay I
think it's it's okay - I think the the
collection of the matrix whatever it
will produce of problems might end up
being incredibly sad and depressing but
probably also very just and very honest
and I think that's maybe okay because
there there will be no there will be no
answers and for that reason it's it's
yeah it most likely will be a possibly a
negative negative event but not I don't
know yeah we'd have to see what the
contributions are but I think it's it's
ok I expect that yeah I think it's it's
possibly us together figuring out what
the the real questions are at different
scales you know what is your personal
what is your most pressing issue
personally but then what do you think
concerns us and then what do you think
is the biggest issue that you are
concerned with globally I think there
are different issues that exists at
different scales and I think that's
maybe one way to approach it and to
allow for different media to be
submitted you know you don't have to
write or send an image you can send a
video you can come and speak to I really
think it would be like a day clinic for
one day that
we collect like a one-day event where I
sit somewhere in a public space and I
you could just drop all your problems
and then you will end up with 9999
problems do you see yourself as a
psychiatrist or an architect no because
well if nope actually if I if I was a
psychiatrist it implies that I know more
than you and I I don't want to be in
that position so I'm more of a collector
but maybe yeah I think I'm a collector
because if I say I'm a sec if I I would
be an architectural psychotherapist I
would it would mean that I could be able
to help you but I I don't think I am so
are you predicting a tragic outcome I
hope it would be a productive outcome in
a weird way because I'm I hope that
through the collection of all of these
problems that we are able to produce
this big honestly I can't tell you what
the what the exact format would be but
I'm imagining a big problem matrix of
sorts or maybe there might be a problem
finding party at the end or some form of
something that relates back to basically
by the end you have even more problems
than you had before both tragic and epic
yeah I don't think it can it doesn't
need to be it can be humorous at the
same time without being silly I think I
think it's quite serious I'm quite
serious about this and so I think as
long as you know us serious about what
you submit and I'm serious about
bringing it into a format that enables
us to compare and and classify and this
is the thing that I both gathers that
I'm really excited about pretty
interested in see he was a biologist so
he made all these matrixes of how he
understood the city and the relationship
between people and their
responsibilities so he was really into
categorizing and classifying things as a
means as a first means to understand so
I don't think I can help you in any way
and I I don't mean that I don't know if
it's wrong that I'm I'm abstaining from
providing any solutions but I really do
believe that first before we are even
going there
because the problem is already so
complex and there are so many variations
of that I think it'd be quite good to
first see it all in front of us and then
from there we can move on you know it's
a living entity as I said so then we can
in the next episode we can think about
the solution it's weird
making aware of yes yeah I think so I
think it's I think it's yeah it's so
easy to say yes no and this is important
to me and this is important here but
it's it's understanding the complexity
of all the problems that that you have
and somewhat forming a consensus or not
in that yeah
other other questions
hello so I was just wondering if the
date of like you all speak with a bit of
urgency about the concept of the future
of particularly in terms of the
environment etc but if the expiration
date on the sort of statements that can
be said is so short now how can we
sustain like an effective conversation
about the future how can you make
statements which don't expire so quickly
or in formats that aren't so limited by
the time how can we continue the
conversation no no just one sense I feel
you're living through it we're all
living through it that's the way to go
and also if it's predictive then it then
there's an expiration date but if it's
explorative or imagine if that's not
quite the same as that out of stepping
out to be in time that you were talking
about that I think gives you that space
of the imagination that then doesn't run
run out and such but it's only if you
kind of go next week this is gonna
happen not next year this is gonna
happen then then you're kind of yeah but
otherwise like I said I think everything
is that uneven anyway so there isn't the
kind of single present from which to
speak but do you think that that
question is relevant to now to our time
or has always been I think it probably
is relevant to all time but I think
because in a sense the way that we
consume media and information is so much
faster you can change what you're saying
so much quicker like um the person just
you're right I think was saying that
like something you did in 2016 it's kind
of prophetic but somewhat like you have
to do it again now but how could you
like yeah so that's sort of what my
question was directed at like of course
this is a problem that always happens
read the future but like in a time which
is so fast
how can you catch up or make valid
statements sort of thing not to be like
critical just like generally how do I do
it too
yeah I know I said it's outdated but
somehow many of the things that were
said I was a timeless which just means
that they are very present so it's it's
it's the way you read it of course many
things refer to political changes or TV
shows that were a hundred and on at the
time and you understand that it's from
2016 but maybe it's also not so relevant
because you can also read it and take
something from it that is that is still
relevant today I just think it means we
have to keep doing those things and I'm
not I don't feel stressed about time in
a way I'm I don't need to like I don't
feel I somehow it's okay to don't know I
if you just keep going and if you
continuously survey and interrogate I
think I don't think there has to be an
outcome or you know these get-togethers
that I mentioned is like 45 33 16 I mean
I think it's a there can be moments in
time where you get together you exchange
and then you you also keep doing you
don't need to exchange constantly I
don't also don't know if that is so
productive or so revealing maybe there
is something in abstaining and then
exchanging and maybe there's an
intensity to it if it doesn't have to be
continuous I think in regards to the
question of the media the way which we
observe and the format that information
comes to us can also serve as a under
it's a reflection of the culture were
living in so I think it's there's no
answer to what's the way of approaching
it but I think there there needs to be a
critical understanding of the way that
that information is received but also
the way that it's produced in in
contrast to how other information is to
be produced so I think becomes relevant
in the question of the understanding the
specificity of the media and how it is
it is
indicated or how it occurs across the
world yeah it was yeah Marsha McCullen
talking about the the idea of the the me
in the media and the message and I think
that that sort of addresses a bit the
question of understanding the medium
with which we communicate I have a
question in regards to the collective
nature of life in China so my question
is basically you were saying that it's
possible that in the future the West
could learn from that collective nature
of living and kind of conformed to it as
well in opposition to the individual but
my question is then is there also a
chance that China could also take
something from the individual nature of
life in the West and if it would would
this be negative or positive in
comparison to the past and the present
of the Chinese collectivity now yeah I
think it'd be wrong for me to say who
learns from whom it's always like an
interactive way like how does different
cultures work like for example we don't
even need to talk about like individual
collectivity or collective subjectivity
it's just in terms of like architecture
education in China for example during my
education in China we thought to try to
think through the dichotomy between the
public and the private and then through
that we realized it's like after like 10
years I realized actually this pair of
terms cannot explain the space and
people's life in China and then I
realized probably there needs to be like
a Chinese own term to define that but I
would say too even to try try to think
through the public various the province
was actually also productive so that's
also what I meant by saying that to
putting forward a critical position
doesn't have to be confrontational it
can be relational
what I meant by relational and so to
answer your question sure yes it's
definitely it's a two-way process okay
thank you
I actually just wanted to pick up on a
point that from your question earlier
about whether you're a psychiatrist or
an architect and also something that
Patricia said in your presentation where
you talked about architects at the
intersection of disciplines and I was
quite curious as to what each of you saw
as your role in kind of taking things
forward of wedding the men avoiding
mentioning the word future but I think
it's quite interesting to think of
whether it's the role of the architect
or of the kind of the the designer
behind these things how do you work with
the disciplines how do you ensure that
the conversation is moving forward I
think what I noticed across all the
presentations was how much you work with
people outside of your own profession
whether it's are like all your images
for artists or chalk refers working from
different contacts working with a
participation with audiences inviting
different networks and then also working
with theory so I was quite curious if
maybe two to close the formal part of
this evening if each of you could maybe
comment a bit on where you see your role
is in taking things forward I think
having these conversations within an
educational environment gives us a
specific privilege actually it gives us
time to think about these things I think
that I mean our own I mean the education
and educational environments and
institutions are probably the last
spaces that we have to actually go slow
and think about specific problems and I
would even I would somehow underline
that what we should think and this a
space like the AAA or any other
University with all with its own power
relations and symmetries and problems
that are within
it gives us the time to think about the
kind of fundamental diagrams that define
design practices or interdisciplinary
practices so you know we talk very often
about urban or architectural forms but
we should also talk about you know
fundamental diagrams of modernity family
gender identity labor all these things
so I thought somehow we take it for
granted I mean somehow we we experience
spaces and we experience these diagrams
as they're given to us somehow
and there are somehow internalized
through you know social and political
and parameters in practice so I think if
there is some that we can do as
educators the researchers actually to
use our time but an institution like a
university allows us to actually do
research slowly and to resist this
incredible speed of proliferation of
media of staff of interdisciplinary
multidisciplinary research I mean all
these things are good but at the same
time we should actually focus on some
very simple problems and not look for
solutions but actually think through the
problem and why on earth we still live
in flats that have three bedrooms mum
and dad in one bedroom children
separated in sexes kitchen is their
corridor is there a toilet is the I mean
odd I mean why do we still produce I
mean the market practice produces this
type of lot for everyone all over the
world is it still relevant who lives
like that I mean for example is to say
it was a very simple question maybe we
have to produce this type of domestic
environment but maybe we should rethink
about it and I think the institution
gives us this opportunity which is a
privileged social
I see the my role as bringing things
together I think as I mentioned I'd like
to be a bit outside of what I'm trying
to work with so I think there's there's
a potentiality of collaborating with
other people that do other things and I
think then this coming together
there's real value and maybe we can do
this as architects because I believe in
in the architects ability to communicate
things so I think the there's for me
it's more exciting or more interesting
when I get to enter another sort of
sphere of work and try to bring in
something there and also take something
on so I believe my my future or my
forwardness is about getting involved
with different people and actually in
this exchange of different things kind
of giving something in that it's
unexpected maybe I think I'm actually
inspired by the title of this talk like
four words and as you mentioned you
noticed this is in fact the first
lecture of the whole public program this
year so I guess this events itself or
additions are quite clear message like
in some of this institution this school
just that forwards and also the second
interesting and Cygnus this series
called positions right so I guess that's
quite some time very important for like
for the role of architects - maybe I
guess did the most important thing I
learned that here is actually trying to
take a position just half a position it
doesn't matter what the petitioner is
and be with aware of other positions and
other people's position around you and
that in that way probably we can deal
with the like the uncertainty or unsired
see of how to move forward yeah I think
I'm trying to work I make him the
collaborations I work with we what we
often doing is modeling what kind of
rehearsing or yeah that taking time out
to go slow in a certain way that is
actually outside the academic
environment in this kind of performance
the actual environment where it doesn't
matter
so I often describe the work that I make
is pre-political well even though often
it's dealing with what other people
consider to be political subjects
because it's not asking you to take
position actually as yes it's like
opening a space for conversation in
which commit it's like the space of
players is face of pre-commitment that
you do not have to commit being and that
in a way as a kind of modeling allows
you to rehearse different ways of
thinking about the world before you then
hopefully go out there and commit to
something I think I would someone like
to go back to this competitive nature of
the profession and how a simultaneous
survey of an animal taneous ongoing
survey of the the present or the status
quo could possibly infiltrate the way we
operate so at a time when architects
were planners when developers are busy
with scheduling financing and organizing
and building what is the potential of
let's say a new survey which which could
let's say create a new repertoire to
infiltrate to influence and to tweak
those processes so I'm quite interested
in the simultaneity between what we are
currently doing and how we could
manipulate these processes by
understanding better what we are
actually doing yes I think I'll repeat
some of the things we've just heard I
mean definitely we are within a school
and therefore we have the luxury to sit
here and contemplate inspect
later and post the questions but I I see
that as a very important task and we
should take that I seriously it's not
just delaying the engagement with
reality I think it's it's the only way
to position and by position I don't mean
to state something to state an opinion
to to choose but by position I mean more
to find a way of thinking and relating
and I think that's a very as you said
it's a very important and very critical
practice and it's something that while
also you have to find ways to expand
that expand on that and see how we can
bring that outside I mean we are talking
about bringing things from the outside
in within the discipline which one thing
and find forms of collaborating and
array forms of arranging or articulating
these arrangements but I think it's also
very important to find ways to bring the
inside to the outside because we
constantly think that we the school is
to abstain from reality and then I
speculate it's a space for speaking of
pure speculation but actually quite
interested to see how we can bring that
into the outside definitely I think
that's a great point to end on because I
think the whole point of making these
conversations public is to generate that
conversation that then can go beyond
this room and beyond the school but it
was also the idea behind the series was
to bring people from different parts of
the school people from beyond the school
to come together and debate their
different approaches ideas and it was no
coincidence that we started with forward
as our first position but I think it's
actually set up the series in a really
great way the next one is on Monday a
week from today and it will look at the
position of being recursive or these
cycles of change which actually through
talking about time we've actually
started to talk about today so I hope
you'll all join us
that one and a huge thank you to all our
six speakers and I hope you can all
stick around for a drink which should be
served in that room for a shortly and
and continue this conversation in from I
would like to thank you for
[Applause]
