good morning and welcome back to day two
of the a a xx 100 conference where we
have a an extremely busy day ahead of us
but hopefully as exciting and
invigorating and inspiring as yesterday
also thank you very much to all our
speakers and also to the audience you
made such an amazing contribution to the
discussion yesterday so just very
quickly good morning and welcome we're
back at the AAA for the morning and then
there's a split of sites this afternoon
but we'll remind you about that later
just one small piece of information
really before we start the first session
one of the things which has been
organized to kind of go alongside the
conference is a coach tour of hundred
years of women in architecture organized
by the 20th century Society and which
will take us on a wonderful magical not
mystery tour because they're telling us
where we're going around London
Cambridge on Monday Sunday and Monday so
just ways this at you but there are
details in the exhibition on the
invigilator steps if you want to go
there are still just a few places if
that tickles your fancy so just to let
you know about that so I'm going to shut
up and I'm going to hand over to Jay
Beckett who is the chair of I got off
the bus at Liverpool Street Station two
lads were fighting each other and
accidentally both punched me in the face
so it's a different kind of
collaboration down and I went so I need
to stick but my next-door neighbor in
Norfolk said you need to stick and he
made a stick for me out of the hedgerows
know they were collaboration when I was
thinking about this session I thought of
some time ago in the a when I worked in
here and I minded two children for what
became quite a famous couple in
architectural terms I said to these two
is it nice in your household you enjoy
being in your house and little girls
signa said why not the boys said you
tell her so the little girl said
we have a donkey and a lion in our house
and they don't get on those two children
are now well one is enough to dope to
their surname was Smithson I'll leave
you to decide what kind of collaboration
there could be between a donkey and a
lion okay things before we begin about
collaboration so you start thinking
about the issue think of the word that
jackal about : barring in other words
Co labor that's what the root of the
word is is that what collaboration is
about what forms of collaboration are
there what forms of collaboration can
there be at this moment I'm around the
painful recipient in different forms of
collaboration I have an architect
working converting a listed building for
me his idea of collaboration is that I
should scrape the walls and find out
what the original colors were there has
to be a millimeter by an inch otherwise
it's not correct why these two
dimensions have no idea but anyway so as
me scraping away and I mean what am i
doing I'm really bothered about what
this is going to look like not what the
color on the walls is going to be but
that's his idea of collaboration with
the client so is it only collaboration
between equals
what's collaboration between people who
are not equal is the collaboration in
something that is towards the people who
do technical drawings make models the
client dare I say the other side of me
parent is involved in a terrible project
which is being built by a combination of
one of the deadliest don't say this word
they'll probably get shot as I leave
here one of the deadliest local
authorities the City of London and
Islington Borough Council to extend a
listed estate golden name state in East
London by adding to it the most
horrendous scheme you ever set eyes on
so City of London thinks the people that
the inhabitants of this estate should
have no stake in this whatever you do
what you're told isn't and will talk to
you but you have to do what they say the
architect tell us
and there are a huge majority of
architects who live in this estate that
we know nothing about the quality of
architecture so what I'm trying to do is
use this to pull it about in different
directions to question collaboration how
does collaboration work in terms of
divisions of labor divisions of gender
forms of hierarchy within a practice
what's the other word that's used in
this context often here connectivity the
buzzword of Harvard Business School as a
crucial thing connectivity across people
on an instant level synchronicity of
connectivity they call that a
synchronicity is when you can have
connections across different time lapses
so can there be connection across
globally with people working in
different places having also been a
recipient on the end of a Norman Foster
project I can tell you that something
that's quite painful ended up with lots
of blinking bruise and buckets of water
and Sainsbury's making a lot of money
out of you but but think about it
carefully what does this actually mean
what do partners mean in these contexts
are they necessarily gen same-gender
partners or different gender partners
what is a partner that's a kind of dodgy
word at this moment isn't a partner it's
a kind of baggy word that takes up quite
a lot of things and I think also go back
to the word collaboration collaboration
has a downside doesn't have people of my
generation and in probably young people
now collaboration is somebody who's
working with the enemy against you so
maybe collaboration isn't quite as
comfortable as you might think is the
idea of collective part of a
collaboration do collectives work now I
know that some of these questions will
be raised by the two speakers who are
following me otherwise I wouldn't have
trailed you down this deadly path
so I would think you need might need to
think carefully about partners in one of
the contacts and collectivism and
collectivity in another and how gender
issues inflect into both these cases
okay then it's my privilege to introduce
the two speakers and equally to say
welcome and hello and I haven't been in
this room finding Lee 70 years I don't
think so it's quite startling experience
i we didn't decide who's going first did
we are you going first well you're going
first are you she gender equality
demands mercy
sorry you're certainly outnumbered in
here ah yes yes absolutely um can i
first then introduce Harry Cherrington
who's professor of architecture at the
University of Westminster he's also a
founder of an architectural magazine was
student at Cambridge is both an
architect a theorist and a writer and
has written on many different issues
within architecture and he's going to
talk about the issue of partners I think
this morning so Harry good morning
everybody
picture the scene Easter 2016 a roomful
of architectural academics from all
around the UK heads of schools of
architecture at Queen's University
somebody says isn't it great the Tsar
has won the gold medal the first woman
to win but she wasn't someone else pipes
up and she was me
reims was in fact Zaha was the fourth
first ray then Patti Hopkins then Sheila
twirl me but says another member of the
audience
they were only partners what is it about
Partners partnerships that have set us
that we find so difficult that makes us
so anxious as architects and
architectural historians because of my
experience in Queens shows it's not just
the public and the media who insist that
zaha hadid was the first female 'some
recipient to the ARA be a gold medal
it's many architects as well and they
are equally willing to dismiss their own
pairs as only partners a dismissal that
makes them complicit in denigrating
large numbers of their own profession
including and above all women in any
history or theory we need to be able to
study singular subjects and objects in
detail and we need to be able to make
generalizations about those subjects in
objects that transcend context because
without generalizations we can't really
describe or change culture to quote
Adorno theory is not bowing down to
every immediate thing but nevertheless
there's a need to be alert dee
contextualizing the subject in object in
a way that undervalues the importance of
those constituting contingencies that
are formative agents in shaping the
story what I want to do in this short
talk is to consider the link between or
intersectionality of women practitioners
an architectural partnership and I want
to make two points firstly the women
practitioners an architectural
practitioner partnerships are overlooked
but in being overlooked partnerships
have enabled a space for women to
practice within a male-dominated
profession and building industry and
secondly that as much as this hidden
form of practices enabled women and
others to practice architecture so it
has also obscured their legacy so back
to the rivo gold medal winners for a
moment despite being the predominant
form of architectural practice in the
professional era partnership has been
largely ignored in architectures
historiography and in the architectural
professions telling of its story to
itself only a further two partnerships
to the three already mentioned have been
awarded the Riv a president's gold medal
quite an astonishing thing the myth of
individual genius indoors in
architectures historiography to such an
extent that even when a partnership is
considered and you'll find a few single
partners left out of the partnerships
they had on that slide even when a
partnership is considered it focuses on
one partner alone rather than the
creative dialogue and reflective
practice of colleagues as this list
testifies it seems that to recognize an
explicit practice would undermine the
mystery and mystique of the architect so
these five partnerships remain
exceptions that prove a rule a rule that
assumes there is always a dominant
architect always a dominant partner we
assert that copious numbers of pain
papers recognize hook or REM but not
hook and Ren suggesting there could be
no allowance for complementarity and
differing roles and yet more ambiguous
practice of equals like say a BK writer
and Yeats we could think of many others
defeatist completely the same applies to
male and female partnerships one of the
partners must dominate and no prizes for
guessing which gender that's going to be
and which one is going to be assumed to
be the creative one however I presume
the same thing it would also apply if we
were to assess a women-only partnership
such as Ellen and Gillian de and Maria
mr. Rangel the tendency is so pervasive
that it's created a tale of a
teleological trope in architectural
history and which research is undertaken
so as to recover partners from their
practices the assumption being that is
only when they are restored to their
position as singular architects that
they can become whole again and be taken
seriously to put in a nutshell and we
all know this image his Patty Hopkins
being edited out because she's a woman
or a shipping editor because she's a
partner or as I would contend both at
which point some caveats I'm not saying
the partnerships are the only or the
best way for women or men to practice
many have flourished working running
their own ateliers like vivillon others
have benefited from the progressive
shelter and anonymity of the public
sector I think of Kate Mackintosh and
Rosemarie
Stearns death at the LCC and in no way
am I saying that the disregard for
partnerships is equal equal to the
prejudice that women have endured and
endure but I do think we neglect them
and neglect them in favour of idealized
forms of practice partnerships fall
between ideals they are practice after
the fall partnerships a hundred so
ubiquitous is to be invisible and once
invisible forgotten and this forgetting
or to phrase it more strongly disregard
fall and dismissal of partnerships
matters for two reasons
firstly it contributes to one of the
enduring contradictions of modern
architectural history a failure to learn
from what we admire to examine not just
our why and our what but to think about
who architects are how we do things and
how we exercise our agency and secondly
it further marginalizes the recognition
of many women's contributions to
architectural practice for whom
partnership has frequently provided a
critical position from which to
contribute to the male-dominated
practice and disciplines so in
recovering partnerships involving women
what next but I think we start with an
acknowledgement of this double-edged
sword
what has enabled women to practice in
their lifetime has also masked their
legacy so there's a need to make an
inventory which hopefully might in turn
evolved into a taxonomy of partnerships
there's a need to locate unrecorded
partnerships such as Amancio Williams
and Delfino Galvez Dee Williams or more
closely to home
Chapman Taylor was formed 58 years ago
by Bob Chapman John Taylor and another a
a graduate who are not Shaw's in the
exhibition next door
Jane Durham still alive the only
surviving partner and the reason that
she's not on the on on the practice name
she told me was because she thought that
one day she might get married and
changed her name so she thought that
wouldn't be very good for the practice
but it is an extraordinary thing and
probably the most recognizable address
in London was designed by a woman but
I'm not sure how many people know that
there's also a need to delve into the
anonymity of acronyms a very useful
thing whatever happened to the rest of
team for Sue Rogers Wendy Cheeseman
Georgie Walton because they also built
Britain there's a need to interrogate
partnerships that have been recognized
because even the most illustrious ones
have often come with assumptions and
insinuations that distort their work and
the commissioning of that work even if
it didn't stop her very successful
practice Jane or drew was grotesque be
patronized in her lifetime and together
with other apparently partnership other
apparently successful partnerships found
that her work attracted a particular
kind of patronage Gordon and a sea of
boat verse Allah oh excuse me
Gordon Ursula Bowyer were apparently
well accepted in the London
architectural scene but as Ursula said
they did find they got to do an awful
lot of nice
Tereus yeah this is some a partnership
that built one of the most important
buildings of the festival of Britain so
part two we're gonna move to Finland and
we're going to shift focus for a reason
not because it's only because it's home
to perhaps one of the most famous
instances of inattention to not one but
two faint female partners in the 20th
century I know an ELISA Alto but because
such heedlessness took place in very
different circumstances to the UK and I
suppose also Finland is also
acknowledging a centenary celebration
next month its own existence 6th of
December so in Finland the role of women
seems assured in 2014
47% of practicing architects not just
students were women well over women have
a long lineage since signe Han Murray
was the first female architecture
graduate in the world who graduated from
Helsinki Polytechnic in 1879 the reasons
for this established success of myriad a
wider general emancipation of women with
already in 1930 one third of all women
or all students being women
much better maternity provision the
establishment of Finnish architecture
itself as a concept within the Grand
Duchy of the Russian Empire conferring
an avant-garde status on it from the
very start and even even as late as 1896
there are only 100 qualified architects
in the country meaning there was no
dominant large professional body of
established and male practitioners and
finally more as Finland has a highly
developed competition system for even
small public buildings it gave its
authors a place to remain invisible
there as
so a quick gazetteer to just give a
flavor of this vivvy learn really one of
the great Finnish architects full stop
running her own practice Elsi body built
copious buildings great urbanist as well
a Vakula felt Eklund built several
buildings in Helsinki and get the
burrito cannon the Salas hospital I
could have shown quite a number more
after independence as well the public
sector has a role and still does unlike
here many women work for the nascent
public buildings public bodies that
emerged after 1917 perhaps most
surprisingly for the Ministry of Defense
so era Elsa ro Collier with the Carver
barracks and this is a name that
Rachel's already mentioned Martha Marty
Kainan it BIA with the dive alot the
vehicle battalion barracks in Helsinki
and these women oscillated between
working in their own ateliers and in
partnerships so Vivian worked often with
Armas Lindgren Lindgren was both I know
and our altars professor Martha Martha
Guinan appear with Ragnar revere built
the Turku hospital like New Scotland
Yard about to be demolished and finally
Martha Blum dead with Mattie lamp in the
Aramco hotel in Hammond Lena unless all
this seems a bit too rosy and you're
thinking our shangri-la which is one of
the big problems of Finland's
historiography a little bit too rosy a
little bit rose-tinted looking back
of course these architects were
dominated on the whole by their male
peers the ones you've probably heard of
and actually curiously there's been no
major exhibition of women architects in
Finland since 1982 which are thinks
quite bizarre or tells us that they're
so established it doesn't really need
doing nonetheless for all of this
context of success
during the time of ina martial art oh
and Alvarado's partnership between 1924
and 1949 they were in the company of
other successful women and partnerships
and a large body of buildings by women
had been built and in 1942 architect uh
the women's architecture Society was
established with I know Marcio Alto as a
founding member and last month it
celebrated its 75th anniversary and by
the time Elysa altar and Alvar Aalto
became partners in 1958 they were an
even more established company the likes
of Raymond Reilly be atilla's work and
Iggy and Kai assyrians sublime otaniemi
chapel so there's a real heritage of
achievement that these people are part
of and yet still I know and ELISA
Aldo are overlooked and their legacies
are obscured and their contribution
Aubert are raised from that
institutionalized term Aldo
because there's no doubting how much
they both contributed as part of a
partnership
inés training as a joiner her brilliance
with textiles and landscape and a
concern for design for all and the
sensitivity to social space and
congregation that is the very hallmark
of altars work and which her photographs
of both historic locations and the
altars owned buildings stress over and
over again and Ivana was ignored then
it's even more the case with Alisa
despite her taking an artistic
responsibility for the Atelier but over
two decades during Alvar Aalto zone
decline from the late 60s and after his
death supervising the construction of
buildings such as the essent Opera House
that are now so evidently part of what
we call the alto Canon now I should
declare an interest in this Alisa was my
boss for two years
and never bettered and she was certainly
formative about how I see architectural
practice and the Atelier I've written
about it so let's conclude I think we
have a lot to do to recover the legacy
of a huge number of women practitioners
but to do this I think we have to
acknowledge the entanglement and the
agency of partnership let's not pull
them out of context let's not try and
disentangle things we don't really know
about let's not make what I know and
Alvar Aalto son-in-law Heikki allen and
the psychologists referring to those
trying to prise apart I knows and
Alvarez joint life and work called the
guesses of posterity let's embrace the
possibility of entanglement of the messy
hazy blurred nature of partnership and
accept it might be part of their
creative genius I'll leave the last
words to Alvar Aalto describing his
relationship with I know in a letter
home from America during the war and I
quote only when we're together can an
unexaggerated attitude Lee found thank
you
[Music]
[Applause]
thank you very much Harry
and we decided collectively it wasn't in
bullying to go straight on with both
speakers and take any questions and
discussions at the end but there are
many many interesting issues that have
arisen out of Harry's talk as someone
who worked on tailfin Duisburg and I
spoke to lots of the old survivors among
whom were many wives rather than
collaborative partners they all said or
those men they will take all the credit
and they have okay now it's my pleasure
I nearly said to introduce Beatrice
picture any relation to an Isaac on
Pritchard okay on that note we need to
be very clear I think that we must be
ready for the legacy of what Andrea is
about to talk about I think which is
women who presumably are still alive
still practicing and oh okay okay well
it's my pleasure then to introduce
Andrea Merritt from the Columbia
University so we're switching countries
and we're switching to some degree date
wise I think andreas working on women
and architecture in the USA in the 1970s
and in particular on the open design
studio
she's also speaking about somebody with
the wonderful acronym of wallop which I
shall cherish for a long long time so
can I introduce Andrea Merritt on open
design studio
so in the early 1970s motivated by the
women's liberation movement American
women in architecture began to organize
themselves they founded professional
associations organized conferences and
exhibitions and even created educational
programs including a women's school of
planning and architecture one question
that these women activists debated which
should they advocate for professional
equality that is to be accepted into the
profession as it was or should they try
to change how architecture was practiced
the open design office was a short-lived
feminist architectural practice that
believed a ladder
founded in 1972 the odio
offered a critique of traditional
practice as well as a model for
alternative office organization for its
members everything was up for
reinvention from relationships within
the office to how to work with clients
and to even the means of communicating
with contractors women who were a tiny
minority of Architects in the United
States before the 70s often felt
isolated they faced harassment and
discrimination in an article that drew
national attention to the problems women
faced ellen perry berkeley documented
some of the issues and these included
unequal pay needing to work harder than
their male colleagues to prove
themselves discriminatory admissions at
schools of architecture firms that
refused to hire women and limited
opportunities for promotion for the
firm's that did despite these challenges
it was also a period of optimism due to
the increasing number of women entering
the profession by 1972 the enrollment of
women in architecture schools was
beginning to rise and the new feminist
movement was spurring women to join
together to fight discrimination
the open design office is part of this
larger are part of a larger movement of
women's initiatives both in architecture
and more broadly feminists are creating
businesses and organizations to benefit
themselves and other women including
credit unions bookstores education
programs health centers galleries
publishers and women's centers the
Boston Cambridge area was a major center
of feminist activism in the 60s and 70s
and home to group says such as the
radical feminist bread and roses and the
Boston women's health collective who
authored Our Bodies Ourselves and in
1971 the members of bread and roses and
several other groups took over a 88
memorial drive an abandoned building
previously used by Harvard's Graduate
School of Design for its technology
workshops the women who occupied it it
created the liberated Women's Center
which eventually moved to another
permanent location so it's in this
context that women in architecture and
the design professions started to
organize themselves in in Boston
particularly the open design office
evolved from discussions at meetings of
wallup women architects Landscape
Architects planners the first is several
women's organizations created in the
seventies across the United States in
late 1971 about 20 women architects
planners
and students in the Boston Cambridge
area began to meet to address issues in
the profession
on March 4th 1972 they held an open
meeting and over a hundred women
attended for at least two years wallop
met regularly in contrast to some of the
other groups it remained a more informal
project focused organization so one of
the first projects that wallup undertook
was an article on flexible work
schedules published in the same issue of
the architectural forum as Alan Perry
Berkeley's article
in it the authors argued that for women
to succeed in architecture
offices needed to change the culture
that equated long work hours to
commitment women were still the primary
caregivers to children and the author's
thought that flexibility was needed to
keep them in the profession they also
believed that flexible schedules would
help both female and male employees
searching to find a better balance
between their work and their lives
obviously something we're still working
on today further they argued that the
project's themselves would benefit from
architects having more time for outside
pursuits and thus a broader perspective
in April of 1972 several wallop
participants Megan Lawrence beachy party
Jenny Gerard Dolores Hayden they are the
urban scholar Emily buck Toronto and
John Forester Sprague met to discuss the
possibility of opening their own office
they were interested in answering the
questions how would an office of women
professionals differ from traditional
men's office what would it be like to
work in architecture and planning as
member as a member of the majority
rather than the minority
what would the priorities of such an
office being they immediately agreed
that it would be a nonprofit enterprise
and that they would quote seek
commissions for work with some social
significance for example daycares and
housing amongst their goals were to
establish credibility for women to
provide a model for a new kind of office
and to research and support research on
women's activities in the profession six
women went on to launch the open design
office including Toronto and Sprague
they also established a nonprofit
organization the Women's Design Centre
to focus on research and public
education although they did not
officially define the procedures for the
open design office until the end of the
first year the members agreed on three
principles the first was that all
profits would remain
than the firm the members of the open
design office believed the structure of
most offices was based on a corporate
model in which senior partners were
motivated by profit to exploit employees
in contrast the open design office
sought to treat all its members equally
and fairly all members of the office
would be paid for time work and any
profits earned would be used to
subsidize research or community projects
following the points laid out in the
wallet paper
the second principle was that working
hours would be completely flexible as
long as deadlines were met and members
kept each other informed of their
schedules each woman could determine her
own schedule regular meetings would be
held to discuss projects and management
issues
the third principle was the elimination
of an office hierarchy decisions about
management were to be reached by
consensus amongst all members of the
office each member was expected to take
full responsibility for her projects and
the office would only accept projects
that everyone agreed on in rejecting a
hierarchical structure their founders of
the open design office or responding to
an office culture that glorified the
myth of the individual creator and this
speaks very much to your talk over the
reality that most projects actually
required a team of people many offices
also excluded women from advancement in
their emphasis on the Equality the
founders of the open design office were
embracing one of the tenets of radical
feminism and radical feminists who
rejected hierarchies and what we thought
of as male leadership qualities and
these they defined as assertiveness
domination and an individual really
leader women's liberation organizations
try to operate without any leaders
giving every member equal say in
decision-making through a consensus
process which could take hours by the
way it was not an easy
way to work Sprague described this
method of working as affiliative and
compared it to women preparing a meal
together and I quote no one defined who
is in charge as Joe Freeman discussed
this kind of structure worked well in
consciousness-raising groups where one
of the main goals was to encourage all
participants to talk about how sexism
and discrimination affected their lives
however the ideology of structure
lessness often became a hindrance when a
group undertook a specific task or
project the members of the open design
office recognized this hence formalizing
their policies and procedures after a
difficult first year whatever the
aspirations of the office a de facto
hierarchy did develop Sprague was the
most experienced member she had
graduated from Cornell in 1953 and had
practiced for almost twenty years
including a decade as a partner in a
firm with her then husband Chester
Sprague she was also the only registered
architect in the office and brought in
most of the work for some of the members
the office did not live up to the
promise of equality others soon realized
that they preferred the security of
working as employees after the first
year four members left the firm and new
members joined for the two women who
stayed with the office the longest Magda
bra CEO and Marie Kennedy spragues
leadership role was not a problem
Sprague had invited bra CEO to join the
office while still a student at the
Turin Polytechnic Oh she had come to the
u.s. to marry and she returned to the
open design office after completing her
degree for her the office offered an
empowering environment despite her youth
and inexperience Kennedy had graduated
from Harvard GSD in 1969 and had worked
at urban planning aid for two years
before joining the office in 1973 the
office appealed to her because urban
planning aid had also been experimenting
with a non hierarchical structure in
which all responsibilities were shared
including janitorial work and pay was
based on need not experience
so actually the secretary made the most
money because she had two children to
raise on her own
although the open design office didn't
go this didn't go as far with its
policies it did promise a more
supportive off office environment than
most practices for the first few years
the practice thrived and even turned a
profit the busiest years were 1974 1975
when the office had commissions for
several large projects as well some
smaller projects and consultation jobs
the type of client and how they worked
with them was very important in fact
they turned down at least one project
where the client wanted to give them
free rein which is most architects dream
since it would not provide the architect
client interaction they sought to
cultivate they aspire to work for
underserved populations especially
children women and children and they
wanted their clients to be full
participants in the design process one
of the most important projects for the
office was the Roxbury neighborhood
rehabilitation in the late 1960s Harvard
purchased about 30 properties in the
largely african-american area southwest
of downtown Boston which it planned to
demolish to expand its hospital with
help from some Harvard students who were
on strike at the time the affected
tenants organized a tenants write
Association after contentious
negotiations Harvard agreed to renovate
the properties and they hired the open
design office the budget did not allow
for full historic restoration and rapid
inflation curtailed the budget even
further forcing the designers to be
creative however they saw the
opportunity not only to provide design
solutions but to redesign the process
tenants were involved from the beginning
and had say in the treatise necessary to
meet the project constraints aluminum
siding was chosen for its economy and
availability in many colors the tenants
were then offered a choice of colors for
siding trim accent
roofing at the tenants requests most of
the porches which had been scheduled to
be removed were preserved the most
innovative innovative aspect of the
project was the construction
documentation in order to economize on
time the open design office used
photographs instead of working drawings
to communicate with the contractor the
photographs were also easier for the
tenants to read and I enable a mem to
understand exactly the work to be done
on their homes by 1976 the economic
downturn threatened the livelihood of
the office the members agreed to give up
their rented space and work from home
the disadvantage of the office structure
was that no profit surplus was amassed
to see it through a recession several
members left to seek employment
elsewhere and the office of fission
closed by 1978 when Sprague moved to
Newport Rhode Island where she developed
a small housing complex of five
apartments one of which became her home
in office Sprague remains committed to
feminist goals although she transferred
her energy from architectural practice
to development in 1978 she helped
contribute a session of the women's
school of planning and architecture a
program which she co-founded with six
other women in 1974 including Kennedy
and Berkley the three coordinators of
the 1978 session of whispah Sprague
whispah co-founder Katrina Adam and
Susan Aitchison went on to create the
women's Development Corporation
established in 1978-79 they chose to
serve this practice in Providence Rhode
Island because of the confluence of
community need and existing urban fabric
mostly untouched by urban renewal the
award-winning corporation can continues
today to renovate build and manage
properties for single mothers and lowing
families mentally ill and disabled
residents and the elderly
however sprang herself stayed involved
only stayed involved with the women's
Development Corporation for about two
years before returning to Boston where
she founded the Women's Institute for
Housing and Economic Development in 1980
the Women's Institute was a nonprofit
organization which is which provided
technical assistance for the development
of housing and economic opportunities
for women
although the open design office did not
last that long
it demonstrated the passion and
commitment feminist architects in the
70s had to transform the profession that
they were fighting to enter worked in a
BK which was about most democratic
office agra fortune and UK pop from
Hampshire County they're the partners of
course did collaborate very closely
I was with Peter Aaron's last night his
book launcher he went into some detail
about the closeness of their
collaboration they did say that their
clients really wanted a lead partner to
whom they could relate I just wonder how
that ties in with this women's
collaborative in Boston I was I said I
mean Sprague really was the central
figure despite you know this aspiration
towards not having a hierarchy and being
collaborative and she she was quite well
recognized in Boston for her work both
with her husband's but also as a
furniture designer she had designed for
Benjamin Thompson and so I think she she
was well enough established that that
her reputation could have provided that
for the clients the type of client I
mean it was also affirmative action
so I think they they felt that a lot of
the hires they got were because they
were women at that period when when
affirmative action was coming in and and
they also you know they worked they
tended to work on community projects and
and a lot of their clients were also
feminist groups although the feminists
tended not to pay them another issue but
but she she did have you know she did
have that reputation and I think that's
what brought the work that they did get
to the firm can I just turn the question
back to you so in a way are you saying
that we're still so conditioned to see
through the frame of a great architect
that it turns back to a named person in
almost all cases I don't think this it's
about a great person it's about personal
relationships okay I'm feeling that
there is a individual who's going to
take the overall responsibility rather
than there being a diffuse situation
yeah well I mean one thing about their
like how they aspired to work was that
you there would always be one partner in
charge of whichever project so there was
always a point person Minh some ways
that collaborative collaboration was
more about providing support for
themselves as women in a period when it
was very hostile and a lot of bosses
offices rather than the sort of the
actual working practice of working
together we have a comment on that Harry
yeah you can kind of throw it back to
you about you know the so you asked the
question of like wire why are these
partners not seen or why they
they don't get recognized or how it you
know it's hard to kind of to learn about
them I also wonder about like why the
sort of myth of the individual remains
so strong damn president idea President
Trump
dear mrs. May dear all school education
I mean to say it is so ingrained just
yeah I'm afraid is that as a Canadian
but you know you know so like in the
post-war in the u.s. like Gropius was
like that the ass version of teamwork
and there's that that really comes into
the discourse but then never translates
to actually how the practices work or
promote themselves she'll eat this I
mean the the issue the altar to the
altars is is more complicated in that it
was an atelier
and there is a very particular tradition
of Scandinavian ateliers that you know
is a much lengthier talk and I've just
done but it it's pertinent to this in
the there is a form of teamwork in it
but it's not teamwork at all the way the
group has postulated it and actually
Alvar Aalto would refer to gropius's
work in in in the states as that's not
what we do sort of thing because he saw
the he saw the problems with it as for
why the myth I think it's for all the
reasons that you want your there I think
also it makes it comprehensible though
it's graspable you just saying and we
all know how complicated putting your
building up ever more so but if you can
just stick a name on it it's easy and I
think that idealization of practice
forms a practice kind of carries on and
I think it relates also to the kind of
and I say this with caution because I
I don't work electives but there's a
kind of interest in collective forms of
practice in the UK which i think is it
is a sort of Richter architects trying
to reclaim their agency to an extent yes
and actually what it's doing is saying
we're happy on the margins which is
where I'm really unhappy
so I question I've got a real you know
there's error there's a much more
complex answer to that discussion to be
heard about why are we interested in
things of practice but I think this
question of the ideal and the idea that
you can find the magic formula is still
well like I'm eating agency and
authorship are absolutely key issues
here in both cases aren't they but does
collectivism work against that I won't
go to another two more questions as
first on the left
Harry first of all thank you for the two
wonderful talks I have a question for
Harry a Charenton did you I know you end
with saying well we weren't there so we
really don't know what was going through
their heads right this the relationship
between the Altos for example but my
experience is basic on Germany and
what's happened in the 20th century in
German architecture there were many
couples some very famous some in the
shadows but what comes out very often is
this feeling of ambivalence on both the
part of the man and the woman and we
also have written sources that describe
that for different reasons and at
different points in time did you find
anything in your research or maybe the
question goes to also to Andrea as well
not just this ideal that we're working
towards but also this ambivalence that
we have to be part of a team in some way
or work collectively it is conflated
with this issue the Italian and gosh how
long has he had five years ago I did a
book with an architect called Vettel
Nava who
for who's the site octet for the altar
church in bologna rial criolla enable
Anya and what we did was an oral history
of the practice and it was there's not
interviews what we did was he set it up
so that we got people who work there
work for our tech a couple of structure
engineers to talk to each other we just
set up conversations and they talked and
one of the and one of the things that
came out of that was why had no one ever
done it before answer was they the
people who worked in Natalia didn't see
it as interesting they just simply said
it was my job we did it we were part of
this Atelier we just did it and these
were people who were executing things
like the Finlandia hall I mean these
were major pieces and they simply said
no we're just part of this story and one
of the things they came back to over and
over again and actually both you know I
think this would bring in certainly
Alisa and probably I know as well
inasmuch as except for the practice was
that much smaller and she divided her
time she was the managing director I
know from 1936 to 1949 when she died she
was the managing director she ran off
deck the furniture and Exhibition Center
so you know she went out to what was his
lovely thing she went out to work and he
stayed at home I mean I could it's kind
of love this because the Atelier was was
basically based in behind the styling
door from the house but they all what
they were both and an altar in a way
were part of this Atelier and that sort
of idea of collective anonymity which is
embodied by the fact that none of the
drawings in the art of office were ever
signed so you can just about work out
the mark of someone's hand which is the
title of the book but that's it
you know that's it it is this sort of
collective thing and and what they keep
on saying during these they are number a
large numbers
over and over again during the
conversations is you could do what you
like but if that of course you couldn't
because you've been employed - the whole
thing was about trust and actually the
secret of that Atelier is recruitment
you only recruit people you trust and
it's embodied in a way of working a way
of understanding so sorry that's a bit
of a lengthy answer but it's the one I
know and I can't speak about the other
practices but I think there is it's more
complex in Finland because of this
Atelier tradition which it blends into
it's a would you want to push that sorry
good hi it just seems so so even you
know maybe and there were certainly
emotions involved and I know how I'm I
know all too was represented in the
United States you know mrs. alto you
know mister Altos collaborator was also
there I mean when they come to New York
for the 1939 World's Fair there's a
picture of both of them in architectural
forum and they're smoking their
cigarettes right and she doesn't have a
name but he does you know and she's
notice his collaborator I mean this this
certainly has you know it lays it has
traces you know it wounds it affects
people and so you just can't always
retreat your nice little abyssal gate
tradition where everyone's cooking you
know call for you from one another you
know what I'm saying I mean it there
were traces that were left and I again I
know from the research I've done in
Germany for other from other colleagues
throughout the 20th century where there
is also a tradition of of couples
working in any event so it's different
from the anti-gay tradition but
certainly there is this idea of
partnership which is what the Altos were
certainly about where they do amazing
projects but it's complicated on an
emotional level and also on a
psychological level oh sure yeah and
that's what I'm pushing for and I guess
the other question would go to Andrea if
you see that as well because I just
don't think it's so simple you know I
just don't think well this is my job and
I make
wonderful structure and then I go home
and get paid no but that's the recall
and and now I take your point in it's
not it certainly isn't simple sorry
Denise Scott Brown's written a lot about
this about what it feels like to be in a
partnership and be erased and with the
emotions that are attached but the
rancor she articulates isn't directed to
her partner Robert it's directed to the
reception and public inscription of
their work in their authorship so
probably if you're gonna talk about
emotions I agree but you need to sort
out you know how that's been configured
by the individuals I think I'm going to
put on historians hat here but I think
it isn't the general question that we
can address here but it relies
absolutely as Harry said on context so
what's the historical context of the
moment of those people actually
collaborating and working I'm thinking
mrs. Schroeder and the Rietveld wrote a
house mrs. Schroeder was a huge
influence on the design of the house
she's just kind of obliterated amazing
personal amazing person to have tea with
and who shot up on her roof on aged 92
up the ladder and be going no don't do
this please but she she would absolutely
had a huge input in that and there's
very little in that that that she would
say and I as a historian would say that
it's because the historical moment at
which that house was conceived women did
not have that agency role they were seen
in the secondary role as the supporters
as the she said I'm making the tea and
you have a red cup or a yellow cup you
can choose I don't want to do that if
you're going to say something else there
yeah I mean you know I think it
certainly was very complex for Sprague
because she so she had worked with her
husband and and she's remarks in a few
places and the archive about being you
know she doesn't refer to
that she was the silent partner but she
does refer to that dynamic of the
husband white team where the wife is
kind of in the background I think she
definitely felt that and so you know and
then she launches this this new project
leaves the partnership with our husband
and but they get their first Commission
through the husband actually and he he
has a school in Arizona which you know
they had done she had done quite a lot
of work with him in Arizona and the open
design office gets the interior but then
she ends up divorcing him kind of a few
years later so clearly that Deinosuchus
was happening so part of you know
launching this this collective practice
was her own trying to you know break
away from that invisibility and yet she
chooses you know this collective
practice where I mean you know I'm
working with an archive that's almost
non-existent like there's very very
little on this practice and she and
fortunately has passed and and mostly
other people were not as emotionally
engaged in it it was just something they
did for a while and you know so they
don't have strong memories of it but but
you for sure there were tensions
you know and it's hinted at in places in
the archive like that first year it was
sounded like it was really very like
those long long meetings of trying to
figure out how this was going to work
and then you know like four people leave
the office you know within a year so
yeah
it was it was a big and but that's
happening and you know like there was
all kinds of it like wall up also like
the meetings used to go on for forever
and these other feminist organizations
there was a lot of tensions of trying to
figure out like how do we work in it
way and how do we work with each other
as women like never having worked with
other women before or maybe having like
one other woman in the office or a
couple of other classmates or over
oneself
oh no I find very strange as an art
historian because in a sense
architectural historians are going over
ground that art historians went over 20
years ago significant others our
partnerships I mean it's it's not a
wonderful book but it does start
addressing those questions it why is
that
why does architectural history does it
lack behind or am I just perceiving this
through the wrong end of a telescope
I'm Ben we've been doing this for 50
years the first feminist architectural
histories are being done in the 70s and
you know I think particularly since the
late 80s Early 90s coming out feminist
our history certainly I mean when I went
to the Bartlett you know I said where's
the where's the feminist stop you know
approach on this course this was 1990 oh
we don't do it you couldn't that
wouldn't happen now you know but
certainly since then I think there's
been a huge huge impulse to rethink and
just to plug my session this afternoon I
we can have these conversations again
late but nearly recovery is that melee
active recovery so I think we'd be
problem I mean I think a lot women
architectures for their feminist
architectural historians have been
problematizing trying not to really
because I think that's part of the
problem the robbed the recovery
reclamation thing doesn't get us
anywhere has that changed how
architectural history's taught here at
all peasant role at all yeah yeah sorry
it's a person right in the back on the
left to put the hand up third or we've
strayed away from them there
sorry I mean I just think his historians
one of the reasons that it's partly
being neglected is that it's really hard
because to do to people and then to do
an office and then often to do a
relationship between two people who
might be at the top of our office it's a
huge amount of work and I really like
both of the papers today because you
know I think they showed the sort of
richness of things James absolutely
right you know historical circumstance
each one and after I tell a ton of
partnerships particularly in the 18th
century that I think helped prepare me
when I was looking at male female or you
know the 19th century furniture makers
mainly male but hugely different and
changing within the partnerships so it's
not just that you know there's no magic
formula and I think we need to think
about the differences and the nuances
and that's actually what I thought was
really nice today that I'm actually
yesterday there lots of that stuff was
coming out and I did quite like the
krusty they're outraged because I
remember being really surprised and I
must have done a lot of interviews with
women architects and designers when Lela
Vignelli was the first one who told me
about arguments of her and Massimo used
to have and interestingly enough about
whose idea was and and she just had got
used to one to kill him you know because
it was my idea and that was the first
person never thought oh my god there's
nobody else been that honest with me
about it have they all been trying to
sort of just think about their
partnerships in less volatile ways and
it was important for me I think and
maybe it's the question I ask more often
now
I didn't think to ask it before
[Applause]
