thank you thanks.thanks Parveen it's
it's great to be back in slightly
intimidating at this at this very retro
lectern so I mean I I generally
improvise quite a lot when it comes to
lectures so that basically the format of
today is kind of I'm gonna like present
some of the thoughts and like my thought
process not just you know these film
works but also how it's evolved over I
guess last 11 years since I it since I
finished my diploma here and I mean what
I really hope is this being an
architecture school like I talked about
what I've learned along the way rather
than just presenting my work and kind of
like geomancer for those you saw it it's
kind of this idea of having like a self
portrait or you know this kind of
coming-of-age narrative or basically
this in case I guess like creative
awakening is the way I'm gonna be kind
of talking about what I've learned and
also how I guess the different paradigms
of what counts as experimental or what
counts as visualization is is kind of
conceived in these times so I'll be kind
of switching between me playing talking
playing video clips and my friend Robin
Simpson who will be doing a live
playthrough of one of the latest
simulations which is called 2065 so I
just want to start with basically talk
about talk about Singapore so my family
is Malaysian Chinese and like many
Malaysian Chinese of their generation
they moved to Singapore to work in the
70s because of them basically racial and
political problems one of the
interesting things I always found is the
huge difference between the way that
places are represented through popular
media versus you know one's own kind of
personal experience of a place this
particular article which the science
fiction writer William Gibson wrote
about Singapore for Wired magazine I
reread a few a few months ago actually
after you know after being invited to do
a project in Singapore and wanting to
like reevaluate my relationship with a
place which is somewhere I've always
known very intimately because I you know
I lived and studied there as a young
child and when I came to the UK which
is actually around the time this article
was written of course the place was very
different and I was always surprised at
how Singapore was used as as a kind of
paradigm really both positive and
negative to project many fantasies about
utopia and its discontents basically
this article by William Gibson I was
kind of surprised to see was written on
the 1st of April 1993 this is I think
about four months before I moved to the
UK his title Disneyland with the death
penalty
essentially encapsulate what he thinks
about the place tagline we sent William
Gibson to Singapore to see whether that
clean dystopia represents our techno
future seen from the lens of 2019 this
seems a little bit let's say of a
insensitive way to describe an entire
nation state essentially it's like an
entire country run by Jeffrey Katzenberg
don't even know who that is
we were smiling in an office a block
from Rodeo Drive one large black
furniture lease with Japanese venture
capital as some of you may know William
Gibson is a huge oriental techno
fetishist and his incredible novel
Neuromancer which was written in 1980
like published in 1984 I think you know
uses this kind of collage style between
like Los Angeles which he calls the
sprawl with this hybrid of you know
basically neo Japanese and linguistics
and kind of settings and of course it's
enormously influential in our visions of
what might constitute kind of
technological dystopia I read an
interview with him where he said Blade
Runner had been released I think just
about 12 months while he was finishing
the first draft of Neuromancer and he
said to himself like what am I going to
do now that this you know incredibly
immersive vision of what this dystopian
future might look like you know now that
there's this film
how can my novel differ from that of
course for those who've you who've read
it it's essentially a kind of like a
crime war fiction set in this future
sprawl we're a kind of hacker so-called
console cowboy goes to basically steal
some data and it transpires later on
that everything is being orchestrated by
Wintermute who is an AI who seeks to
kind of integrate with a different
system so based on this kind of Fame
essentially William Gibson ten years
later and nine years later in this case
is basically asked in the case of Wired
magazine to be a kind of hush I say not
quite like a technological evangelist
but is seen as this kind of prophet
essentially of the new technological age
and you know in in new romance he coined
the term cyberspace and so on and it's
fascinating to me to see that even
though I respect him enormous ly as as
an author and he's continued to write
amazing books how badly this article has
dated from my perspective essentially
and some of these things are incredibly
relevant now was it Laurie Anderson who
said that VR would never look real until
they learn how to put some dirt in it
Singapore's airport the Changi hopless
seemed to peasant possess no more
resolution than some early VPL world
don't even know what VPL means there was
no dirt whatsoever no muss no furtive
fractal edge to thing outside the
organic florida's ever in the tropics
had been garden into brilliant green and
all two perfect examples of itself only
the clouds were feathered with chaos
weird columnar structures towering above
the strait of china i think it's not
even the strait of china that he's I
think he means the Strait of Malacca
Strait of time doesn't exist in that
region and what is strange is me
rereading this with a kind of like
context of you know D colonial politics
and all the rest that I'd in the 25
years when I first moved to Singapore
because Singapore was found in 1965
there was this kind of sense of
nation-building you know it was a 20
25th anniversary of the country and
really it was about this creating this
multiracial multi-ethnic
you know United Society and like in this
article part of making that society
essentially marketable for investment
from the West was making it into a clean
utopia so what is basically the heaviest
irony to me is that William Gibson being
an American who moved to Canada in his
20s is that I thought hang on you're
American
there's Disneyland is American and the
death penalty is a very advanced kind of
economic institution in the USA why is
that that if you say that Singapore's
Disneyland with the death penalty it's
really framing the entire nation state
and the region essentially in a certain
way whereas the entire country with
Disneyland and Disney World with a very
well-established death penalty isn't
there some kind of strange and
incredibly subtle framing going on at
play here that's very problematic with
with my new perspective essentially
because going back to the a a when I was
here there was to kind of um summarize
the kind of dichotomy was less about
politics but it's more about you know
digital creativity let's say an analog
creativity so what I would see is either
there were people would be about the
algorithm or about making about physical
making and this was the essential
conflict between the discourse that was
being taught around here you know
between representation and the physical
reality and it took me a long time to
start thinking of my practice as
something you know thinking about
representation or the virtual not as a
means to an end not with the kind of
constructed environment to finish with
but actually to think that what if I
took the virtual as the final thing in
itself so that divorced from any kind of
economic or rail or now political
considerations I would essentially be
free to use architecture or at least the
language of it as a speculative medium
which is always what had interested me
in in the first place so this kind of
side note about Disneyland with the
death penalty is really a way to say
that
it's it's just so interesting to me that
some of so many of the paradigms from
even quite recently have completely
transformed because of the the urgency
of different kinds of politics and the
political nature of any kind of
creativity let alone architecture
specifically with its with its so-called
you know social good with the impetus of
social good
and what I have kind of queued up
essentially is a mix of a few like nine
of the videos I'm just going to play
small extracts from and to kind of
illustrate my my thinking process
between these things so geomancer was um
you know it's commissioned for as
Parveen was saying for the film and
video from a video umbrella award and in
this because previously I've been making
lots of site so-called site-specific
films that have been talking about so I
thought what if instead of kind of
thinking about the audience so much I
think about a future audience because in
this sense there's a lot of talk about
you know algorithmic algorithmic
analysis of human behavior and which for
me feeds into this dystopian narrative
that creates a fear of the other
essentially and in geomancer and in my
work Idol and another work called sign
of futurism
I actually think of what if we could
basically envisage the world from the
other point of view not so much that we
are the kind of biased human individual
looking with envy and fear of this
imminent takeover let's say of another
intelligence but well if we actually try
and see the world through their point of
view and in this particular part of
geomancer it's not just about CGI but
it's very much about point of view so in
this case literally it's geomancer
looking at the world as a weather
surveillance satellite the difference
between looking at the world from the
what is it about four thousand
kilometers in space so I actually much
more than that from up in space in the
stratosphere and to looking at the
ground view in in kind of narrative
terms
to make it a small tangent into that
because it's not just architecture I'm
interested in it's very much you know
let's say the first person experience of
these things that I'm you know
fascinated by not just in terms of
filmmaking but really changing this
cartographic view of looking at the
world which is essentially you know the
plan and the primary architecture mode
of control and representation into the
perspective of one you know what is what
are things like on the ground and in geo
mats are very literally the the view
goes from starts from a board game the
game of go looking top-down on the world
as if it's a game that you can win or
that you can win against a is shifting
from that to geomancer's point of view
up in the stratosphere totally
disconnected from the from the world and
actually plunging down into into the
depth of the city essentially in kind of
I think in Greek narrative terms as this
kind of idea of the was it Qatar buses
which is essentially moving down from
the high place to the low place or this
descent into the underworld where
essentially the protagonist comes face
to face with their fears and their
demons and so on and the others and the
other variation of that which is the
antibodies which is essentially going
from the low point to the high point so
geomancer even though it's you know all
rendered within this cinematic
perspective it really is about the
journey down and then back up again to
make to put things very simple and in an
incredibly literal sense because when I
was constructing
with my friends the the world design or
the world building for this I was
thinking I have a found place which is
Marina Bay in Singapore and how am I
going to find a way to weave together
these different narratives it's kind of
coming down and coming back up again
within this already existing structure
the game that is being played now is
called 2065 which is basically the open
world video game version of the world of
geomancer and so like you can see it is
set this current version is set in the
Barbican in
2065 and so for me the other thing that
I'm trying to do is play with this idea
of temporality so for example geomancer
is set in 2065 but at the same time
unconscious that works that I make today
will be processed not just through a
human audience but through an
increasingly large and non-human
algorithmic one as well so for example
you know you upload your video to
YouTube or whatever and the the kind of
copyright algorithm scans it for you no
use of uncleared samples use of unclear
music samples and video samples as well
so with both geomancer and with these
video games I'm actually thinking not
just of framing the world in terms of
this future other to come but also in
terms of I am making this not just for
an audience not just for a curate and
not just for myself but really to inject
another narrative into the spectrum of
AI versus human which of and like I said
AI for me is just an analog or a kind of
a kind of stand-in for any kind of
emerging other that because again there
are no human figures or human avatars in
most of these works except from my
latest film that the the world then
really becomes about a confrontation
between a viewer and how they fill in
the world for themselves in many of the
games one thing I always recognize and
it's fascinating to me is that people
really explore the world just like they
would explore the real world so quite
often people are there with their
friends and they say like oh you know
we've really been here before or like
when you check out that place it really
is just the same kind of sense of I
guess mentally it's the same kind of
idea of exploration as areas in in
exploring the city as well and that's
really fascinating to me and also how
people kind of manifest their own
personal I guess their own personal
spirit essentially in how they play the
game because what I've observed is that
this people who some people want to win
they really want to be like what do I do
what's the goal
how do i how do i beat the game is there
any point to it and again I say to them
it's like the whole point of this game
is that there are no goals and it is
just to kind of it's a endless loop
simulation there are others who really
want to break the system the kind of
anarchists of the game they want to like
find will try and walk through all the
walls they'll kind of walk to the edge
of the world to see where the flat earth
ends to try and fall off and so to see
if you know it glitches endlessly
there's also people who you know the
kind of and people who are there just
for a pure state of play they try and
jump places they try and access places
that you wouldn't otherwise inhabit so
it really is incredibly similar to the I
guess embodied experience of space and
how you might explore the world or the
city through your own body but going
back for a second into the the kind of
politics of what I'm talking about
so up to about 2015 I was doing very
much like literally site-specific
simulations so in each I would look at
you know the place where an exhibition
would be and in this this is called
Europa Mon Amour so basically it was for
a public Arts Festival in called open
source which is in Gillette Square in
Dalston and in this I'm basically using
Gillette Square what is it as a cynic
dokie of the whole of the UK and become
which is you know part representing the
whole and in this in here I was looking
at you know the the alain resnais film
Hiroshima mon amour which is about you
know the trauma caused by war to memory
and about the failure of communication
between different individuals and
because this this work was made I think
just before I think it was May 2016 just
before you know the initial kind of
brexit vote and so on I thought I kind
of had it as a you know comedy what-if
scenario if this you know virtual
apocalypse or this political one was
brought about within the square which
would represent the rest of the UK so
I'm just going to play a small kind of
clip from that
and also in terms of just the evolution
of the visuals sometimes people ask me
are you worried about things getting
outdated and I I feel now I realize how
inevitable that is I kind of embrace it
so that over the long period this kind
of archive of work is not just the kind
of archive of things I've done or been
interested in but it's also how should I
say a record of the evolution of the
medium in itself and what things I felt
I could bring together with this medium
so in in this particular simulation
there are you know different samples
there's a Lars von Trier film called
Europa in which is this endless train
journey through what is Europe every
time you hear my voice with every word
and every number you will enter is still
deeper they're open relaxed and
receptive
[Music]
I shall now count from one to ten on the
count of ten you will be in Europa I say
one and as you focus your attention
entirely on my voice you will slowly
begin to relax to your hands and your
fingers are getting warmer and heavier
three the warmth is spreading through
your arms to your shoulders and your
neck for your feet and your legs get
heavier five the warmth is spreading to
the whole of your body on six I want you
to go deeper I say six
and the whole of your relaxed body is
slowly beginning to sink 7 you go deeper
and deeper and deeper aids on every
breath you take you go deeper 9 you are
floating on the mental count of 10 you
will be in Europa be there at 10
I say and
so what I think there's a few things
that I think only clear to me once I see
things that I've made before one is not
just the kind of technology and the kind
of visual styling of everything but also
very much the kind of sensibility to a
mood which either is kind of like how I
say like there's comedy and tragedy on
on one hand and there's obviously like
simulation in the rail on the other hand
but also I guess this idea of is
essentially dysphoria and euphoria like
as opposed to like being particularly
interested in dystopian utopia even
though these are kind of embodied in the
set design as well I'm much more
interested in kind of what what mood or
effect these these places have you know
kind of like the electronic music I like
it really veers between these two
emotional extremes the euphoric and the
district or the fact that there's this
real push and contrast between them like
in I guess like in G oh man so you have
happy melody sad lyrics or sad melody
and happy lyrics it's really the push
and pull between these two elements that
I guess generates a lot of my interest
in I guess in the parts of I guess like
art and architecture and filmmaking that
aren't so necessarily clear from from
what is being seen um and a lot of these
site-specific works I kind of tried to
write this video essay about them called
pyramid schemes I'm just going to play
kind of silently at the moment and
pyramid schemes was I wrote it as a
response to kind of critiques of The
Shard actually when it was built I think
in 2012-2013
that were really kind of equating let's
say neoliberal architecture which is as
evidenced by the shard with his kind of
you know as if it was something that
should be resisted because the other
thing for me myself is obviously
politically I'm always thinking about
which way to you know what's the
relationship between my role as an
individual and the political role as as
a kind of collective or you know
essentially how do I change this utopian
impulse in architecture to a way that
actually works for me in 29
tene firstly there's a kind of means of
production right so for me people might
say like y-you know obviously I spend a
lot of time make building virtual worlds
but for me that is never the focus
actually virtual worlds or using my
laptop or whatever is just the minimum
means that I have in order to kind of
convey these ideas or to build these
worlds even though they're incredibly
low fidelity I mean look you know you
can contrast like Ubisoft Assassin's
Creed with you know with my stuff and of
course this has a team of hundreds like
mapping laser scanning in this case not
your Dom cathedral to the utmost
accuracy in building a perfect
recreation of that that can run on the
system and of course once again the
irony is that with the with the fire at
notre dam they actually Ubisoft actually
had the most accurate record of the
original state of notch dom cathedral
before it burnt so this whole idea that
i think this very essentially biased
notion that you know the the virtual is
less authentic than the physical or
somehow the virtual is a less worthy
commitment i suppose than physical
building is something that is I think
really grounded in a particular version
of I guess I guess monumental creativity
that I don't particularly subscribe to
especially now
and so pyramid schemes this essay was
essentially making parallels between
this impulse to build the pyramid so of
course from from Egypt to to the shard
or to create this like monumental symbol
of you know like humanity's place on
earth essentially to see the shard as
emblematic not just of capitalism
essentially but of this impulse to
create a symbol that both works on an
individual level and on a collective one
and in Assassin's Creed of course
because you know as a character you
spend a lot of your time trying to climb
stuff and essentially get up to the top
of the pyramids get up to the top of the
Cathedral that I kind of felt this
relationship with my work in the sense
that essentially the simplest kind of
utopia or the simplest kind of privilege
is just one's point of view essentially
and obviously games like Assassin's
Creed and some of my work like skyline
really embodies this I'm just going to
play a short clip from another
simulation that I made one of the very
early ones which was about a recreation
of the Crystal Palace and kind of
slightly worryingly I think I have an
obsession with buildings that have been
destroyed or burned down either if after
the fact or it kind of happens once
there's a video essay about it so I'm
going to be very selective in the future
I reaches the commute to see star
salvation
and this is potato which
he started the serger is intended to do
kobish
yes haunted side entrance non continue
developing ecovillage rust
they've done sir
so for those of you who don't know the
Crystal Palace was actually moved to
Crystal Palace in South London where
then burned down in the early 20th
century so this idea of I mean obviously
it's a seminal work of you know hybrid
engineering architecture and modernity
you know but also it it's a mobile
artifact somehow or somehow this example
of the great example of you know
architecture made to be transformed or
architecture made to be a container of
other things rather than either the end
in itself
so in these works like you could see it
Europe and one or more and with and with
Shiva's dreaming the Crystal Palace was
this idea of you know a collage
essentially with the Crystal Palace I'm
just taking the building or the design
of the building as a found object with
Europa Mon Amour I'm taking this part of
Dolson as a found object along with some
you know Wolfgang Tillman's pose anti
brexit posters and so on that kind of
transformed this you know this idea of
sampling from reality into this
different kind of container which is
which is this simulation so the
different aspect that I'm also kind of
fascinated by is essentially comedy
right so if that is all like very like
meditative and you know kind of
meditative and introspective about one's
experience of the city of course with
technology and AI this is absolutely not
how they are presented from the opposite
point of view so another strand in my
work is to do with far sight and far
sight is essentially the the fictional
company that made geomancer in the film
so according to this timeline so 2065
and it's 2019 now I started thinking
what if instead of thinking of myself as
this kind of like original creator of
artwork or this you know artists with
the capsule a actually I think firstly I
think what if I'm essentially like a
content creator for the creative
industries secondly what if my main
audience is actually not people today in
2019 but is actually people broadly
speaking including non-human people over
the next 50 years and third
what if instead of seeing this fiction
I've created is essentially something
under my control
what if I make myself into essentially
like a Farsight employee so that I bring
about the conditions in which some of my
work talks about not just so that art is
no longer essentially entertainment or a
medium but it's a way to speculate and
shape the future that is to come so this
is an ad where I launched Farsight as a
you know like real company which is no
big deal it cost like 10 pounds online
but I launched it at bold tendencies
last year and so this was a launch
trailer embodying some of the ethos of
Farsight which of course is not my real
thinking but as me imagining myself as
essentially like a Silicon Valley
startup entrepreneur who really wants to
innovate in the creative industries
which of course I guess as an artist or
an architect or a writer you actually do
you just don't call it the same thing
[Music]
[Music]
so of course the way that AI is framed
let's say in kind of Blade Runner
Neuromancer versus how it's being sold
to us through kind of Google pop-up ads
and so on is very different to how
multifaceted it is essentially and one
thing I was thinking about as
essentially one thing I I'm trying to be
self conscious of is in what way am I
being hypocritical right so for me
myself if I am a product of a certain
pattern of let's say globalize
industries my parents worked for an
airline
and I was born in Germany if I'm very
much a product of globalized capitalism
to take a very simplistic stance that
essentially like I am aunty the very
processes that brought myself as in
physical entity into being would be
incredibly contradictory and of course
there may well be no easy and neat way
of resolving these things but one of
these ways I'm trying to do that is to
actually see the production of my work
as not just from this you know like
artists in the gallery or giving a
lecture presentation but I'm thinking of
myself is how would I as an alternate
version of myself go about presenting
this idea of creativity so of course in
in geomancer and so on I'm the alternate
version of myself is myself as an as an
AI and this idea of you know
personification is like poetic
embodiment of the author within the work
within the object they are contemplating
is a very established format in you know
fiction literature filmmaking and poetry
and all this kind of thing but to go one
step further particularly particularly
when researching and dealing with super
intelligence or this idea that the
creator makes the the creation makes the
creator obsolete or superfluous is
another whole level of this let's say of
course in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein
the Frankenstein's monster possesses
emotion but possesses no way of
essentially communicating with it with
the human who always see the monster as
actually a monster so this idea that
despite the the arrival of intelligence
the failure of empathy and communication
is actually what breaks breaks the
system down and it's it is really a kind
of psychological thing as much as it is
a technological one and this is just one
thing I find really fascinating because
of course the technology is so embodied
in all the external appearances of the
world that I create whether that's the
sound or the vision but really what's
important to me is bringing this
ambiguity or this paradox about you know
let's say being like fighting power
through cartography or fighting power
through you know calling forth a
different sense of moral superiority
which is again one thing that I try and
just be self-conscious of because of my
own privilege and ability of someone
who's making work that will be shown and
and also create a different dialogue and
discourse around so um all this being
said I think again the the final point I
want to make is this idea of art that is
both a tool for Futurity not just about
visualization as a as a kind of one step
in the process of a project or a kind of
concept but is especially in a kind of
mediatised
age where any kind of like to me at
least any kind of DIY means and mode of
production is possible it's really
something to be embraced essentially and
so the the final trailer play is from a
film called idle which is the sequel to
geomancer but whereas geomancer's
looking at AI from this point of view of
the machine and of and of this kind of
coming-of-age of this artist so
essentially this upward trajectory Idol
is really about this human superstar who
essentially they've kind of faded and
they want to make a comeback and it's
about music essentially both as a medium
and as an industry because to me what's
interesting with music is it's always
been one of the first mediums to exploit
technology
essentially from you know recording to
distribution whether it's from you know
a vinyl radio the internet and different
forms of replication and physical and
then immaterial distribution so why is
it I was asking myself that you know
music is such a conduit for I guess
some people's personal engagement with
kind of creativity and identity of
course there's it's to do with the way
that the star or the the avatar is
embodied within the music and it's about
the commodification both of the
individual image and the sound that can
be distributed but also with you know AI
and these different processes you know
so much money like I made the example
earlier so much of the first innovation
in artificial intelligence from a
consumer point of view is to do with
music and copyright it's nothing you
know sublime or amazing it's incredibly
in mundane and it's to do with rights
and giving you know fractions of a cent
or penny to different corporations so
with this in mind like with all of this
background or kind of consciousness
about the economics or the politics
between the individual and the kind of
system that they exist within I try to
like tie this within again a narrative
that is not about coming up but it's
really about coming down essentially so
this is a trailer from idle machinee
defensin diva young chemistry on you
jo-jo can question truly
[Music]
hi Isaiah when John do Joker and ow it
was a real war drama own traversal of
the sound
jappa Chicano or the one team
woman this she did it in your mind
transcending
a sea turtle gelatin de Gruyter
cha soojeong concern and attention you
tompa tomorrow central citizen Kwanza
shun transgender well you knew each
other you were marrying some today
myself
[Music]
[Music]
Sassanian daddy sure hope a temple
Jenna how are you
[Music]
who may endorse you was an ER a dollar
so demeaning
Shekinah position - shampoo - Amy
[Music]
thank you well after that stunning and
very complicated presentation you will
be able to relax in the next ten minutes
I think I've taken a very old-fashioned
attitude to this I was actually asked a
very simple level the question of the
human and the AI so I hope it is of some
interest but you can also be planning
your questions and sorting out what
Lauren's have said in your minds can I
have that light game please
is that the best you can do for the
lectern okay I'll start anyway
is just over 10 minutes geomancer is a
stunning movie it can be appreciated at
many levels the complex narrative
creating a whole world with its history
and is tensions we go backwards and
forwards in time in Gio's history and
the history of the world the present of
the film being Singapore 2065 the voices
are important in conveying this history
they conjure up backed by the images a
world reaching up to the heavens and
beyond to the space in which geo carried
out a surveillance for 20 years
there was a past Singapore submerged in
water and that water again at the end
with the subtitle you never asked well
this is I think it's render in your
translation you never render the same
river twice a reference to Parmenides
which crosses aliens of time and are
carrying us back to the Greeks much more
would be needed to convey the experience
of the soul but I will concentrate on
how geo and artificial intelligence is
portrayed in relation to humans Lawrence
is in doubt geo with an AI capital I a
curiosity about his own origins and a
desire to be an artist within the
narrative which is creativity that is at
issue creativity is the dividing line
which AI must not cross what does this
film tell us about how we conceive of
the human and the difference from a eyes
here are my observations Lawrence has
produced a mythical figure for our times
geomancer an AI with some human
characteristics in an interview
Lawrence said that as he searched for a
way to present you he came across the
story of hagatha house'
the young man of seventeen who was
discovered in the will village square in
nuremberg in 1812 with no knowledge of
his own history bereft of language and
knowing nothing of the world the
inhabitants couldn't quite recognize him
as a human being what is the matter with
him what kind of person is he why can he
not understand words and yet speak how
can he fail to recognize objects and yet
be able to see
CrossFit was housed and looked after by
Professor donghwa in his account of the
attempt to understand its make as per
human
there are many inconsistencies and many
guesses as to his progress dhamma made
some bold conjectures for example text
says he looked into the mirror
Kaspar he murmured inside of him
the answer was i capital i dharma is of
course reading the situation from his
own viewpoint and is there an
expectation of what is human something
so they caused great amazement remain
unexplained gospel was able to read a
page for the bible opened at random by
the city librarian you may remember that
in David Lynch's Elephant Man the latter
is found reading the Bible aloud the
assumption of a link between the child
of nature and the spiritual is a
persistent feature gospel was a human
being without knowledge
in contrast geo has no problem with
knowledge I downloaded my memories
overnight I became history I remembered
a flash in the sky a flare brighter than
the Sun like God taking a photograph
that night I evolved into a collective
being my sense of self was in a turmoil
I didn't even know where I came from or
what I looked like I wanted to take a
selfie but had no face I had to resort
to screenshots memories of the
collective I made algorithmic searches
about the meaning of his existence
absurdity and truth cruelty and love I
absorbed everything that had ever been
written
philosophers novelists journalists for
its mystic cynic saints and sinners I
read them all it was also clear of their
logic and their errors is irrationality
characteristic of consciousness but what
about geo census caspere could see here
and produce sounds and words perhaps
Geo's wants nothing but an eye he tells
us I was conceived in Singapore but I
worked in space for twenty years I have
been the Sentinel of the South China
Seas my eye wide open being able to see
everything above and below
so with every detail edged into a neural
network Total Recall but all I have is
my mind's eye so I dream of worlds I
learned to speak in a voice not my own I
had no voice so I had to synthesize one
does the sound please us if I had hands
I would be a sculptor if I had a voice I
would sing if I had a soul I would pray
geo functions as an innate releasing
stimulus it's very shape triggers our
emotions when we hear of its
difficulties we are moved we feel for it
the small girlish regretful voice does
its job
perhaps geo is a reverse of kaspar
hauser Casper's body is firmly there
though knowledge isn't but Lawrence's
deprived you of a body as is clear in
the kind of psychological disturbance in
a eyes that he describes cycle
psychological issues exhibited by early
AIS phantom limb syndrome except that it
was their entire body that was missing
their self-portraits were protests like
deep sea creatures brought up in
darkness there may be passengers in
geomancer the distributor assumed a body
for AI but what is fundamental is the
way we think about the body today as the
human body and that excludes geo geo is
where that he lacks something in
comparison with humans
I could call it being very bold to this
audience I could call it the lack of a
lack following the psychoanalyst Jacques
Lacan but the human body as we know it
to emerge into culture and language
something has to be lost symbolic
castration in the human coincides with
the entry into language and culture that
loss is what Gio lacks one could say
that Gio has no body or that he has a
fully present body I'll explain this
idea of Lac var another great fiction
Kodiak statue developed in his treatise
on the senses in 1754 he writes the
statue will only judge things the way we
do when it has all our senses and all
our experience
and we will only judge the way it does
if we suppose ourselves to be deprived
of everything the statue lacks Conde
Hulk statue experiences sensation
without having senses he starts by
giving the statue of a sense of smell
if given a rose the statue will exist
only as this smell the statue is given
the senses one by one but it is still
not able to form the idea of the outside
of itself that is possible only when
when it is given the sense of touch this
enables a statue to discover its own
body and to form a continuity of herself
only then can the statue discover the
space outside itself it is touched as
crucial for the statue to be able to
separate itself from the world and to
see the world is it accidental that
there is no mention of touch in relation
to a eyes in geomancer as Lawrence
knowingly or unknowingly deprived you of
the sense of touch either way this would
signal that he is using implicit ideas
of what it means to be human
he has allowed geo the eye that
Professor Dahmer found it to be true
kaspar hauser but has withheld any
allusion to touch the credibility of geo
and the power of geomancer come from its
multiple voices both female and male
speaking in many tongues Cantonese
Mandarin English from mesmerizing visual
and auditory tracts and from a complex
narrative which we try to follow as it
unfolds with twists and turns of Geo's
history Singapore's history and the
history and the different AI groupings
key to the difference between the latter
is a question of creativity geomancer is
a myth of origins the origins of a
future world where creativity may have
ceased to exist
gyah wishes to be an artist something
forbidden towards the end of the film
something happens a miracle to use a
world from another world following a
beautiful stretch of film painted with
blurred moving shapes and colors the
dissolve and reform accompanied by
mobile soundtrack of words and sounds a
pair of doors open out and Gio floats
out and up and beyond the tall buildings
to a vantage point from which it
conjures up rain
you never render the same river twice
the first time was the drowning of
Singapore this time is not the same as
last time has geo acquired a soul has
geo become like God the Creator and I
have three questions for you I think you
could respond to that how you like be
abusive my questions are how did you
handle the story of gasp what did you
how did you handle it in your head the
second one is there's a reference to
smell just once but can you smell the
jasmine in the springtime and I just
wondered it's extremely powerful
redolent as it appears out of nowhere
and I just made you wonder what make you
talk about smell and of course the great
missing thing is sexuality and finally
at the BFI you said something about but
which I'm very interested and I hope the
audience will ask questions about the
way in which yourself in making the film
were altered in a sense it sounded like
you at AI merge that was how I I read it
and I found out a very interesting idea
so Lawrence
thanks I'm that for questions I'm gonna
try and remember them in my head so yeah
so kaspar hauser so Casper houses of a
Verna Hertzog film that actually is the
the English title is like the ED enigma
of kaspar hauser but I don't quite
exactly remember the German title but it
translates as everybody from themselves
and God against everybody basically so
the basically you know they're the
english-speaking rebrand is much more
palatable than I can I think it's it's
German original I think a few things
with the kaspar hauser because I
actually I'd forgotten I said that which
is good but a few things the final scene
okay so firstly there's the fact that
just in terms of making the film there's
quite a lot of both found footage as
well as kind of film footage which I
found very interesting like kaspar
hauser the kaspar hauser has a dream
sequence actually whereas he kind of
lies dying near the end he says that he
basically sees I think a procession of
people walking through the desert with
camels and so on which to me is come
back to this what I find so powerful
about certain kinds of films it's just
the way that they they might have scenes
that appear out of nowhere essentially
like non sequiturs like stuff that
doesn't logically follow on which kind
of comes into the reason I put like can
you smell the Jasmine in the springtime
it's a way to essentially twist the
dynamic of kind of question and answer
because of course question answer works
both in terms of this reddit thread
which is ask me anything to kind of
Alexa when you you know talk to the AI
to kind of serve you essentially and
also back to the kind of Turing test
essentially this idea that question and
answer or this idea of a dialogue is a
way to gauge intelligence so really can
you smell the Jasmine in springtime it's
really the most nonsensical question in
my head that could have been that could
follow on from a dialogue about you know
essentially the history of AI because of
course it's something completely not
addressed in the film and the final
thing about Casper house
not just and actually I think the just
the opening scene in the end scene that
the credits title is Pachelbel's Canon
classical music very famous over a field
of swaying wheat I think and it's
amazing because that image is so
evocative of consciousness and at the
same time it's not talking about
consciousness at all and the final scene
also similarly is about some surgeons
essentially like getting his Casper
Hauser's brain and slicing it up you
know because you know German phrenology
quite into analyzing brains and stuff
and being you know essentially saying
like where does consciousness reside
it's not there there's no way that you
can pinpoint how someone or something is
through their material form and I think
that's something that ties into
geomancer as well so the thing about
let's say geomancer and kind of gender
and sexuality is another thing to
address because essentially I'd never
thought about this before but I guess in
my very basic psychoanalytic terms if
for geomancer being a product not so
much of biological pairing but
essentially being a product of a
corporation you know I just imagine like
firstly from a psychological point of
view it's not just that you know mommy
and daddy don't love you it's like you
were you know you were like a three
gigabyte file on someone's hard drive so
just the whole notion of the awakening
or self-consciousness of like one's own
state it's obviously completely changed
you don't and laconian sense you don't
go through like you know a kind of like
a mirror phase or anything like that you
arrive not quite fully formed but the
way that you consume information does
not happen in any sense like a kind of
biological entity because going back to
kaspar hauser like behavioral
neuroscientists basically say that those
who are
deprived of human contacts at the so
called like you know people at kaspar
hauser essentially like feral children
do not form the pathways for language
the shape of their brain the shape of
their cerebral cortex is actually
incredibly different from people who
have been brought up and socialized from
the age from birth until about you know
especially birth till six is like a very
crucial time for these pathways to form
but again how it relates to geomancer is
that for me this idea of a kind of
gendered awakening that's purely about
consciousness separate from desire was
very important and actually in Idol so
Idol is like a word play of AI and an
idol basically and in its in that but
the Chinese title is AI tau so like
literally that means tau is way and I is
love so whereas geomancer's dealing with
awakening and I like I said this idea of
you know kind of like going up and
coming down in the narrative as well so
Idol is both about in the Greek sense
it's like what is it like eros right so
basically the way of love essentially as
opposed to Thanatos which is you know
like death Drive and so on as they're
these essentially different I guess
narrative archetypes that I'm interested
in kind of making the background for the
most of my films around and the next
film actually is is more about Thanatos
which is about death essentially so if
the first ones are about awakening and
you know coming-of-age and so on the
next one is really about how does life
however it's conceived or consciousness
end for nai if it could just be
replicated or how could Nai be
incarcerated and punished or how does it
exist you like legal systems of life and
death so that's the kind of next thing
I'm looking at really it's that all the
questions
oh okay and so there's also the question
about how I was informed about the
making of the film
so um just briefly while I was making
the film I made this other video essay
called sign of futurism that essentially
draws parallels between representations
of Chinese industrialization and AI so
in this video essay which I didn't
actually intend to I mean make formally
it just came about through the process
of writing geomancer I basically
observed that everything that was being
said about let's say the rise and demise
of both AI and Chinese industrialization
were mirror images of each other so for
example like you might get these
episodes from Infowars or Fox News being
worried about the threat of automation
or the loss of jobs to AI and also three
years ago there was this specter of I
think Hinkley Point nuclear power
station being kind of essentially
invested in by kind of Chinese
enterprises and at the same time so
either you have this very let's say anti
AI anti-chinese industrialization
narrative or this incredibly like
positivistic heroic one Wired magazine
China will save the world through
because you know it it's the only
country with enough industrialized
capacity to do so and at the same time
this very neo nationalistic agenda and
also last thing I'll say about sign of
futures and when I was saying very much
all of the things that were being said
about AI in terms of these cliches like
copying gaming endless labor will work
for no money you know this like
dehumanized labor force exactly it's the
same representation of you know um
Foxconn employees building everybody's
iPhone gadgets as well as you know the
specter of this nameless faceless mass
and so this self-consciousness really is
related to actually making this video
essay and also the process of making
geomancer when I was thinking not so
much in what ways am i personifying this
non-human other but actually me thinking
in what ways am i nonhuman myself or
what are these aspects of creativity
that
essentially algorithmic processes so I
have a job my job is to make artworks to
make an artwork it has to have you know
a certain sound a certain look I might
be inspired with certain things I will
edit a film I will create you know this
virtual world I will edit it together
and what about that is actually uniquely
human nothing its instructions for
myself that are just highly evolved and
so it was really that kind of
self-consciousness that made me aware of
that and the last thing is the the
neural network dream sequence that there
is in geomancer was again like kaspar
hauser this non sequitur dream sequence
but that was itself generated from the
previous 40 minutes of the footage so it
is literally the dream sequence of a
certain kind of present AI and what I
found surprising about that was you know
like in Mon in in film editing you have
what's called a match cut where you know
like in 2001 eight throws bone in the
air it spins and then becomes a space
station however of course if you're you
know filmmaker you like oh great you
know that's a really smart thing to do
whereas in the neural network or to
encoded sequence in geomancer it the
algorithm just cut between the roulette
wheel and the earth roulette wheel and
earth because of course to the algorithm
it's the same match cut it's a circular
form against a solid background if I was
a human editing that it would be a good
thing to do but it came out
automatically and so this idea not so
much in what way is the AI inheriting
human characteristics for us but in what
way am I being changed by the process of
trying to embody this AI in my work yeah
hi hi thanks for for an amazing
presentation and somehow you managed
very well frame in a way the
contradiction we we are surrounded by no
in a very close epileptic in a positive
way way the there are couple of things
that strike me one is indeed there there
are no people there very late in the
last film people come about or human
representations the other one there is
fire in every single almost every single
video and all this kind of trigger me a
bit curiosity of let's call it a digital
tribalism or kind of a symbolism of a
very primordial human existence applied
now we're trying to support the
representation of the artificial
intelligence to come you know I'm trying
to figure out from your presentation to
what extent you are crusading so to say
for an artificial intelligence to come
or you are planning to build it up in a
way or planning to planning to you or
where's the point or let's say you are
dropping off your artists hat and let AI
do its job in no way do you see yourself
stopping at one point and building up an
artificial intelligence which will take
your art further yeah I mean I think one
thing the the kind of question is of
course you're dealing with the kind of
essentially outsourcing to me it's a
kind of question of outsourcing so I
mean besides all the philosophical
connotations of it so what I see at
present essentially is there many many
projects which are essentially
demonstrations of current state of the
art of AI technology like let's see how
bias the algorithm is let's see how
screwed up the kind of data feed is
that's being fed by it let's see how
much AI embodies the very human failures
that it's being fed by I'm not so much
pro or against either side in this
debate I'm just interested
I guess particularly in like
hybridization
and complex to you within these systems
which are not simply simple as you could
probably see from my presentation not
simple like binaries between like one
side being in opposition to the other
because I think very broadly speaking
the whole notion of let's say a
militarized paradigm for creativity
which is embodied in let's say like the
idea of an avant-garde the idea of well
futurism as this way to like propel
something forward is really problematic
basically because it takes it it takes
conflict as as the paradigm so for
example the question like am i for the
AI is or am i for either side it's
explicitly I'm into the impossibility of
taking sides essentially without being
hypocritical about the fact that is it's
essentially seeking power either through
morality essentially or through industry
if that makes sense so for example and
just to be more clear as anyone working
with you know let's say the arts broadly
speaking in technology is aware of their
many many many sponsorship co-production
grants by Volkswagen BMW Google Baidu
Huawei and all this kind of thing and of
course this is problematic I can't
completely be against this thing because
I am my work my livelihood essentially
my existence in a very material way is
dependent on these things so I couldn't
take the stance of like oh I'm gonna be
a neo-luddite and be against technology
and go back to this like fundamentalist
let's make everything through you know
found objects that I pick off of the
street kind of mentality because again
to me that would be contradictory with
my the roots of my existence as well but
going back to your question of like am i
for the AI or not again sorry no I
didn't ask if you're wrong again I think
that's not there's not a debate you know
a mine or the point I'm trying to figure
out actually by asking I think is
where is I feel a sense of propaganda so
to say it for I'm not saying good or bad
I mean look we are surrounded by AI
we're gonna live with it you want it or
not and we enjoy it right yeah you
mentioned that the attitude of using
picked up objects I think I think we're
doing that you're doing this from my
point of view just that the objects
you're picking up is not a phone a
copper piece war in a way sure but it's
like a primitive an artifact the fire
effects in unreal or whatever alright so
I think the attitude is the same in a
way that what I'm trying to figure out
through your work is where is the point
that you prefer more to let's say build
a system which was slightly touched on
towards the towards an interpretation or
based on parveen's questions where is
the point where you're gonna feel
comfortable to to build your character
almost as an artist to build yourself to
build your own system or to build let's
call it an AI algorithm that you can say
you can let that aside produce your art
while you will curate it only right so
talking about generative art show to an
extent so that's where I'm trying to
figure out a bit because the process to
me it's similar with let's say the old
material based process hmm of course the
aesthetic is raw and celebrates the
digital rough roughness in a way and I
think we I think you don't walk very far
away from it because again the digital
tribalism I mention in a way I feel it
very visceral and passionate about which
is great you know I write so I'm just
trying to think and the feeling of the
energy you're building up things with
which is great as well I'm just trying
to figure out from your point of view
where is where do you see yourself maybe
it would be the pragmatic question in a
way in 2046 sure yeah no exactly I mean
so there's the kind of going back to
something I mentioned in you know when
when I was studying at the AAA of course
is like you know digital analog divide
but also this idea of you know let's say
you make variation and then curate from
the variation right that has been
created because I was looking at many
many different
current machine learning systems for
essentially generating moving image and
kind of audio content and what it seemed
to me incredibly clearly was basically
all of the projects that are presented
in the framework of look at what this
air has generated look at you know we
fed Exodus and it produced Y completely
discount the the level of human curation
that has gone into it essentially the
amount of like tweaking and choice and
adaptation of parameters into something
that actually is would sound like
something the air could make for example
because the to me the strange paradox is
again when should should this system be
completely successful should I
successfully successfully replicate my
trial and error thought process and
outsource that into a third party
algorithm the ultimate success of that
would be where it would be
indistinguishable from what I personally
could create so also having many other
limitations besides that in terms of the
filmmaking process that I wonder I mean
I do feel for myself it's more
productive to go think through things in
a kind of craft based process
essentially because the labor required
to make the system of full automation of
creativity is obviously something beyond
my capacity you know and to put it like
simply yeah I'm gonna pass it over thank
you it's just we ran off from the fire
question because in particular to note
her Dam I was wondering if you can say a
bit more about your definition of
reality because you think about the
assassin could the assassin creed the
game version of daughter time it's a
frozen moment which they've created is
encapsulated stopped Bowen and I will
know for them burned down in reality and
the question came out was now should be
builded back to the version is burned
down before or move on as you know
buildings and cities to in reality and
you know as a bell if
building gets burned down and lives
forever because is encapsulating your
memory so I was trying to figure if you
think there's distinction between the
definition reality as a frozen moment
when you render in the virtual reality
and the well it's back there pasteurized
Kennedy forever change of eternal
because you can't touch it on a little
bit when you showed the idle film which
in terms of the question of eternity and
now your definition of no exactly I mean
this is also the I mean whether through
essentially like humans or certain
monuments the idea that death brings
eternity right this thing that you know
something ends and then if it is
represented sufficiently then it is
frozen forever in that moment which is
you know the whole basis of a whole kind
of theory of let's say photography of
the ruin of you know representation or
essentially like the graphic arts as
fixing a certain thing in a specific
place in time um I mean in relation to I
mean talking about Assassin's Creed as a
game it's it's therefore entity I mean
thinking about what will be soft is
thinking right it's a system for
generating addiction right so they are
creating the game these multiple
narratives and time frames so that
basically people buy the game people
play it for longer it contributes to
this franchise known as Assassin's Creed
and you know it serves the lineage of
that particular product and it just so
happens that during this time where the
simulation is set which is doing the you
know French Revolution that their game
designers thought that in terms of let's
say um cultural memory that's a good
place to put the building is at that at
that moment in time and again I have no
idea whether they're you know they
scanned it and then kind of artificially
aged it to look sorry
artificially de-aged it to make it look
younger because I think the other
timeframe for this version of Assassin's
Creed is during the Second World War
so there's another bit where they go up
like the Eiffel Tower and like shoot
like German planes and stuff like that
but this idea of being frozen in time
specifically because this is a game
is I guess slightly different I guess
because again so are you just following
up on the propaganda so are you then
feeding to the addiction of image yes
it's all propaganda but I think the
propaganda angle is is really important
I mean essentially you exactly I'm
making arguments but again without the
confrontational nature that the whole
basis of let's say humanist reasoning is
based on I'm not saying that's like
thesis antithesis and synthesis I'm just
saying it's a series of hypotheses that
just need to come together because there
is no like final conclusion whether how
things are going to involve evolve and I
guess my role in to respond like what
I'll be doing in 2046 will be I guess
asking different questions I hope yeah
hi so I have a question about your
relationship to the audience so I found
something with the kind of video art
often people tend to kind of look at it
for a couple of seconds with the
headphones on in the exhibition space
and they get a vibe but they don't
really attempt to understand the kind of
complexity that you went through in
creating that and you know nevertheless
the complexity of the whole piece as a
kind of narrative so I just like you to
kind of maybe tell us your kind of
relationship your expectation I guess
from the audience yeah in that sense and
then is it either is it to do with your
kind of definition of yourself as either
an artist or a filmmaker because I guess
artist is a bit more free not to be
understood while maybe a filmmaker tends
to actually achieve a level of clarity
so it's a question about definition of
yourself as either artist or filmmaker
and about your relationship to the
audience
yeah I mean so I think that okay so
firstly I think the first one is less
about it to me it's more about the
consumption of my work essentially you
know the the tie am i aiming for this
like five seconds snapshot as an
advertisement would be read whether in a
gallery or like on the street or am i
hoping for this you know full immersion
start to finish the at Racal cinematic
setting so essentially for me as
expectation what I've learned is just
not to have any expectations because
that is not under my control in any way
like of course somebody else's attention
in this you know attention economy
saturated universe is not definitely not
something I can control so I can hope
for someone's attention but creating
something with a certain timeframe in
mind is like for me at least slightly
counterproductive at the moment and of
course you know with films like
geomancer an idol they're shown in both
like kind of gallery settings on a loop
and you know trailers online and then
also in you know like film festivals so
they exist in different modes of
consumption essentially and also the
difference between the film consumption
and how because I didn't show how these
are presented as installations which is
another facet of that essentially so
sometimes these are presented within
installations that are themselves part
of the fictional world that the work is
set in and sometimes they're just
presented as films so there's always
this kind of bleeding of the of the
space you know either like into the
screen or out from the screen into the
physical realm and then how do you
define yourself do you
I've stopped I wanted to follow up
actually on on this on this note I said
the medium of film is not new to two
galleries or museum but certainly gaming
is and a lot of the questions that your
work brings up is certainly new to the
article sir and the fact that you're
actually educated as an architect I
think
it's interesting that you would at some
point have made a choice to explore
these ideas in the art world and I would
be curious to hear if you to what degree
you would say that it's a catalyst for
propelling your work and if you see the
boundaries of what the art world is kind
of willing to to provide or kind of
support in terms of your ideas and if
you see that it's the perfect world to
explore them because certainly a lot of
these ideas and a lot of these mediums
live and thrive completely out of the
art world at all and I mean our work is
constantly kind of on the edges and
we're constantly kind of questioning and
considering that the the ideas behind or
what's what's important and then whether
which kind of world managed to support
it so you see some kind of barrier where
you might move out of the art world to
continue exploring these ideas sure I
think you know the other thing is
because in the framework of let's say
content creator let's say right again so
what so actually going back to when I
finished in 2008 and then kind of
financial crisis so I was really
thinking about what what ways you could
move forward because of course at that
time it was very much against kind of
DIY fabrication so everything on one
hand the kind of authenticity of
assemble on one hand or kind of doing a
you know a a sponsored pavilion for some
kind of event and not just to move to
the virtual is essential but one thing I
did strongly realize is that this I
think this concept of certain things
like let's say broadly speaking Asia or
the art world are quite fictitious
entities in the sense that when you say
them or you say China and technology it
is immediately referring to them as if
they're this monolithic homogenous
entity was in reality in my experience
they're just made up of huge hetero
hetero genus
collections of individuals and small
groups and institutions some of whom
will care about your staff most of whom
won't care at all and and it's the same
in any kind of cultural sphere you know
there will be some people in you know
advertising or baking who'll be
interested in virtual reality and many
people who won't so for me again the
means of me making all of these work has
been through commissions because as a
content creator I say like yeah if I'm a
content creator for the gallery industry
that's that kind of gives me freedom
from I guess the high seriousness of
making art and actually liberate Smee
from yeah some of these I guess biases
about the superiority of one industry or
over another or the other authenticity
of one industry over the other I think
because as essentially let's say for
these the first maybe dozen of them were
for you know public space publicly
funded and not-for-profit artists run
spaces and so on and after a while being
so site-specific about it I felt like
what else is there that I could say that
about public space for example so you
know like the Dawson project I showed
I'm talking about you know war and
conflict and public space and the cinema
and then that just felt like if I kind
of went continue down this public road
it would essentially be repeating myself
completely in a different situation so
that's why for example like with
geomancer and with Idol not just the
nature of the production changed but
also it actually gave me some freedom
from being tied down to a specific time
in place
thank you very much loans that was
really stunning disclosure thank you
[Applause]
