so this is actually the official launch
we just realized today Karen and I are
beginning this enormous project with
Bloomsbury called the global
encyclopedia of women in architecture
1960 to 2015 and we officially signed
the contract this morning so there you
go so this is a brief presentation about
this so this conference presentation
will describe a current project that
seeks to address the limited
representation of women architects
gender issues women's rights
non-canonical spatial practices in
theories of gender and architectures
global public sphere we are working on a
large hard copy and digital book project
titled the Bloomsbury global
encyclopedia of women in architecture
the title signals the book's aim to
include a wide range of spatial
practices and to narrate the separate
and intertwine histories of women in
architecture across the globe this
project is one way of responding to the
panel's call to address issues of
difference and diversity and
architecture we aim to refocus a history
of women in architecture shifting from
the National delineated histories of the
global north to a transnational vision
that is inclusive of a much wider range
of practices this project assumes that
gender has historically and socially
configured it does not take women in
architecture as a given but we'll
examine how this category has been
constructed over time and in different
local context a diversity of voices is
built into the art the encyclopedias
editorial structure the project is
steered by two editors but this is
undertaken and dialogue with ten area
editors who have superintendents of
entries from different regions the
project is a feminist activist project
it creates new knowledge and by drawing
on a diversity of editors and
contributors it aims to create
solidarity across a difference in
national boundaries and to have an
effective transnational impact we take
our lead from the growing transnational
alliances and contemporary architectural
feminism and from the transnational run
or turn in feminist history and theory
we will briefly describe the project and
then discuss the activist aspirations
and theoretical framing of the project
around an intersect
small vision of women in architecture
the global encyclopedia gives students
scholars and public an International
compendium of women architects their
buildings and spatial practices in key
terms for gender and feminism and
architecture then cyclic encyclopedia
builds a cohesive global account by
organizing 1,200 entries within an
Geographic framework the book divides
the globe into ten regions with each
region subdivided into an alphabetized
list of countries individual
biographical entries are filed
alphabetically under country name and
individuals are located appoint
according to where their architectural
academic or organizations practice was
centered our period begins in the 1960s
as women entered social movements from
their engagement in civil rights to
second wave feminism to anti colonial
and liberation struggles and movements
for indigenous self-determination women
led the way in the new arenas of
Environmental Action that came into
focus after 1960 in cities sustainable
design community activism affordable
housing social inclusion struggles
shelter and settlements and the everyday
life of the built environment these
histories are now of urgent interest the
encyclopedias timeframe concludes in
2015 40 years after the 1975 declared
the UN declared international year of
women there are several theoretical
frames we would like to briefly
highlight that encyclopedia will be
built upon we assert that feminism with
an architectural discourse has not fully
embraced an intersectional approach for
complex reasons the difference
propositions of third wave 1980s and
1990s feminism have failed to take
general route in architectural culture
and second wave feminist ideologies have
prevailed it is critical for our
feminist discourse one base both in
theory and creative practice to become
intersectional intersectionality has
been powerfully developed in North
American theories by women of color but
intersectionality defines us all in
1990s scholarship on architecture on
women in architecture had begun to
articulate the intersections of
architecture and
and to explore the category of whiteness
despite critical scholarship on
post-colonial histories and urban
geographies of race the contemporary
public sphere conversation on women in
architecture has has been dominated by
white metropolitan middle-class feminism
in 1991 the American legal scholar
kimberlé crenshaw
argued that more mainstream legal
liberal discourse categories of race
gender class and identity are generally
understood as vestiges of bias or
dominate or denomination that is
intrinsically negative frameworks in
which social power works to exclude or
marginalize those who are different
the problem with identity politics she
argues is not that it fails to transcend
difference as some critics charge but
rather the opposite that it frequently
conflates or ignores intergroup
differences her essay argued for the
structural intersectionality of race and
gender in her work on domestic violence
she noted that Californian domestic
violence shelters and policies were
configured around white middle-class
experiences that fail to understand the
impact of migration status and cultural
differences and the inability on women
of color to effectively access these
services in consequence the immigrant
women of color interacts with other
pre-existing burdens that create
additional degrees of disempowerment she
argues that the failure of feminism to
interrogate race means the resistant
strategies of feminism will often
replicate and reinforce subordination of
people of color and the failure of anti
racism to interrogate patriarchy means
anti racism will frequently reproduce
subordination of women like Crenshaw
sociologist Patricia Hill Collins argues
that intersecting paradigms of race
class gender and sexuality shape
people's experiences and understanding
these provides insight into how the
nomination domination is organized which
intersecting oppressions originate
develop and are contained and how
denomination changes over time the
relationships and by location and of the
role transnational factors including
citizen status age and social location
by including biographies of the notable
and the ignored architects educators
activists and theorists we aim to
uncover some of these intersectional
histories and relationships for example
North American feminist community
activist author of discrimination by
design and pedagogue Leslie cans Weisman
cut her activist teeth organizing in the
civil rights movement and was committed
to intersectional feminism Sharon Aguada
sudden whose educational play
environments were included in the women
in architectural catalog alongside
excerpts from Frances Fox Pickens 1974
essay race and class design and
environment has recently published when
ivory towers were black detailing civil
rights activism black power activism and
community based social justice agendas
centered around a successful period of
curricular and admission changes as well
as outreach programming at Columbia
University's Graduate School of
Architecture planning and preservation
in the late 1960s individual biographies
helped us see these intersectional
identities and corrections and
connections the encyclopedia project
will include theoretical entries as well
as biographies here's the sample entry
on incentive in sexuality
intersectionality written by our global
book proposal by Melbourne based scholar
Anoma Harris Anoma definitely describes
in situates intersectional theory and
then demonstrates how it might be used
to theorize architectures global label
hierarchies educational training and
career pathways
she writes by arguing for the social
experience of multiple forms of
subordination across race class gender
and disability intersectional theory
after the work of kimberlé crenshaw
challenged the narrower perspectives of
critical race theory and second wave
feminism in the US while largely
directed at civil rights law its
critique is applicable to socially
insulated professions like architecture
or despite gender equity and education
social mobility or vanity and privilege
forms of cosmopolitanism remain
prerequisites for professional success
she goes on and says the
professionalization of Architects
as an elite global practice profits from
these intersectional so
in equities another example I will
provide is how individual life might be
centered with an historically specific
and culturally configured identities
this is how under I under weekly
sadiki's brief biological biographical
excuse me entry on Sri Lankan architect
Manette DaSilva begins
she writes that's salons universal
franchise and independence movement in
later decades arguably under girder her
perspective and ambitions
she definitely weaves larger historical
conditions and career narrative together
here in this intertwined story of how
changing structural education conditions
achieved by Indian independence affected
her training she later writes that
DaSilva moved to Bombay and her studies
were interrupted by the tumultuous kid
Indian protests of 1942 with new
regulations allowing Indian students to
complete their architectural studies
within British institutions D'Silva was
able to matriculate into the
architectural Association desilva's
theoretical and historical work also
wants a place in the encyclopedia in
1974 DeSilva took a position as lecturer
in the Department of Architecture at the
University of Hong Kong where she taught
it to a course titled Asian civilization
through architecture and art which
allowed her to continue her research for
a project on a comparative history of
South and Southeast Asian architecture
began in 1965 in 1946 the United Nations
Commission on the status of women was
established over 30 years later the 1975
International Women's year conference in
Mexico City set the stage for the UN to
declare 1976 through 86 the decade for
women this created opportunities for
women from the global South to critique
the framing of movements through narrow
gender interests that had been put
forward by those from the affluent north
the subsequent UN conferences in
Copenhagen or Roby and Beijing expanded
the engagement of women from NGOs and
other arenas they helped to establish a
global identity for feminism that
allowed transnational feminist movements
to collectively articulate global ideas
for women
rights and equality stemming from
diverse viewpoints and experiences the
human rights framework that emerged
provided opportunities from women from
the global south to mobilize both
locally and regionally transnational
feminist methods are invested in women's
rights and gender equality they are
connected to the complexities of social
transformation at a variety of scales
including the local regional national
and global these movements operate on
many levels both within and outside of
institutional structures those within
transnational feminist movements are
invested in structural change and
altering the effects of globalization
and its impact on gender race class and
ethnic relations and are challenging the
first world third-world classifications
with its global scope the Encyclopaedia
and myriad mirrors the globalization of
architectural practice training and
culture in the post-war era women
architects like their male peers engaged
in transnational careers the
Encyclopaedia will link disparate areas
of the world enabling us to see how
architectural ideas and networks
criss-crossed geographical borders we
aim to investigate how transnational
feminist movements have impacted
architecture and created coalition's and
connections at a variety of scales
reflecting differences across the globe
we envision that the encyclopaedia will
reflect local and regional awareness and
generate new knowledge as a result we
hope to further build alliances that
will in our wildest dreams transform the
architectural discipline at large as
we're now an active academic and
activist Angela Davis has observed
feminist methodologies in the
intersections between the theoretical
and his application who activism are
critical for questioning the status quo
and creating change out in the world a
feminist approach requires one to issue
to examine issues that are not always
visible to inhabit contradictions and to
question what has become normalized and
for who does this normalization protect
the Encyclopaedia acknowledges the Canon
and will aim to counter the to counter
it by expanding the category of
notability we aim to include a range of
engagement within the built environment
from community activism to shelter and
settlements and
food scholars journalists educators
activists and policy makers as Patricia
Collins argues by understanding the
diversities of Group histories a new
foundation for developing a transversal
politics is opened up coined by Italian
feminists transversal politics
emphasizes coalition building that takes
into account the specific positions of
political actors yet to create this
transversal approach one must not be
fixated solely on ones own sinner but
acknowledged the acknowledged the
diversity of those around and beyond you
this requires a both/and approach toward
cognitive frameworks the groups that are
more fluid rather than fixed a groups
dynamics helps create coalition's groups
are relational and yet not equivalent
and that because there are differences
coalitions are dynamic shifting and
changing as needed the encyclopedias
reach will include different
demographics and constituencies we would
like to highlight three specific areas
of its activist outreach first by
contributing to library Holdings and
print additionally for students faculty
and practicing professionals we make the
broader practices by women across the
globe visible this is a collaboration
with all of our librarians who
understand there are nowhere near enough
resources to demonstrate that the
discipline is varied and expansive
second we aim to have impact through
curriculum the Encyclopedia will become
included in bibliographies with the help
of our expanding Network and thus have
curricular impact and third the aim is
transnational in the network that will
be built through this project this alone
will have an enormous and empower 'full
influence on all of our abilities to
work across differences race countries
and class and to build alliances and
coalition's that will help us all
continue to change our discipline thank
you
[Applause]
anyone have any questions oh my gosh
it's called the Empire Strikes Back
[Laughter]
thank you
first of all Laurie thank you for this
wonderful presentation and really lots
of luck with this excellent project
Critias a good question would you mind
saying who you are my name is Mary
pension scheme occur Germany thanks very
much but I have one question about your
methodology or how you begin it you kind
of frame the project with 1960 and
there's this moment where the rise of
feminism also women's and emancipation
movements and that's the the impetus
behind sort of the rise of women in
architecture globally and that's the
point but one thing that you leave out
is ideology political ideology and of
course it's the world is divided at that
point and you have socialist ideology
which had a very specific attitude
towards the genders and also where you
have a rise of women architects in
socialist countries it's a reason why
you didn't include that or will you
include it or have you thought about
that well yes we have thought about it
and within the framing of each of the
areas the area editors are going to be
writing an introduction we also will be
writing an introduction that's a more
overarching setup for the project which
we'll definitely be looking at that
we're gonna have a timeline as well but
for the sake of the proposal and this
presentation we are not going into that
but that will be addressed the political
cultural economic environments of these
regions are critical for the way
practices unfold so it will definitely
be brought up and discussed in the
introductions I think to the example of
Manette desilva's biography demonstrates
that second wave feminism in the north
isn't the beginning of everything the
the quit India campaign the struggle
against Empire is incredibly important
for forming a political base and those
struggles for independence begin before
second wave feminism so depends how you
frame it so it's very clear in that
entry that there's a different set of
ideologies that being negotiated that
allow her feminist practice and interest
children hi my name is Solomon I'm from
the University of Brighton third year
and I'm writing a dissertation on
discrimination and gender in
architecture and just focusing on the
role of the female architect reviews
says it's really helpful but and I've
got you a lot of my bibliography well
that was worth coming so it's a real
honor to hear you speakin yeah anyway so
while one is asked is it is just popped
up now I had no idea what first and
second wave feminism is like it's you
know and have how do you how does how do
you get like I'm really green on
feminism right I understand it just like
use your typical male black male
understands a racist I know as an
African I am I am Nash I'm feminist yeah
by semantics it's just words and why not
the more I understanding the more I
realize I am a feminist but I said I
don't really understand what a first a
second
first wave is the suffrage campaign to
win women the vote and second wave is
the renewed I guess revival and then
mainstreaming of struggles for women's
equality that begins in the 1960s
there's a whole range of issues that are
involved but you know feminist
historians also can test the wave
metaphor there's a woman called Verdie
Taylor who argues that there are people
who who are feminists through their
entire lives in practice but then there
are these specific historical moments
where feminist projects and projects for
gender equity become mainstream and
they're usually historical moments of
greater social and political struggle
and so we're living through one of those
moments now why should probably say that
we're also in the fourth wave now so
where people are arguing that we're in
the fourth wave of feminism now the
third wave the third wave was the
difference feminism's of the 1980s and
1990s as the feminist project broadened
to try and deal with these intersections
of race gender class sexuality sexual
orientation - so to move beyond the
gender binary of second wave feminism
yes I mean I think it is amiss here the
first and second wave particularly you
know from your reply about India and
things and so it you know I understand
you need to start somewhere but it may
be you know boulders as they just pick
nineteen fifty and see where you are and
in each of those areas because that
takes it away from you know Western
Europe North America and I've just been
involved in a big global project about
women designers and we decided that
since that was fourteen hundred to
somewhere but I didn't want you know
Renee some so whatever just choose a
moment and choose a place and look and
do all the things that going to do and
the other thing is that at the end we
decided we would not have we would not
start physically the book with Western
Europe or North America we would start
with China or wherever and and then your
list was probably just you know as it
came off but it's I think it's just very
important to make something else of the
random choice you know I'm not sure this
question is to you it's just in its to
the conference in general my name is
Karen wayna I'm an architect and
educator I studied him there's a quote
that a mantle if it said that zaha hadid
got the prize she got because she was a
great architect and that's where it's
gotta end in other words there's no such
thing as a woman architect and I come
from a country where is you're not
called it a woman what I couldn't
explain never mind
I'd like your response to that well I
think
I that arguments made quite often that I
don't want to be referred to the one
that archetype then I'm an architect
that not arguments a very common one
that we are hearing in the last many
years is probably way longer than that
but it there we also have to acknowledge
and and discuss the inequities that are
that exist within our discipline and
within the systems of Education and
until we do that there are women
architects and there are male architects
and we're not treated equally and we're
not awarded prizes and recognition at
the same rate as our male peers so these
women who are really well known and who
have done amazing things seem not to
understand that they are lit there they
exist in a different Escalon than the
majority of people practicing and I
think it's really critical that we talk
about those differences between men and
women and the structural systems that
have enabled these differences to happen
so that we can then work to change them
but this has been a dilemma of the
women's movement since the 1970s and
there's a recognition that the category
of women is a useful political category
to organize but the danger it carries is
that it's essentialist that it
generalizes all women together there are
women who don't want to be
self-identified as a woman and I guess
one of the difficult things I think in
architecture is we place so much
emphasis on individual agency but we're
also asking people to think about the
dynamic between the self and how we
self-identify in our own agency and
larger social structures so as much as I
might not want to be identified as a
woman architectural theorist there were
people in the room who will do it
regardless of my own desire for my
identity to be constructed in particular
ways so we have to also recognize in
architecture there are agencies at work
beyond the self and that's
very tricky in a discipline that's very
focused on individuation and individual
training and architectural practice and
training as the realization of the self
so I think it's hard for us is a
discipline because it's it's at odds
with one of our most fundamental
precepts nice my name is Joe Carr I'm an
architectural historian and in your
presentation and what you've said the
one category that you didn't kind of
pull apart but you must do in the
project is the word architecture shortly
and I was just wondering to what extent
the term itself actually collapses under
the kind of interrogation you give it
and just a second part of that is that
the women in architecture phrase I mean
you obviously expand you you expand the
Catterick are you very widely but how do
you even limit that because historically
obviously as women were not able to
enter the profession as architects their
influence and architecture often came
through being clients and patrons and
commissioners of architecture and so
forth so the kind of ripples from that
notion of women and architecture are
almost infinite aren't they selection
and narrowing the range of entries is
going to be a huge struggle and and
we're both committed to having a project
that covers well-known figures and much
lesser well-known figures and the
slightly unwieldy title of the project
is to put both women and architecture
under the spotlight and to question
those categories so you know spatial
practice is one of the terms we use to
cover a whole range of interventions and
I think you bring a you raise a really
good point and how I mean I think we
both are committed also to how
architecture gets defined far more
broadly so that it does allow a wider
group of people to be recognized within
that and that it's not only buildings in
a very generic understanding the built
in the built environment and it forces
and those
working to influence that so
architecture is an expansive term in the
way that we're using it and employing it
in this project did you ever think of
actually abandoning the term architect
or is that impossible no I don't I mean
we haven't actually talked about that
but I actually I think there's agency
and the expansion of the term not the
narrowing the further narrowing down of
the term this presentation is part of a
collaborative work in progress that we
Anna Rada IO Siddiqui who was mentioned
in the previous presentation have been
developing since 2014 and you see a
couple of the of the conferences that we
are we've taken that we've chaired
panels at yeah uhm and 2016 and eh n
next year I was just at a conference in
South Paulo on gender domesticity and
memory and Anu is taking part in a
conference in Singapore with Laurie cold
situating domesticity and clearly it's a
bit of a a moment I think that we're
really experiencing right now aware of
where these discussions are coming to
the fore thankfully and I really enjoyed
the list that you prune up at the end
Laurie and what I've been thinking since
the conference in South Paulo is that
there's so many sort of clusters of
research being done in different
geographic locations and it would make
an awful lot of sense if we could
somehow Network these more effectively
so any suggestions for that please we
should share them ok so in this
particular project which is much
narrower than what Laurie is doing we
are attempting to map mobility and
gender on to our reading of a specific
set of artistic urbanistic and
architectural practices marked by
transnational migration and projects and
dive
first geographical locations our
research focuses on the careers of a
number of women in the early to mid 20th
century oh I forgot to mention this
we're putting together a call for papers
for a general architect review on Europe
which is a peer-reviewed golden road
open access journal which will be along
the lines of this theme so please submit
abstracts when the call comes out I
think in December yeah so our list is
long though incomplete some of the names
may be easily recognizable others not
margarita certainly hot ski El signatory
Mandelstam Paran mystery civil
moholy-nagy Charlotte carrion Marta
motika and yippee ax Jacqueline turret
Jane drew Georgia Lewis harrisbrown Lina
Bo Bardi Ericka man minute Silva Denise
Scott Brown Hamish wagenbach
flora Lucia ronk aunty Dorothea Hughes
and Jillian hop would they represent
transnational practices across
continents across borders of race
ethnicity class and ideology within
Empire as well as post-colonial space
some of them were educated that the
architectural Association which brings
us here today so with the ones marked
with the asterisks all studied here I
just quite a lot of considering the list
this collection of careers spans the
gamut of architectural and related
practices were also trying to broaden
the the term architecture here design
arts and crafts curating planning
structuring building historicizing
teaching thinking all articulate a
vision and deep engagement with the
everyday the ordinary the anonymous the
folkloric these expressions and concepts
lay at the core of modern architectural
and planning discourse since the arts
and crafts resistance to modernism in
the 19th century and have been well
documented cultural interests of
modernists especially during the
mid-century post-colonial shift we see
them in Charlotte pavilion walls moved
from France to Japan Lina Bo Bardi is
from Italy
to Brazil or Denise Browns from South
Africa to England to the US as well as
in the way that Bahia our region in
Northeast Brazil came to Sao Paulo and
an exhibition by Lina Bo Bardi or Africa
came to Las Vegas in an architectural
studio led by Dean Scott Brown we argue
that the engagement and debates ranging
from the visuality of mass-produced
grain silos this is civil moholy-nagy to
the organization of labor and
craftspeople minute da Silva to the
Musial adji of vernacular cultural our
artifacts Lina Bo Bardi may be studied
as iterations of the gendered
connections between extreme mobility and
a theory of the situated in particular
we are thinking with Donna Haraway is
concerned with situated knowledge as
that which is informed by the subjects
position in this case the subjects
mobility or temporary fixity status
location or relocation and we also see
this in connection to the concept of the
margin both of both as a as a way of
seeing and as a territory in some cases
the women we examine entertain a
permanently external view as in Denise
Scott Scott Brown's claim that quote -
an African view of Las Vegas as Craig
Lee writes quote her status as an
outsider left her not so much on the
outside looking in but rather on the
outside looking around in some cases the
subject the subject moves inside an
outsider margin or the margin shifts in
relation to the subject as in Lina Bo
Bardi exhibition Bahian or Ibirapuera
and the representation of that margin
through the building or exhibition has
the capacity to support or resist the
cultural hegemony bombard is ephemeral
performative exhibition with its display
of popular art everyday objects and live
cultural practices provides a potent
oppositional political argument to the
brazilian state developmentalist project
could these women's focus on the
vernacular
that everyday and the anonymous also be
understood as a resistance to an a
critique of Western modernism formulated
from a periphery without always finding
evidence to ascertain this might we
understand understand these moments in
architectural history as a languid the
history from below movement which began
in the 1960s and contributed to
revitalizing social history through its
focus on studies of non-elites and its
later iterations through post-colonial
theory the question of the form of
knowledge to be produced comes back to
questions of historiography and
historical practice simply put many
women's archives are not formally
organized even when the women were based
in one place they are also vulnerable to
loss unless likely to be institutionally
inventoried or conversely carefully
guarded by their owners to that end
biographical detail has the potential to
form to sites of resistance one to a
cannon that may have excluded women in
general and many specific women in
particular but - as a form of empiricism
that may be mined to understand social
institutional and spatial problematics
let us explore this in three examples so
first example is Erika man
Erika man was born in Vienna to Jewish
parents raised in Bucharest and studied
architecture at the academy disposer in
Paris the only female in a class of 300
with the outbreak of World War two man
then Erika schoenbaum was forced to
return to Romania in 1940 she and her
husband Ignatius later igor man escaped
the dangers of anti-semitism and war on
a journey through Bulgaria Greece and
Turkey to a refugee camp in Palestine in
1942 an opportunity arose for the couple
to move to Africa after a brief stay in
Rhodesia the family relocated to Kenya
where Erica was employed by the time
Planning Department to work on the 1948
and I will be master plan
after moving into Nairobi in the 1950s
era commands Town Planning work became
increasingly focused on regional and
rural development with project a
projects aimed improving living
standards and quality of life by
empowering women in 1972 she founded the
Council for human ecology Kenya through
which she instigated the women of cubic
qaz an initiative that sought to improve
living conditions and a settlement in a
drought stricken rural area by providing
women with income generating skills such
as beekeeping brick-making
and bookkeeping this is perhaps not your
traditional architectural practice sure
she was committed to studying African
dwelling types and dispelling the
negative myths that had been established
about them although she presented the
results of her work internationally for
example at the UN habitat conference in
Vancouver in 1976 in the first year of
the decade of women and received some
recognition
the women of qaz project was judged one
of the hundred best practices in the
world at the habitat true conference in
Istanbul Erika man's contributions to
planning and architecture remain largely
unknown
and despite also being involved in
international networks such as doxiadis
acoustics group her work groundbreaking
as it may have been was not published in
Western journals or professional
magazines in deeds to provide more
visibility to local and regional
architectural and planning issues she
was involved in the founding of two
African journals build Kenya and plan
East Africa so moving on to the second
example who's now familiar I'm possibly
the most familiar of these figures and
she also studied here at a minute
DaSilva became the first woman from the
island of Sri Lanka to practice
architecture professionally while her
perspective and ambitions were
undergirded by her parents activity and
international exposure within cylons
franchise and independence movements so
her mother was involved in
in the women women's movement very early
on she moved to Bombay working in the
office of mystery and budva and studying
at the academy of architecture in 1941
she matriculated into the government
School of Architecture part of the JJ
School of Art at the time led by Claude
batli she worked in 1944 in the
Bangalore office of ordered Kleenex
burger who may also be known here as the
founder one of the founders of the
Department of Tropical architecture who
was then the chief architect of the
princely state of Mysore with new
regulations allowing students at Indian
institutions to complete their
architectural studies in Britain DeSilva
matriculated into the AAA where she
studied from 1945 to 1947 becoming a
RIBA associate in 1948 she had arrived
in London as a contributing editor for
the newly established Bombay Arts
Journal Marg and as its representative
attended the first post World War 2 cm
meeting in bridgewater in 1947 and you
can see her there between Walter Gropius
and funny Stern dress in her sari after
in the first room if you seated after
receiving her first Building commissions
in 1947 for a house in candy for family
friends the corona cavanaugh watney's
she founded the studio of modern
architecture the office remains small
throughout her career rarely supporting
many employees the bulk of desilva's
approximately 30 built works all in Sri
Lanka were constructed within the first
15 years of her practice only three were
non-residential including the candy and
Art Association and she designed
multiple buildings for repeat clients or
different generations of a family many
of her buildings followed 1920s
continental European approaches such as
the use of reinforced concrete slabs on
pilates while also gathering natural
elements indigenous to see Lanka from
stone to grasses as well as craft works
that quoted reliefs and moti
from the islands many ancient
architectural sites reflecting Buddhist
and Hindu spatial and material
traditions in 1974 DaSilva took a
position as lecturer in the Department
of Architecture at the University of
Hong Kong where she taught a course
titled Asian civilization through
architecture and art which allowed her
to continue project on a comparative
history of South and Southeast Asian
architecture began in 1965 which
resulted in chapters in the 18th edition
of Sir banister Fletcher's a history of
architecture the studio of modern
architecture also fabricated modern
clothing based on traditional hand loom
designs as well as home furnishings and
other industrial designs drawn from
local materials and craft traditions the
Silva's final project was to produce the
manuscript for the life and work of an
Asian woman architect an
autobiographical scrapbook that was
published immediately posthumously and
to the final example for today honish
making bath in 1932 she was born and
she's still very much alive born and
ozan of rooked Germany in 1932 in the
final years of the Weimar Republic
srivasa grew up in Magdeburg and studied
architecture in Dresden before fleeing
East Germany by this point and
completing her studies in West German
Karlsruhe at the University College
London I think both received a
postgraduate degree in town planning
before working briefly for the London
kinds of council in 1960 she emigrated
to the newly independent Ghana where she
worked for 22 years 15 with the public
works department and up in Accra where
she was initially the only woman and
during which she designed many buildings
I'm showing some examples here including
the extension to the national parliament
building which you see here
she also spent seven years teaching at
the University of Science and Technology
in Kumasi and the final two two years in
Ghana writing the book construction
technology for a tropical developing
country throughout her career in Ghana
Shrek and Buck regularly visited rural
settlements documenting the communities
buildings building practices her
interest was sparked in 1961 when she
undertook a 3,000 kilometer car journey
to visit the building site of a motel
she was designing so this was also a new
building typology at the time and this
comes from her memoirs where she
pictures herself with vehicle serve
underscoring her mobility during the
trip she encountered the indigenous
architecture and spatial practices of
some of the country's different ethnic
groups she immediately started recording
the mud buildings through photography
sketches and analytical drawings as well
as documenting the construction methods
she paid particular attention to the
decorations that were applied or
scratched into the exterior walls as a
way of archival archiving a building
culture that she perceived as threatened
not just by development by but by the
national governments housing policies
although her interest in mud
architecture was met with hostility at
the Public Works Department in Accra it
became a constitutive part of her
practice and by 1970s - Bob had
published two articles in the German
journal Baumeister on mud architecture
in Ghana you can see them Ghana out on
neue boom ba Foreman from 1966 and then
von Salem plus our white cell is life
beauty tool from 1969 at the conclusion
of her teaching career shaking box spent
several years working on construction
technology for a developing country for
a tropical developing country published
by the gtz in 1984 the book opens with a
full page color image of a mud building
in northern Ghana and an entire chapter
is to vote
to traditional building methods among
her most important achievements in
ganush Reichenbach lists the inclusion
of mud as a building material in the
general building regulations and
standards of ghana combined with her
teaching and publication striking bass
work with indigenous architecture and
her focus on local building practices
began to have an influence on the
production of architecture in Ghana and
elsewhere particularly through the work
of her former students
Shivani ba as an individual woman
architect whose professional activities
were not directed by the policies of a
foreign nation state or an international
organization such as UNESCO and who did
not rely on colonial colonial or
institutional networks to attain her
professional ability or capacity to
practice abroad succeeded in creating an
awareness of the significance of
indigenous building practices from the
ground up her commitment to the subject
resulted in a gradual shift in
government policy and contributed to the
development of a form of regionalism in
Guinea in architecture and just to
finish I'd like to finish with a few
questions rather than a conclusion
because I think like one of the things
we've been thinking about is is the is
this is the Canon and the exclusion of
women from the Canon but of course
there's an impulse to collect
biographies of women but really that's
not enough so what we're trying to do is
through this collection it's just to
start also theorizing on the
significance of of these women's works
so how do we productively draw from this
kind of comparison and move on from them
in order to theorize and then something
that I've also briefly mentioned is the
problem of the archive literature that's
dominated by connoisseurs and architects
which direct the discourse and the
question would be how do we reorient
story ography and in situations like
this when you're talking about or
discussing a margin how do you figure it
positively rather than negatively
and perhaps how do we move beyond
historiographical cue patience with the
production of scientific evidence for
universal knowledge so the reliance on
the state history the official narrative
the verifiable biography which is often
difficult in these cases because of the
state of the archives and instead
productively mobilize these forms and
others to speak differently of history
and territory for instance in ways that
acknowledge the limitations of their
situatedness okay thank you buck is it
Magdeburg I think she's 85 okay do we
have any questions to begin with just
take a few before we go into the next
presentation Rachel Lee thank you very
much this was amazing
a very basic question how did you find
these women oh gosh well some earlier
presenter was saying that things that
have happened to her were generally
unplanned and I would have to say that
that's also the case here emanate the
silver I came across through my work on
Otto conics Berger and she she worked
with Konigsberg and Bangalore and that's
also how I came into contact with a new
Siddiqui if she started doing work one
minute to Silva and we Skyped in me
immediately basically I wouldn't say
fell in love but there was a strong
empathy there from from the from the
first moment um but with Erika man there
was some research done on her by a u.s.
American artist who had been to Kenya
Toluca Aaron smize work and had happened
upon her work and she had also been in
contact with Konigsberg er which is how
I again came into this knowledge and
then a very strange thing happened there
was a an artist in Berlin called Zora
man and we were introduced to her by a
mutual friend and my partner is an
artist and she's an artist and she came
to visit his studio and I had heard
something in the car that she was
involved in something in Kenya and I
thought that's too strange so um I made
a little note can can you please ask
Dora if she knows anything about Erica
man and then I wrote down a few details
on a bit of paper of course he forgot
but he had stuck it on the stairs and
she saw it when she was walking up the
stairs and freaked out because it was
her grandmother yes so this is
serendipity in action and honish
Reichenbach I came across because I
started working on a project looking at
East and West German development
cooperation projects in sub-saharan
Africa and I was googling I was just
doing a Google search and she has a blog
and so I discovered her through her blog
okay a couple of questions okay so Donna
can we take your presentation and then
[Music]
afternoon everybody and thank you for
two really awesome very inspiring
presentations the perspective that I
took on this I was asked to speak a
little bit about the work that I'm
directly involved in and I thought for
context it would be useful to share my
story and talk a little bit about the
sort of UK landscape which we're
thinking about diversity just and
discrimination and the other thing I
want to talk about was those sort of
practical interventions that are being
taken by a number of different agencies
to create change so the reason or common
thread that is driven my passion and
interest in this work is been that I
would really hate to see wasted talents
and in construction and architecture
we've become so used to believing that
talent comes in a very particular
package and my belief is that we really
need to challenge those lazy
preconceptions as so much of the work
that's been talked about today is really
starting to do that because it's really
been allowed to flourish in our culture
about who in society has the potential
for greatness I believe we also need to
provide a safe space for that potential
to grow and part that inspiration is my
own journey I go to lots of events I
network and want actually one of the
most difficult questions that I'm asked
is what do you do I'm not an academic I
am an architect by training I'm a
Formula trician I was also chair of the
RBA's quality diversity and inclusion
group architects for change which is now
being led by the amazing Elsie Lucy I'm
now a social entrepreneur and I found is
something called built by us and I'm
honored to have been a trustee for
Stephen Lawrence Charitable Trusts and
I'm board member to new charities I
should also mention that I sit on the
ARB board I'm an individual who wears a
lot of hats and assumes different
professional identities I'm sure many of
you do too but I'm also black British
female of Jamaican heritage and like the
majority of people in the UK I attended
a comprehensive school state school I'm
from a single-parent family and our
level of income meant that I qualified
for free school meals that is not the
typical profile of someone who's an
architect or a board member or even a
professional and in a way there seems to
be no expectation that that was
something that I could achieve it's a
long time ago but my school in terms of
preparedness of going out into the world
for careers they set up our foyer like a
Job Center where we were just picking
cards off the wall and I think me and my
friend Sharon picked the job
which is going to be the highest paid
dispatch rider from that wall but you
know that is the kind of view so those
of you that are familiar where them the
work of alum in Melbourne will know that
around seven percent of the UK
population independently scored and in
that report it really highlights that
seventy five percent of people in the
professions have actually been
independently schools so there is
something actually happening in the
structures of our education system and I
don't think it's just about the
education that people are receiving it's
also about the networks of people
connections which open up opportunities
which begs the question about what
education what role education is
actually playing in nurturing talent and
how the majority can access support
networks to fill their potential in some
ways my personal profile like my
professional life is complex and
multi-layered no one aspects of which
defines me and I believe it is not only
one aspects of that profile that impacts
the ability to progress and it's by
understanding how those different
diversity characteristics including
those which are protected and those
which are acquired interact with each
other can we really truly understand and
address diversity and discrimination and
I'm thankful for intersectionality being
brought up earlier in our very first
presentation so I have a coat quote from
Kimberly as well if we aren't
intersectional some of us the most
vulnerable will fall through the cracks
and what that means for me is that as a
sector and as individuals if we're to
truly address this we need to be taking
an holistic approach and I'll talk a
little bit later about what that might
look like but it needs to encompass not
only those protected characteristics
gender and race but income as income
caring responsibilities and all of the
places of those strengths overlap so
individuals pursuing their aspera
petechia architecture who were impacted
by intersectionality trying to navigate
the barriers of gender classic and
ethnicity can be exhausting not
surprisingly many are put off before
they even start well they may drop away
during their studies or in the first few
years of qualifying they are IBA that a
really interesting piece of work look at
the average time it takes to qualify and
many of you won't be surprised it's more
than seven years it's about nine point
five ten years to qualify looking in
more depth at the raba state or in
education there are reasons to be
positive it would appear that efforts to
widen participation are making an impact
so looking at the 2015-16 cohort there
were just under 4,000 new entrants onto
part one full-time courses of the total
number of full-time entrance to part one
49 percent were female according to the
RAB ace data and 32% of those part 1
students were from black and ethnic
minority backgrounds it's important to
note that that data covers everybody
who's an entrant entering its part ones
that includes data set from students
from around the world according to the
RBA figures around a thousand people a
year take and pass the part 3 exam
allowing them to register as an
architect each year and of that number
around 35% of the pass is achieved by
women 11% or black and ethnic minority
and around 1% identify it as black or
black British that's as few as 10 a year
given my background and heritage it's
clear to see that chances of my becoming
an architect were statistically quite
unlikely it's incredible to think that
when I qualified I may have been one of
a handful of black British willing to
become an architect in that year so the
challenges I've faced are not just about
one thing they're about a series of
interconnected issues which all work
together and can work together against
the most vulnerable to create a serious
barriers so if we're not looking at this
holistically I don't believe we truly
address
in diversity and inclusion what needs to
be done is to look at the entire talent
supply chain in my view from the image
of the industry to practical support and
creating a cohort of increase of leaders
we need to see diversity as an
opportunity I believe it's an
opportunity for disruption of this
sector so I just like to share with you
a few of the sort of projects and
interventions that I've been involved in
or I'm aware of maybe some of them you
will be aware of so the AIA
had a conference last year I think that
Michelle Obama I might be an earlier
this year was able to attend and she
mentioned the importance of mentoring
the fluid diversity mentoring program
which actually started under architects
for change which is now run by me
through built by us it's part of a kind
of mission to diversify the construction
sector support career progression and to
create and foster leadership so our
vision is for a construction sector that
reflects the society it serves I think
it's so important in terms of creating a
more inclusive built environment that we
have everybody sitting around the table
deciding what that might look like and
how we do that is by connecting diverse
talents or opportunities supporting
companies as well on their journey to
becoming more inclusive workplaces
because if we bring people in and those
workplaces don't work for all they will
leave they won't stay and as I said it's
so important to foster that sort of
diverse leadership through mentoring
interventions so fluid started back in
2012 it was developed to address
under-representation and the higher
levels of attrition that we see from
people from diverse backgrounds the
program encourages applications from all
but particularly women people from black
and ethnic minorities those who
disadvantaged socioeconomically LGBT
people and people disability
it uses a traditional mode of mentoring
some are more experienced paired with
someone less experienced but we also
leverage the opportunity for cross
discipline knowledge exchange so this is
a program that started by architects but
actually it's kind professional we have
project managers lighting designers
landscapers urban designers etc all
working together in mentoring
partnerships we support people at key
stages of their careers it's not just
for students it is amazing to me over
the five years we've actually seen an
increase in people who are at management
level who are saying actually we didn't
have any of this when I was at
university and I'd love to have a mentor
we get applications from across the UK
and actually beyond so we've had our
mentors from New York Bahrain Hong Kong
etc and for the miracle of Technology
were able to facilitate that so it
involves 12 months of mentoring and
we're currently doing the matching for
the 2017 2018 cohort which we think is
going to be the biggest yet back in 2012
we started with about 20 pairings and
over the years who facilitates him over
a hundred of these mentoring pairings
and it's been fantastic for me when we
have our sort of interview session to
hear about how they've made change in
their own lives and their own careers
and careers of others by leading in
their own practices taking leadership
roles in professional bodies for example
and launching their own businesses
another fantastic piece of work has been
done by the herb Steve Ranch Charitable
Trusts the building futures program for
those of you don't know I think lots of
people think the Stephen Lawrence
trusses made me about I kind of campaign
for justice but this educational part
has always been there and one of the
programs that's particularly exciting
this building futures program is
actually co-designed by the alumni by
the students that's taken part
it not only offers mentoring but work
placements really importantly housing
alongside a bursary so again addressing
all of the different elements that
students might be facing
so for 200 students have registered onto
the program of the past couple of years
aged between 16 and 30 they've been able
to get paid positions placements
bursaries and attentive workshops and
very excitingly the Stephen Lawrence
Center is going to be opening a new
co-working space next spring so that
people who have got that entrepreneurial
bug will be able to start their
businesses in the Stephen Lawrence space
which is designed by Sir David Adjaye
and one of the things that I want to
talk about in terms of a potential area
of interest is apprenticeships so I
don't know how many of you know that
architecture apprenticeships are on the
way so for more than 50 years and this
was kind of highlighted earlier the
professions are favored higher education
is the main sort of pathway and as we've
seen over the past few years the costs
has become incredible in terms of what
people are expected to pay the
contracting organisations for the
industry have always used
apprenticeships and been contributing to
a levy that levy has now been expanded
and delivered by HMRC which means that
businesses of any size or type can be
part of this the thing that is quite
exciting is that a number of practices
architectural practices have convened
and begun the journey of recognizing
apprenticeship frameworks in
architecture so there is an
architectural assistant at level six
which would be equivalent to part one
and one at level seven one should be a
part to a mixture of academic training
and actual working in the office which
is fantastic and I hope it's going to
open up even more opportunities for
people who do not even consider higher
education that is buying
I think one thing to note is quality I
started as an apprentice many many years
ago I was very excited to be earning 75
pounds a week which is about just one to
four thousand pounds a year but I was
living with my mum
apprenticeships now all ages and I think
the minimum wage makes it around seven
thousand pounds a year which isn't a
huge amount of money also there has been
some feedback not on the architecture or
even construction apprenticeships the
the quality of the work that people are
getting to do or the quality of the
experience hasn't been good we really
need to make sure that that experience
is an excellent one that is comparable
it's going through higher education so
there are lots of ways to get involved
and your support and your voice and a
race or practical way the tools are
being put into place and we have the
opportunity I believe to really craft
and shape the industry that we wanna see
thank you very much
[Applause]
presentations um I just wanted to start
off by asking you about
intersectionality and and how you see
that how you see that analysis as a
means of emancipation in the future
that's a great question
I think it could be a means of
emancipation for all architects and
client groups to understand the
complexity of people's identity and in
both positive and negative terms the
experiences people have to give people
empathy and insight into difference and
the qualities that we need to engage
with each other which in empathy or
listening skills communication yeah I
think also you know as the world becomes
more and more diverse I mean thinking
about trajectories of demographics that
when we think about how our discipline
how we would like I mean I very much
like your point of changing and shaping
the discipline that we want or that we
think we strive for that
intersectionality provides a way to
think through and operate within these
differences that become places of agency
so once and it becomes also
representative of the kind of practice
and the type of engagement that we want
to see happen so it provides that
framework to really allow us a way
forward interesting did you want to
because you picked up on on the concept
of into intersectionality and how
helpful that analysis was in some of the
work that you're doing if you want to
yeah
I'm hopefully you can hear me there that
see
you're working so yeah I mean I really
believe that all of this stuff together
has a potential for creating disruption
for the industry and not just for those
who see themselves as part of the
diverse strands but for everyone I've
caught this the disruption that the
industry has been waiting for in terms
of our working practices in terms of our
culture and those are the things that in
terms of the day to day experience are
so important you know that's what is
gonna sort of make or break if you like
all of the fantastic work that's being
done to to make change to draw attention
to the fantastic practitioners that have
come before us and more come ahead of us
if we don't get the culture in the
industry right you know we risk being
here 25 years 50 years talking about the
same thing well I was told by a very
senior architect who shall remain
nameless that he is all in for all in
favor of disruption but he didn't want
it to mess up his practice their horses
for course and we'd like to say
something about that and because you
gave a series of vignettes didn't you
were in and there seemed to be
connections across those experiences and
I just wanted if you'd like to say
something about that yeah I think this
is one of the things that we have to we
also have to pay attention to is not to
focus so much on the differences but
also to try and find things that bind
people and that's kind of just as a way
of of yeah I mean trying to understand
more clearly what what's going on in a
particular space and time I mean you see
with these these women architects that
come from very diverse backgrounds and
have different practice
in different geographic locations but
there is something if we just studied
them as individuals maybe we wouldn't
see these intersections we have we would
see intersections but they wouldn't be
intersections of their works and it's
important also to keep this sort of meta
level in view so that we can actually
yeah through seeing similarities start
to start to generalize it's not always
bad to generalize it's how you build
theory and it's how how you these
generalizations and theories are always
dispelled in the end they're always
wrong but they do help to to move
forward and I think we have to keep that
in mind as well
I think too it's an opportunity to
connect social justice issues inside the
profession about who has access to the
professional training support to be
retained to connect those social justice
issues to bigger spatial justice issues
so you know one of the most pressing
spatial justice issues is about
inclusion in the city and you know
obviously particularly pressing in
London but that is the case for a number
of global cities that they're becoming
more and more exclusive so I think we
have to see social justice and spatial
justice together well speaking of
speaking of social justice in this in
post weinstein world i just wonder if
some of this is a lot of unhidden sorry
hidden unspoken of culture of the
profession itself I mean I do you raise
somebody raised the issue of I'm not I'm
not a woman an architect I'm an
architect and I suppose some black
architects would say I'm not a black
architect I'm an architect but so I was
having this conversation the other day
and I said to the woman I was talking to
that I think that people most people can
tell from 100 places that I'm black so
there's no point in
trying to try and decide step the issue
you might as well take it head-on but I
think the same probably applies to women
and in architecture as well but I wonder
could we just start boarding it to the
audience and see who might have
questions for us
hi my question or comment to Donna about
the apprenticeship I think it's a great
idea you mind introducing a line sorry
my name is Janine camera I'm from
Australia I've come worked 15 years in
Sydney five years in Switzerland and now
two years in London so I'm one of these
nomadic architects also worked in South
America as well anyway that's another
story but my questions about the
apprenticeship idea I studied
architecture part-time so I worked
full-time so I was basically in
apprentice it's the only way I could
afford it my parents couldn't pay for my
education but my question is I read in
the BD online some criticism of this
this idea or this this apprenticeship
apprenticeship thing and I was outraged
I was outraged by the person who wrote
it and and the fact that this director
of a very well-known architecture
practice has been in a male-dominated
architecture office for the last thirty
years and does not know anything about
diversity
so why was someone like that even
commenting and why was anyone even
taking that seriously and you want me to
name who it was
[Laughter]
the criticism well I haven't memorized
the article but but he was saying that
it won't create diversity and I was I
was thinking he has no agency to say
such a thing because his practice has
not created diversity in 30 years
so how would he know and he a director
of Grimshaw so why bigges Solnit called
it mansplaining yeah I mean so who the
hell is he to even comment on it
seriously it's not uncommon
it's called privilege yeah I know where
you you just assumed the right to
comment on all issues and you assumed
yourself as the fount of knowledge on
issues with which you may have very
little experience and that is privilege
and power
yeah well then well BT published his
opinion on this would you would you like
to say how you think it will create
David why it's important for diversity
well for my example is that you know I
couldn't my parents we're not going to
pay for my architecture education and
they were going through a divorce at the
time and so I wanted to study
architecture so I had to study
architecture part-time and pay for it so
in that regard as you know that's it's a
different type of apprenticeship so so a
type of apprenticeship of course will
give opportunity to people that don't
come from wealthier backgrounds or even
middle class backgrounds it'll just be
it'll just broaden the horizon of who
can put their hand up for such a thing
yeah could we take another another
question we have black we have some
lights on please that's a good
the audience laughter my question hi um
I come from an art background and what I
wanted to ask was about what you were
saying about the spatial justice and
something that I find a very problematic
you know sort of year any thoughts on
that ISM in an ID context and
specifically in a gallery setting when
the work is political it feels very
contradicting that in certain spaces are
very inclusive so who goes to gallery
who feels comfortable to be in a gallery
especially when the work is political
that it feels like the audience that
ideally addresses two would never sort
of go to these spaces so do you have any
ideas of how could I guess art in
architecture collaborate to create
spaces that are more inclusive in that
sense whose your question addressed can
we start the question maybe you think of
something that was I was working on
quite recently in a very in a very
minimal way really am it was after the
[Music]
the problems that happened in in the
American South recently when there were
the the right-wing radical white men
from testing the D mounting Helena
exactly a statue and the sort of spatial
and justices that are that are connected
to that and how architecture schools is
very little in the way of Education in
these kind of subjects and colleague of
mine Anna Maria Lyon who has done quite
a lot work on Lina Bo Bardi she started
a Google Doc where she was just trying
to put together a bibliography of
authors who would be worth teaching in a
seminar on I think she called it space
slash race in the city and it was an
amazing thing it was amazing how quickly
we put together the bibliography and how
extensive it was and it was so useful I
mean I don't know how really inspiring
and these kind of things shoot there's
so much easier today something we should
all think about it I think it goes back
to Joe's point earlier to like um the
architecture curriculum can still be
constructed around a very narrow
definition of what spatial production is
and that can reinforce the sense that
the remnants that architects have to be
engaged with and the knowledge they have
is very narrow but as soon as you widen
it and say well we're going to run a
course which is about the city you and
you immediately are going to assume I
think you do you have to engage with
these other issues yeah so I think
there's a sort of fundamental connection
to definitions of what we should be
looking at in the curriculum and it's
you space for that in traditional
curriculums are needing drastic reform
but I think also the types of projects
and who you work with so the discussion
earlier about the briefs and are there
ways there are ways that you work with
and take on subject matters that are
political that are out in the city that
aren't about an abstract idea in a
classroom and I think so that space of
engagement the literal space that we ask
and go with students to is critically
important for opening up ways for
students and everyone to see how there
are different ways
operate as an architect and different
different audiences that we need to be
engaged with but that requires going out
and meeting with those people and then
bringing them back into our institutions
as well but then how do you make that
transition from the freedom to challenge
a brief when you're a student to being a
practitioner and the tension between
giving your client what they want and
your need to challenge and interrogate
the architecture that will result from
doing what you're told in in inverted
commas I mean that's that's something
that I think that's that falls between
the cracks between being in it being a
student the freedom that you have
freedom of thought and the limitations
of being in practice I think too because
the professions transition to being
largely a market-based profession
whereas it once a great majority of
architects were employed by the state
and then in a certain period by
community centers so I think we also
have to advocate for different forms of
patronage and employment and the
expansion of that public realm I think
we could achieve I understand I know
exactly what you're talking about in
some ways I haven't out because my main
source of income isn't the Academy so I
had the luxury being able to take
projects that no one else would work on
and they're highly politicized but
that's my choice but I think teaching
students that to question in a in a in a
useful way
what clients want and sure we are at the
service we are providing a service but
are there ways that there can be more of
an engagement and collaboration and I
know this is an idealized notion but at
least providing a framework for students
to think through some of those once they
graduate and to selectively think about
where they go to work and are they
working for places that are doing the
kinds of projects that they want to be
working on and
just to be able to pay the rent I mean
it's it's very difficult I understand in
Australia there's a number of large
corporate architectural firms that also
do pro bono work so a friend runs at a
large humanitarian architectural agency
and then there's a number of corporate
firms that also donate pro bono work so
it's possible there are other models as
well oh sorry Lysa will come will come
to you know say we've got in a similar
line it's out audiences so I am really
looking forward to know how we are
because we are talking about engaging
with their students and involving them
breaking the curriculum and bringing you
and giving more visibility to women in
the curriculum how we artist standing on
to understanding the academia how we are
connecting with society how we are
addressing new audiences far away from
our beyond that we are already here
because we are really interested in
women and in architecture how we are
addressing people who are not so
interested in architecture and the role
of women in architecture how are you
doing that with the encyclopedia with
built in with your research
I'm drilling 3 that is everyone um well
we imagine because we're just starting
this we've only written through the
proposal but but by taking on and
including people who have not been
included before automatically expands
one how people understand and think
about what we do as people involved in
our built environment and also raising
awareness about those
who have not been there they're known
but they haven't been publicized in a
way so I think by by expanding and and
really altering what would could be
considered the canon and creating a new
body of people for for future
generations to look at does a lot about
pushing the boundaries of architecture
who can practice and how we can practice
and I think actually a large part of
this is about really thinking through
the language that we use I think as
architects we use the language that
other architects understand and
everybody else goes I have no idea what
just happened
which is maybe why in terms of our
relationships with our clients you know
we've now got more sort of project
managers and almost other people
delivering messages on our behalf
perhaps in a way that our clients can
understand there is some really
interesting pieces of work and one pops
into my mind in terms of public
engagement and engaging people who
aren't necessarily thinking about
architecture as a career and so you
might have heard of hip hop architecture
so engaging you very young people using
music using another form of art to
actually connect people but actually
talking about modernism and Corbusier
and why you know mass-produced housing
is designed in a way that it is but
doing it in a completely different way
so I think some of it will actually not
come from architects ourselves but
actually come from outside as a way of
engaging with us I think we can also
engage differently with the public realm
so my colleague just stands over here
from parlor and we ran a really
successful public event called women
transforming the city which was about
women as urban activists and that meant
all kinds of women but in you know we're
including architects and policy makers
in the idea that activism is about
spatial intervention we had a woman who
had been an activist through the 1960s
and 70s through struggles against state
intervention we had practice
Architects myself as a historian and we
got a huge crowd of people who were
interested in the topic so I have to I
think we have to reconfigure the topics
we talk about in public and absolutely
move away from that internal language in
which people are trained in architecture
school which is we have to learn to
communicate in different ways all right
I also think that because we haven't got
so far with this research project yet
very certainly not at the point of
finishing a publication but in past
projects what I find incredibly
important is to present the work in very
different fora like I did a lot of
research in Bangalore and I made a lot
of people who gave me a lot of
information and knowledge and I find it
incredibly important and to go back and
give several public lectures on my
research which were all incredibly well
attended by local people of Bangalore
not just the architect all sorts of
people that were interested in the
history of the city and then also in
addition to that to bring out a
publication that is a low-cost
publication that everybody can afford
and is a sort of size that you can put
it in your pocket we did that and they
also sold out so so simple things so I'm
going to go to Lisa who's been waiting
patiently firstly was just in response
the question of where is the spaces for
for discourse and just in London there's
two examples there's the stall for focus
15 so that's a a proper sort of a group
of activists talking about housing
particularly Noom and every single
Saturday there in Stratford with their
stall and including women architects is
also sisters uncut who staged their
conversations on the steps of hacking
Town Hall or squatting a flat and
setting up a Breakfast Club
how does the how does the institutions
of London host those conversations only
when they invite them to curate them so
thinking I know that Focus 15 has been
present in some London's institutions
but also the organization gal dem do you
know that magazine it's pretty cool
else you like it it's an essay about
some magazine where instead of the VNA
having them in a kind of corner they
invited them to take over the VNA to
curate the program and to choose where
they'd have it and I think it's that
opening the doors that's necessary and I
just wanted to say with the minutes a
silver why it's so important to present
the work is that I saw the photograph of
her in 1947 in bridgewater that the Siam
six conference where Corbusier lies back
on a chaise longue and she's laughing
and somehow once you've seen the work
you get the sense she's actually
laughing at him he's performing to her
but without the work you could think
that she was just Coquet utley giggling
at his antics and I think that that in a
sense though these two things sit
together of why you have to make space
for the work anyway thank you for
[Music]
hi my name is a enjoy I'm in first Joe
architecture brighter as a student and
when you get when you get qualified as
an architect how much freedom are you
given to be black and female and
actually portray that in your work and
without being black board as being too
urban or being too political okay well I
cannot I can answer that it's really
really tough you get very little space
and as Donna said the rate of attrition
for black and minority ethnic students
is absolutely appalling I mean there's a
drop-off of 55 percent between Part one
and Part two so that means that those
people are that talent is lost to the
profession already and B AME students
and particularly women are just not
getting work and I didn't interview the
other day and the journalist said what
do you think of these dire statistics
and I said well it's an improvement
because it's gone from bloody abysmal to
dire so you know that's but I mean I I
hate to disappoint you but it is it is
going to be tough and you may find a
practice I mean that I'm I would say
make is potentially a good place to be
partly because of the structure the
ownership structure but I think the
hierarchy of architecture which is part
of the construction industry I have gone
on record as saying that the culture is
sexist racist and bullying I don't know
I don't resolve from that it hasn't
changed much but the great thing about
it is that there's there are mentoring
programs like yours there is the Stephen
Lawrence trust who run a great Network
and students themselves are starting
their own businesses you know there
taking the cue from the technology world
where young people are starting their
own businesses and you know if you can't
if you can't get work if you can't get
employment start your own business
because that way you can marshal your
own resources and make sure that your
creativity doesn't die so that would be
my advice is start your own practice
this is about practice this is about
being this is about this is about being
paid to do what you've spent 10 years of
your life learning how to do and people
are dropping out because if you've spent
well the support is coming from Danner's
projects and from the Stephen Lawrence
and but but I mean I think it's
important to be clear about statistics
because it's gonna be tough and and what
are the statistics like for entering
academia and doing postgraduate degrees
and doctorates I mean is this is that
being addressed are there mentors and
support systems for that I think as part
of it too it's really important to have
a conversation in architecture where we
knock the myth of meritocracy on the
head so you know people have people it's
an idea that people are really committed
to which actually doesn't look at
opportunity how does that go well if
you're talented it you'll be fine
your talent will be recognized you'll be
promoted you'll be given a job alright
there's no there's there's no issue if
you just just about talent and merit we
should have merit-based appointments
there should be
no equal opportunity there should be no
special provisions that's how it's part
of that larger set of assumptions but I
think it's it is really important I mean
a partly I think sometimes that
underlies people's public comments about
I want to be seen as an architect not a
woman architect because you want to be
judged on your talent alone but we know
from the statistics that people don't
see talent as this pristine package it
comes wrapped up and all this other
stuff and it goes to what you were
saying about what is the model for
creativity that's dominated the
profession and that certain people are
seeing to be creative you know it's the
whole idea who who seem to be the star
or the genius what kind of person is
that
and I just like to thank you for your
question angel I think it's one of the
things that actually comes up a lot for
the people who are playing on the
program that kind of how much of my real
self can I bring to what I do and I
think it's almost a tale of two cities
for a lot of us so we find that in the
university space a lot of that stuff is
explored and it's really engaged with
and then people feel like oh I'm in
practice now does that mean I now have
to be a slightly different person and
other different expectations and to a
certain extent there are because you
know there is this whole narrative what
you're building towards is this sort of
professionalism you know you're gonna go
out you're representing your company or
your client and all of that kind of
stuff but I think actually working with
people who have been through that
experience will really kind of help you
to work out how you're going to to
navigate that because it's such a sort
of individual journey as well and it
it's constantly changing I think the
point that you made about the culture
within practices and some practices are
beginning to break where an ox
themselves that question they're asking
themselves that question how do we allow
people to feel you know comfortable and
included in our practice and
fantastic it's you know something that's
been happening far more recently people
have as you say broken away to set up
their own practices so that they can
have that space to be themselves so it
is possible I want to add also that I
think as a student it's important to
find solidarity with your classmates and
people across even other schools I know
in the u.s. we have smash which is the
Society of minority and architects and
designers and they've become incredibly
active across schools in the US and it
creates a network for you so when you
move or fight look for jobs and other
places you already have networks of of
peers not to say that solves all the
problems but it's really important to
find support structures while you're a
student and even I totally agree going
to faculty and administrators to ensure
that you do get that support so I think
to take a proactive role in your
education and building solidarity is
really important so we've got a third
hands could be a woman in the second
second row well should we do well in tea
hi my name is Tatiana I'm a student here
doing my PhD so this is a question for
you you had mentioned briefly about make
being an environment that I guess
encourages more diversity and I don't
really know their business model or how
they structure their work but I was
wondering if you could tell me more
about why that would be an environment
that's more encouraging of diversity and
how maybe if we know what kind of model
works how this could be implemented
elsewhere well I don't want to do a
promo for make
because I didn't know enough I haven't
I've never worked there but I do know
that they have a lot of involvement from
the from workers within the practice and
that that's part of their policy and I
think they're also owned by members of
the practice which tends to level out
how the organization works they're also
involved in a project called
architecture incubator where they're
looking to nurture a mini practice
within their own practice so that to me
indicates a willingness to look at
different ways of doing things and and
look at innovation which lots of big
practices aren't prepared to do so I'd
find that really encouraging and I think
it's also worth noting so a project that
I think was only launched last month
which is a sort of sponsored by the IBM
started by architects for change with
these role model practices so axis were
able to put themselves forward and talk
about all of these issues you know
increase of its he sustainability etc
etc and I think all of the practices and
I can't remember how many that were in
total maybe tonal throw yeah 10 they put
themselves forward and there are sort of
case studies about what it is they do
and how they do it interesting stuff and
it's I think what's most important is
that practices want to align themselves
and want to be seen as organizations
that care about this kind of stuff um
yeah my name's Seneca I'm actually
writing a book on on minute and we're
trying to also organize a conference on
a birth centenary next year so we'll do
call for papers and if anyone wants to
join my question was there quite a few
women who set up their own practices
under their name like Lynette I just
want to know how many and when that
would have happen because I know Jane
true sat set up her practice during the
war but I just want to know like as in
terms of like power and organization
control of you know well the kind of
like quality and work that you know and
as a director as a as someone talking
well
Justine's gonna know the stats better
than me but in Australia it's one of the
most important models for women to have
control over their own where practicing
their time is to start small businesses
I'm not sure if just analyze the exact
stats now but you know that comes with
limitations as well and often it means
they're confined to domestic work
because it's very difficult to move from
the domestic market to other kinds of
larger scale work so it's a double-edged
sword but it gives them enormous control
over some of the very issues but then
you've also got to have a workflow in a
client thank you thank you okay okay I'm
not an architect so this might really
upset everybody but you talk about
inclusivity on one hand you're talking
could you just give us your name my name
is Sarah I'm a writer okay you're
talking about inclusivity have you ever
thought about reducing the study time or
the to make it becoming an architect
more available in a different angle
yeah oh this is a constant discussion
yeah so yes is the short answer
slightly longer answer so I think where
it's at is that the raba
have done a piece of work about it there
are now issues around the fact that
brexit is imminent etc etc around
because at the moment you know the the
course that's recognized is the one
that's recognized and mutual recognition
between the UK Europe so there are a few
things that need to be resolved there
before some of the ideas around whether
the course should be slightly shorter
different configuration can be kind of
bottom down but yes it's talked about a
lot but there are also different models
coming through I'm Vice Chair of the
London School of Architecture where
which is a post graduate school of
architecture but in the first year
people work and attend their courses so
and then they're located in an office so
that acts as a bridge between academia
and practice and then in the second year
they are they do their full-time doing
the thesis but it effectively they're
embedded in an office and we have a
practice network of about 80 to 100
practices who host students which means
that the fees 2/3 not nine thousand at
six thousand and that is paid out of the
student salary so effectively it's cost
neutral and there are a number of these
I mean I think there are five or six of
six colleges universities who are
introducing new ways of doing things so
it's it's recognized
I mean it's partly because the fees are
so high that students really got it's a
pragmatic things you can't afford it
I Salomon Kenya yeah so look at you know
the ideas of inclusivity and
intersectionality and general solutions
that you looking to provide to increase
diversity and recently I saw taken an
interest in feminist design-led
architectural practices and what I
wanted to find out was in you as a
collective
what what how do you design how do you
define what feminist design principles
are like what are those exactly what are
the core features of a feminist design
that practice and and and wouldn't maybe
wouldn't it be amazing or really good if
you could create a list of firms that do
the Fonz's so that you can centralize
students - I think that's very yeah yeah
yeah okay all right yeah say answer um
homicide of a four please sorry um so
you were listening to all the
presentations and one of the things we
talked about with our transnational
project is really looking at issues of
power and issues of identity and a
feminist approach is really trying to
question who has the power whose voice
is being heard and to open it up to
other voices and more diverse ways to
think about anything would be a feminist
approach to something there are many
lists actually circulating currently
Harriet has been published recently
across the globe about a three three
hundred author plus list 700 now wow I
haven't looked at in a few days
so there are many ways to access but
that are being publicized pop in the pop
pop press right now they
you should definitely become aware of
Thank You Donna
what is feminist practice oh goodness I
think that was the perfect time so
actually I'm not sure if there's
anything I would answer that do we have
an answer from the audience some
contributions from the audience my name
is van der graaf Johnson I am great I
used to remember director of matrix
which was a feminist architectural
cooperative and to some extent how he
defined it was process rather than
defined steps so it was about finding
means of communication and facilitating
in relation to the particular groups or
people we were working with so that that
might be about extending the knowledge
of what reading planners it might be
extending the knowledge through going on
visits around buildings and looking it
it might be about people bringing in
postcards as their ideas of what their
ideas of buildings that they felt
communicated their cultural identities
awareness it might be about making very
very rough models or demountable models
and leaving it with groups so that they
could have their own discussions free of
architectural influence so that they
could make decisions critical decisions
but also it was about recognizing that
quite often the clients or the users
quite often - to a great degree
experts themselves so it was about a
collaborative exercise rather than a
conferred exercise thank you that's
that's really I think we might have a
contribution yes I've come from a
complicated country and the idea that
you want to be conclusive what happens
when you have to take a moral stand and
you don't want as a tutor I've been an
educator
for 55 years you can't if you do tell
tomorrow stand except some of the work
of your students can you can you explain
explain that I was born in South Africa
I live in Israel
I have hosting in students but I also
have settler students and okay it's
complicated and I'm not allowed to voice
an opinion today and I think if you look
at the way the world's going it's going
in the same direction so if we are
completely inclusive we've got a problem
I mean a women's movement called women
for peace and they want to have
Palestinians in it but I also want to
have sexes in it so what do you do
you've got to listen because that's what
feminism means and I'm beginning to
think that I have to take a moral stand
otherwise I'm back in South Africa I
think um I think you've touched on a
really important problem which is that
sometimes people think that equity is
about sameness and that all of those
positions have waited in the same way
and we've kind of seen this with Trump's
comments around the Confederate statues
in the protests you know that trying to
give equal value to both sides and in
fact you're dealing with historical
asymmetries of power to start with and
asymmetries a voice I mean what kind of
voice to Palestinians have in the public
realm in Israel you know not to mention
the Imperial policy so I think it's a
problem if we if we see it as an
equivalence it's not it's an asymmetry
well it's not my teaching situation yeah
but yours is we have we have a question
from just at the back
my name is Elka and I'm based in Vienna
I just wanted to comment on what we just
heard because the country where I lived
a far right which is now the normalcy
make a lot of claims to free speech or
to democratic representation or to all
the values that actually were developed
during 1968 and afterwards so they would
say in the name of emancipation we have
to be part of the discussion and I think
it's not so easy then to say we work
with the methods of participation that
were developed a long time ago in order
to bring all their wishes to the table
because their wishes are actually very
racist or if you bring them to social
housing it would mean that you have more
boundaries or that people are kept out
or that it's not about diversity so I
think it's very complicated to work with
emancipatory models when those are
captured by the enemy or by the other
side and it's it's not it it's not a
question really it's more a comment or
kind of so what does it mean when this
kind of political depression is the
everyday and how do you then develop
current strategies maybe going back to
the question what are feminists design
principles I think there cannot be such
a thing as a design principle because
the time
are changing so dramatically that it's
actually necessary to update like all
the time there's no such thing as to
fall back on something that can be used
all the time in the same way
[Applause]
my name is Khalid I'm a student here I
ran into an Egyptian filmmaker a woman
who told me that unless she had her
place at 8:30 on primetime she would
pull her film away generally and she
said that she pulled that away three
times we're currently and that came out
of a fear I think of saying that yes I'm
an Egyptian at one first you know a
woman at all so her fear of being
ghettoized or avoiding that subversion
or that I believe to be subversive by
almost evading the mainstream underst
is this a concern that sometimes also
you know when we talk about timeless
design principles that there is this you
know potentially ghettoization which
which you know couldn't you know which
or this categorization in particular
kind of senses or if that's a question
okay I'm not sure I understand the cool
part I'm not sure I understand the
question
when you say ghettoization and usually
women architects yeah but but almost
being framed in a particular light which
almost is seen as away from the
mainstream in some sense right okay so I
mean I'm reflecting also on that point
kind of previously but also and this
idea of defining feminists defy the you
know design principles you know how how
does that conversation go about what I
am historically the topics that
architects have identified as feminists
have dealt with are actually incredibly
mainstream they're about social housing
they're about integrated neighborhoods
where living and work run together
they're about mobility in the city
they're about
clusion in the city and if you start
from that position and sustainability
issues to do with shelter and settlement
if you start from the topics that those
feminists architects have been dealing
with it's incredibly mainstream but if
you start from feminists ghetto
marginalization then you're setting up
another kind of narrative so we have to
be aware that feminism both in the
mainstream media and within the
architecture profession is scapegoated
in certain ways there is that there's an
assumption that there are principles
which are subscribed to by all feminists
I mean there are feminists who are right
across the political spectrum from left
to right
and I would say that right-wing
feminists would not necessarily see what
you set out as something which is you
know universal norms you know there are
feminist architect who would say gated
communities are some kind of solution
because they provide security because
you know women are able to fulfill their
innocence so I think you know there are
nuances and great shifts between between
feminists sure I was just giving you an
example that if you turn the narrative
around and say what topics have feminist
architects worked on then you could see
them totally within a so-called
mainstream vision so that that was the
only reason I was giving that list I
don't know any right wing feminist
architects I'd be interested to sit down
and yeah
a pretty interesting conversation I see
that is am still here can I ask you can
I ask you a question
and which is to say how do you think
that the principles which matrix started
that the which started on feminist
principles you know the kind of feminist
principles that are being described here
do you think there's been a shift Oh
when when did matrix start 1984 1984 so
a book I wasn't part of the book but it
started with a book group yeah and then
became an architectural practice yes so
how do you think that what sort of
shifts are there clear shifts between
those early principles and where we are
today and what do you think those are I
think quite a lot of the issues I mean I
don't see moves as a linear process I
think it's usually a sort of wave in
terms of ups and downs I think certain
things like I mean quite a lot of early
universities but also quite there are
practices that are doing participate or
projects and practice but I also see
things at the time when matrix was sort
of perhaps most prominent there were
quite a lot of technical aid
organizations that were supporting
different organizations both through the
planning process but also through the
design and build process that has
disappeared
and quite often a community group sir
sort of reliance on funding quite often
European funding which I think quite a
lot of communities will unwittingly
realize they've lost a source of funding
they've brexit does go ahead but that's
the sort of mechanism I think at the
moment for some of the the participate
rework that architects are doing but I
do think it is quite worrying in terms
of the trends and the lack of I mean you
know with regretful towers isn't
incredibly extremely the extreme but I
do see the dismissal of local
communities right across the board I'm
based in Bristol and director of a
Community Interest Company trying to
engage with local parks of kept a
council officer refusing to speak to
members so there's a lack of
communication even though at the senior
level the mayoral level they're saying
speak to the communities so I think
there's still a contradiction I think
there is a stigmatization and a
characterization of communities that are
less well-off socially and economically
and there's also a stigmatization of
highly diverse ethnically if they're
more diverse at our communities
ethnically and that is a really worrying
trend yeah
join a Michael fine I just I didn't
really want good I'm what are you would
you say who you my name is yes my name
is Josh boys and I was one of the
authors of the matrix making space and
we were all very young and I just I
didn't really want the session to finish
on this idea of feminist principles
because it seems a very essentialist
phrase which seems to me not to connect
it's kind of popped up somehow and it
doesn't connect with a huge amount of
what's been said I wouldn't say matrix
never tried I mean like a you know that
will vary lots of different variations
of matrix but I would like even at that
time I don't think of you ever never
used the word
principal we might not have used the
word tactics because we probably didn't
understand it but just I think there
were a lot of things we were just we
were just trying to try out different
sorts of processes that seemed more
appropriate in the way that you know all
the speakers have really eloquently
described those things and what what
I've heard has been this amazing set of
discussions about how all sorts of
different women from different
backgrounds have creatively dodged and
dived this what I remember I was he
calling a gentlemen's club this kind of
gentlemen's club of architecture in in
really interesting ways and that's like
every time that's we're reminded of that
and we're also looking at ways of
continuing that that's fantastic and
broadening it broadening it and not
limiting it but I also think of course
it's completely contested field it's
even contested let alone contested on on
whether you know it was taken over and
which it was by white women in the
second wave but also it's contested
between whether you think the best way
forward is working within the profession
or outside of it or some quite clever
play across both it's very contested
that it's it's not left wing right wing
I don't think those are useful terms for
us
I think we we we accept that
contestation and we just deal with it
case-by-case and through time we just
try different methods and and we just
keep doing it and we just keep getting
knocked back and we just keep going
forward and I think that's that's the
truth of the matter sorry
[Applause]
thank you just that's a that's a really
helpful hopeful no hopeful note to begin
to end on and do we have any more
burning questions that people no no no
I'm being told questions cannot be
burning hi my name is Lowell I didn't
know Isobel name because we didn't
address yet the maternity but we
feminists to be more flexible in the way
we address maternity in our in our
profession in our in the offices would
be would be like a claim to government
to talk about that it wouldn't be that
feminist I think I think the short
answer to that is yes it would be a
great thing to do say so I'm on that
note I'm going to thank everyone who's
come to this incredibly interesting set
of presentations I think everyone's
going to be here so do feel free to ask
questions and thank you for such
interesting contributions both from the
presenters and from the audiences so oh
sorry
hopefully a very welcome announcement
because the panel and the audience have
worked so hard and generating such
interesting debate and we will be
rewarded with drink and some canapés at
the reception which will be back at the
poor man and center so whenever you're
ready we are ready for you and
just come on over and it'll be really
nice to continue the discussion together
[Applause]
