for those of you don't know me my name
is ma a bogie a head of public program
here at the a and I'll be chairing
tonight's conversation along with flora
in Edinburgh who produced a series who's
the founder of Sony or solid objectives
so last month the series began with a
conversation around the idea of homeland
there's a place of origin or a space of
autonomy and our three speakers used the
re-emergence of British nostalgia as
longing for a sometimes fictional time
or place the role of maps is a form of
self portraiture to better understand
our identity and the rise of populism
across Europe as tools and trends to
navigate our current condition tonight's
conversation will explore the concept of
order as an arbitrary line drawn on a
map to demarcate one sovereign entity
from another this line in reality
becomes a thickened territory a space of
negotiation friction change conflict and
negotiation as the line travels between
different contexts and understandings of
land ownership and political identity
how can this line of tension become an
opportunity to design new spaces of
change in exchange is one of the
questions we'll be discussing tonight so
these types of questions in the series
as a whole a framed is part of a larger
uncertainty which is our future
relationship with the EU we'll take as a
starting point for tonight's
conversation in kind of how as we
continually a bit draw and redefine our
edges so too do we negotiate new
relationships with the outside world so
to briefly introduce tonight's speakers
Michelle Provost at the end is based in
Rotterdam as the head of the independent
school for the city she's the co-founder
of Critias and historians now and she's
the director of the International
Institute and tonight she's going to
discuss the border through various
projects she's worked on including this
independent school but the city of
comings and goings and to kind of
question what the border could mean
nowadays
then following on from that lesson it
says he's not detect researcher an
educator
he's the co-director of the projective
city them fill in architecture and urban
and urban design and he's a unit wants
to here at the AAA of diploma unit seven
and that you know specifically looks at
the territory of the north sea and
tonight he'll discuss her borders begin
to define the space and perhaps carve
out new relationships between the UK and
the neighbors it connects to through
this important tract of water and
finally Michael Young is an architect
and educator practicing in New York City
where he's the founding partner of the
architecture design studio young and
IATA my present currently an assistant
professor at the Cooper Union and
tonight will be speaking about ethics
and aesthetics in relationship to the
border from potentially an American
perspective and as we know they also
have kind of border situation going on
right now so lastly I guess the series
was made possible through the generous
support of the embassy and we are really
grateful for this and before I hand over
to the embassy would like to say a few
words about the series so please join me
in welcoming him today
[Applause]
it's a good to be here I think it was
about a year ago when in front and we
met you must experience this that that
you meet inspiring people for me meeting
you who's I think as of the story
sudden we were talking about design and
future and richness Sophia your IDs so
when you said let's do something with EI
I said Wow yes that that must be it must
be done so we're very very happy to
support this event I think it's it's
very timely it's it's very inspiring and
intellectual so looking forward to the
debates and of course I've been thinking
although our diplomats are not designer
and not but I worked at the Ministry of
Culture for for a long time
I said reflecting on on board I told
what what would would there be that I
can could could would pop up and
basically there were three concepts it
was the concept of property it was the
concept of sharing and the concept of
neighbor so if you allow me just to
reflect on that it would be easy to to
just frame border in a brexit context
but I think that would be wrong because
you know basically borders are
everywhere the border
you in your god defense in your God and
or or the roads that crosses a turn or
or whatever the walls between our houses
are in fact borders and so borders are
everywhere and what popped up in me is
that borders are always linked to
property it's always it's this is mine
or this is yours and a time ago I was
reading this booklet I think it's
fiction but it's good fiction
it describes the the Papa lager
describes a trip of of a chief from
Samoa from the Pacific to Europe at the
beginning of the last century and one of
the things that is interesting is that
this his people basically had the same
word for mine and yours so you know you
know we would phrased it this as as
possibly as as ours or as a kind of
common good or but we always fall back
in mine and yours and I think if if we
look at ours at the common goods all of
a sudden a border comes in in a
different perspective and that brings me
to sharing because I think sharing
country to owning is the concept of the
future and we see that we share cars
nowadays and we we share our tools and
we share spaces but I think there's a
huge huge challenge to develop a sharing
relationship between nations so if I
would say from from
and what the opponent perspective it
would be great if an item crackling in
this way is a challenge to see how we
can develop a kind of sharing community
between European Union and and the UK
finally I say sharing is caring and
caring is what good neighbors do
so basically well from the Netherlands
we care about UK as we are noisy
neighbors and we will stay naughty
neighbors so I would like to conclude
with that positive notes that we we will
absolutely stick to the UK whatever may
happen and I think I've said enough so
that I think I'm not going to handle you
floor yeah yeah okay thank you
so the format is where three of our
speakers will make a short statement and
then we'll have a conversation I
prepared some similar remarks in summary
that you did so I'm not gonna repeat
those I was thinking though as
architects and I think what was sort of
positive note of the rule ended then I
think the way we spoke about it last
time also it's not we can reflect on
what is happening but we should also
start to imagine you know what what can
we do and how can we move forward and
what was very productive last time was
the sort of emergence of a set of
attitudes or tools that we could use
moving forward as designers and we had
conversations about what's the role of
the architect and the designer within
this new reality and also what's the
future of Education which i think is a
very relevant discussion certainly here
at the school and as architects we draw
lines right that's basically what we do
we actually you know the main role of
the architect is to draw a line to draw
a division and so now that we have to
rethink the way we draw these lines you
know or what is the what is the say the
strength of such line I think if the
rule is saying we should share order
need to be common areas it might mean if
we need to draw our lines much less
sharp maybe we have to make very fuzzy
lines very
diffuse lines lines where you're not
actually sure if you're at the one side
of the edge or the other side of the
edge and I think that could be an
interesting new way to think about
architects not drawing very clear and
clean lines with drawing very fuzzy and
very messy and very ambiguous lines but
that's my small contribution I think my
you're gonna start right yeah yes
and then we'll have a larger
conversation first of all thank you so
much for inviting me
it's a opportunity for myself and Hamid
Coast Ravi my teaching partner just to
say a few things about the studio that
we started is here at the AAA and if you
want I'll just present a few points just
to begin the conversation and then maybe
we can come back to some of the issues
that you raised during the conversation
so I think brexit as a political
condition is a very some that we cannot
avoid by discussing it today borders
also are not the same and not experience
in the same way I mean the color of your
passport the color of your skin
there's a fundamental of how you
experience this any kind of border in
the national international scale but
also you know I just want to say a few
another thing before going into the
studio that I find for me it's a
question of how we define this problem
of
the relationship we have as nations or
as peoples or societies because don't
forget that you know the quite smooth
space of capital and labor flow in
Europe is based on extreme violence on
other borders right for example you know
the death in the Mediterranean is the
price that we pay an average pay for our
own smoothness should never forget now
in the context of the studio what we
tried to do was to actually say that the
North Sea which sits in the middle of a
series of international and historic
disputes it's a kind of exemplary space
of not peaceful relationships but
coexistence through conflicts and
violence and disputes that historically
found different ways to be different
resolution and now we are probably
experiencing one of the most peaceful
moments about history I mean the North
Sea was never historic and at least a
space of of cooperation with a space of
war and that's that's somehow fine we
embrace that history in our studio we
embrace also the differences between the
different conditions climatic event
mental social of the Nazi our students
in close collaboration with another
studio in Delft they did a week-long
trip around the North Sea and they
actually saw completely different types
of settlements completely different
types of environment so the idea that
you know you know where we start
unpacking this space and understanding
its its differences and the different
types of forms of living now something
that we also underlined in the studio is
that
all these disputes and differences
should be somehow kept alive the same
way that we keep alive differences in
disputes and conflicts when we draw a
line in architecture so a window doesn't
resolve the problem that it's 25 degrees
inside and five degrees outside the
window just negotiates this problem but
we need a specific type of comfort
inside here and a specific type of
environmental condition outside so in a
way with this example how do we think
about a territory Melbourne problem
where we we never resolve a problem who
never resolve a conflict but we keep it
active and alive and for us this was
something that informed our brief
writing but also the directions we gave
to our students the problem of all the
breaks it as a political it's a as an
example of what's going on nowadays is
very important because in a way the
North Sea and the dispute about for
example fishing resource extraction
energy production was central into the
brexit communities in the east of the UK
where among you know the most
conflictual and complicated entities on
this dispute so you know questions about
you know if this is where and when to
whom this energy belongs and how I mean
all these problems and we're talking
about communities of historical were
quite well off until recently and then
through I mean a EU for them was in the
agreement that UK had with it was
actually a problem that changed
completely the social economic and
environmental ecology of this so for us
we kind of try to approach this with
care and
and somehow very considerate ways of not
to provide solutions to this problem but
actually to understand how the specific
spatial order of the North Sea with all
its boundaries and borders and
conditions has inform a specific type of
space and space disputes in life so very
initially between land and sea which is
also historically a very important one
for us I mean most of the things that we
do and we understand when we are talking
about urbanization have to do a lot with
special orders conditions that have been
developed in order to colonize the sea
and then the land so this in a way the
North Sea has in our approach to it has
a constant reference to the histories of
colonization the histories of scientific
political economic and environmental
disputes that colonialism has developed
across the entire planet
I think I would leave it there for now
and then we can come back to some of the
think things that you raised before
I'm going to do something old-fashioned
which is show images
I'd like to for the last years already
three years my office has been looking
into this topic of migration of course
we started in 2015 with the so called of
refugee crisis when our borders like it
was just everybody will remember that
point in time when the focus was on that
almost in a historical matter I would
say creating this polarization between
us being inside and those being outside
and this was for us a question well the
reason to put the question what can
architecture historians architects
planners contribute to this this urgent
societal question and we started this
project a city of comings and goings and
it actually deals with this well-known
fact that our cities are not static
kinds of constructs they are places that
have from the beginning of history been
shaped by people coming in and going out
and so we decided to use this sort of
describe that moment in time to zoom out
to zoom out in time to point at the sort
of eternal importance of migration but
also to zoom out in a different way not
only focus on refugees and people coming
from mainly Syria and Africa but to look
at all those groups that make up the
migration flows going in and out of our
cities like well expats international
students I guess many of you yourself
have come from another country
EU workers asylum seekers etc etc
tourists not to forget so all these
groups together
err that the fact that they temporary
are living in the city and that they
stay for longer or shorter and they have
their own demands of feeling at home in
the city of course there's many many
differences between those groups not to
mention this one that some are very
welcome and cities actually compete for
them so international students I would
say but also expats wealthy foreigners
those are groups that cities compete for
and others of course are not the the the
groups that are easily taken into into
the borders and of course this has well
there it has to do with brexit because
this is also a topic that is very
relevant for that but the refugees from
the poor countries are not so welcomed
in European countries I don't have to
explain but what is actually a new from
the most recent years a new phenomenon
is that also tourists are increasingly
becoming unpopular that cities like
Barcelona Amsterdam Venice are actually
suffering from tourism that a city like
Barcelona has seen protests and
demonstrations saying please give us
asylum seekers instead of tourists
because they over crowd the city and
they the Eleni and alienate the people
who live there from their own City
and again it also has it has been
mentioned that it also has to do with
city property and it's all those
migration flows increasingly make cities
in uninhabitable for for for residents
so should we take housing out of the
market which is a discussion that is
increasingly heard in in the Netherlands
and other circles
so what do architects how do architects
usually deal with these comings and
goings of people and here you see that
temporariness equals temporary housing
which may sound logical but in fact it's
not migration is not something of a one
moment in time it's an ongoing
phenomenon so why should this housing be
temporary the inhabitants are but the
housing is not so from this we also
asked us the same question like how we
can we move forward what can architects
do what kind of advice do we have what
should we put on the agenda and we
collected when we actually made a
catalogue of projects which have been
made in Western European cities in which
and this is of course a kind of an
ideological issue we had three criteria
criteria of selecting projects that were
according to us bringing something new
and pointing into the right direction
which is the P of permanence so this is
a statement really that to to counter
the effects of migration you don't need
to build temporary buildings but you
need robust and permanent architecture
which is good quality architecture the e
is the e of emancipation stating that
architecture should offer the chances to
migrants to emancipate and improve
themselves and climb the social ladder
and the S is for shared space saying
something not about architecture in
particular but about public space giving
residents of a city the chance to be
amongst other groups and to make
overlapping possible of the different
bubbles of migrants that we that we have
so you see these are kind of the yeah
again maybe old-fashioned social
democratic values that have been put on
the agenda for our
and I put it forward for discussion next
statement that I would like to put
forward for discussion is that the
question of identity we've all I've
already mentioned the group of the
tourists and of international students
if we look at cities like the the
capital cities like in this image Rome
and Paris Berlin and Amsterdam but it
could easily also have been long and
then we see that each city advertises
itself and proclaims strengthens its own
identity only to become actually more of
the same with the other cities that it's
competing with so there is a you could
say there's a network of historic
beautiful cities historic European
cities that are increasingly attracting
the same tourists and the same groups of
people travelling from one city to to
another and in fact the stronger they
identity the more these cities are
becoming the same you could say and what
is also becoming increasingly the same
is that these cities have a center which
is international and beautiful and
smooth and and rich while if you take
the tram or the bus and travel for our
30 minutes to the outskirts to the
periphery of the city then this is what
you see this so this is again Rome Paris
Berlin and Amsterdam and there you see
the same kind of environments which are
particularly not smooth and not rich and
also not wide European and where no
tourists ever goes to unless it's by by
accident and it is reflected into into
these maps again of the force the the
same cities in which you can see that
people from with a non-western
background are increasingly to be found
are living in the periphery of the
cities close together and
concentrated areas and not in the center
so what we are seeing this is the
statement that's that we have we are not
only talking about borders of the nation
States but also within our own countries
there's very strict borders which could
actually connect the the rich city
centers more to each other then they are
connected to their own peripheries
and these peripheries are more connected
to preference in other countries than
they are to their center so there is
actually a different sort of border that
we can perceive in in the countries
itself and I think that is something
that we should be we're very aware of
because this is a beginning trend that
is strengthening as we speak and just to
illustrate that it's not very visible
but this is one of the things that
amazed me professionally with the new
town Institute I visit Milton Keynes a
lot and Milton Keynes city of design the
modern city the most successful new
towns of all new towns in Great Britain
it's also the capital of the homeless
so all these beautifully designed
overpasses are lined with tents where
homeless and homeless families sleep and
live and so this border is everywhere
thanks
let's let's work on the aesthetics it's
a little bit better we'll make it a
little bit better so I figured it's
important since I'm gonna talk only
about aesthetics that there's some
images to look at so we've all heard
this phrase it's a quote that's popular
but that's just aesthetics it's usually
said by someone who wants to make it
clear that aesthetics are just the
sprinkles on top just the the way that
things look just the visual appearance
of the world and there's something much
more real much more important much more
fundamental that these aesthetics are
hiding and those are the kind of
fundamental issues of economies of power
of politics of the ways in which real
operations with real consequences with
real questions are operating underneath
the aesthetic layer so it is may be at
some level frivolous maybe just
sprinkles but there's also another
implication in that that somehow there's
something nefarious about aesthetics
that aesthetics are hiding masking
concealing real serious and substantial
problems
this puts aesthetics always in a
secondary category it's something always
after the ethical or the epistemological
the the real things aesthetics is
doubted for its reality but as we know
or as maybe oh no for five weeks there
was a shutdown of my government in the
United States over just aesthetics a
fight about a border wall a fight about
the way in which that border wall should
appear and we could very easily and
should and rightfully so realize that in
this fight no one's actually fighting
about the real causes economic disparity
through accelerated capitalism nobody's
talking about the global migrations due
to political or climate crises these are
very real things and these are serious
issues through which one should discuss
a question like the border and we could
also say that this maybe is just a
commerce
in America between the posturing of
political parties about who has the
support of one base and who should then
not give in to that person because that
person is not popular for this reason or
that reason and we can all have our own
opinions about those I'm sure you
probably can assume where mine lie in
this negotiation but that's actually not
the way in which the government shutdown
was positioned it was not actually where
the argument lied the argument lied in
the aesthetics of what that border
should look like so yeah there's us
that's a border wall and then there's
not us and the aesthetics of that wall
as a solid impenetrable concrete thing
is more than just symbolic it actually
produces different effects the solid
wall literalized line of a concrete
architectural object conceals actually
aesthetically removes the other that is
on the side it's more than just a
linguistic conversation that's solidity
that kind of removal of visibility
produces a fiction because the line is
arbitrary a line drawn on geography this
is an arbitrary thing the fact that we
have to literal eyes it through physical
manifestations of architectures was
absurd because this wall already exists
between Mexico and the United States
this is a fight about aesthetics in in
the solidity of that wall it not only
generates a reflection that adds a
cohesion and an identity to a certain
group of people who feel threatened by
that border within the United States it
also aesthetically removes the other
that is on the other side producing the
idea or the fiction that these two
things can seamlessly exist on one side
or the other we are this they are that
the border literalizes that sort of
effective construction all right it's
nice to do performance art with the word
well again the Mack is putting all my
things in the wrong place
that's an array of drones because the
other proposition by the other party was
not to get rid of the border but to
articulate it with a different
aesthetics an aesthetic of technological
vision of surveillance of occupation so
the border wall is no longer a visible
thing but the border wall is very real
it is an army of drones surveilling this
imaginary line so that now people are
translated into data data to be stored
recorded and analyzed very far from the
border within the powers of bureaucracy
and this is a very creepy thing this is
not a border that we can go now to the
to the land of the Rio Grande and look
at something solid and physical but it
is a very real border nonetheless and
it's a border that is transforming the
aesthetics of what is the identity of
one population into the statistics of
control within the occupying the
population in this case the United
States in the region between the United
States and Mexico both of these are
actually dubious from the point of view
of ethics and this is just to look at
the aesthetics of both these counter
propositions so this leads me to a
question like can we have a just
aesthetics can we have an aesthetics
based on justice and aesthetics based on
ethics can we work to actually have in
an ethical position and then give it an
aesthetic that allows us to articulate
those relationship
oh this is important that should be a
question mark because I wonder about it
I think we'd all want this I think we'd
all agree that we'd want to have a just
esthetics and aesthetics based on ethics
but this gets slippery and it gets
slippery in a number of manners for
whose ethics when duet except into
morality slip into ideology how is that
then aesthetically represented we have a
very bad track record as architects for
the aesthetic representation of
political ideology I think we can
question this pretty fundamentally the
other thing is what is the fundamental
relationship of ethics one of the things
that happens when we have an ethical
relationship with another is we have an
empathetic tied to them empathy is
initially an aesthetic response so this
leads me to other kinds of formulations
like is ethics just aesthetics is that a
possibility
well now I'm also very worried because
we've slipped into another problematic
time because if X is just aesthetics
then what do we do when we see a sea of
red hats what do we do when we see a sea
of yellow vests what is actually the
difference between those other than we
may feel that we are ethically more tied
to one side or the other side when
identity is given through an aesthetic
device that provides a voice or a way in
which a population can see each other
express a concern about marginalization
there is a real concern that we need to
talk about and it's one that we cannot
avoid or suppress just by saying I feel
like I am ethically right and those
other people are not and they become
problem so maybe to wrap up this little
thing whatever it may be that I'm saying
there needs to be a border yes between
ethics and aesthetics but not a border
that blocks them out not a border that
is an either/or question but actually an
understanding that we need to do both
simultaneously they are both ways in
which we fundamentally relate to the
world and the moment that we compress
them into each other or cause one to be
the fundamental root or the causality
for the other we get into Quagmire's we
get into problems that we cannot resolve
and as architects we are responsible for
the aesthetics of the background of
reality it is one of our deepest
responsibilities and I view that as an
ethical commitment on my part
if we can understand endure alter the
aesthetics of the background of reality
to be other than we assume it to be we
give a potential voice to people that
occupy this world to be other than they
assume their world to be and that to me
is one of the most powerful ethical
responsibilities that we have as
architects and as designers that's it
wonderful
yeah thank you all for these
contributions I think there are numerous
provocations here to start a
conversation which hopefully will also
include all of you here in the room and
what I thought if we if we think about
the three presentations and I was
thinking about spatial relationship that
is basically say sketched out in these
three conversations around the border
maybe we can look at them in three
different ways
I think the first the idea of the North
Sea
you disagree so maybe the first border
is a very ambiguous border it's a
multi-layered border border in the first
border we looked at today in which
multiple sort of realities exist on top
of one another multiple jurisdictions
and multiple stakeholders it's multiple
sort of interest and in some way you the
potential that you see in that border
that we make you described is also one
that actually strengthens or allows for
differences to co-exist and and that
then they go that basically it's a space
of negotiation between which these
things happen but in sort of a place I
would say it's a zone where you can can
be and then I think Michelle's border
was a border that is found not just sort
of in a traditional space but one that
we can maybe discover much closer to our
selves but it's want to go to words I
have a feeling and you see it as a um
you're describing the potential of
actually exploring the differences in
that border this quite defined I'm
thinking here about the border for
instance within our cities where you go
as you also described the border in
Milton Keynes for instance where that
space is actually a place to go to in a
place of opportunity you describe and
Michael here was a border where you
actually walk away from and where you
where you you you don't seek this border
you don't seek the difference
necessarily but you you allow for
both sides to be to an extent and maybe
sometimes check in but it's not actually
trying to emphasize the border as a
space to maybe discover the fact that
you walk away from he turned her back to
words and allow things to be so maybe my
first question is dude does anybody feel
extremely offended by my and that's it
no but maybe to add and that could also
be a yeah a difference too for the
discussions sake I think there's a value
in itself in researching the border
seeing it as a space in itself with its
own characteristics ethics aesthetics
etc our position which my position would
actually be that borders borders are for
crossing so in numerous ways so that
would be social geographical physical
and that if you talk about putting
something on the agenda then that would
be the position that I would take so
that would be in in the sense of
physical borders connecting different
areas but also connecting groups of
people in the social sense
I'm trying to figure out if I'm offended
Florian and it's a little bit of
offenses is a good defense it's it's
understandable maybe but I hope it
doesn't come across that this is this is
an issue that I would like to walk away
from I feel very strongly that we as
architects cannot walk away from this
issue but I also with that feel very
strongly that that the questions and
debates that have existed within social
national identities and policies and
those factors what we need to be able to
deal with is the aesthetics of what
these propositions actually are this is
something as designers as architects
that we are deeply involved in and it is
not a light task it is not a it is not
an issue that is somehow just secondary
I would say to the to the thing at hand
because actually when you consider those
aesthetics seriously they put it into
and reframe the border in a different
manner you know it's always good in a
conversation about a deeply European
issue that an invite American for comic
relief and so I will not step over my
bounds because I have been in that
situation before and and will hold my
border but there's an island in that
island presents a certain aesthetic to a
condition of identity and then there's a
tunnel in one of the things maybe we can
talk about too because this crosses I
think believe between the North Sea and
many of the issues especially the Milton
Keynes that you presented is
infrastructure infrastructure has often
a shared space either nationally or
internationally and so one of the
questions I actually I have a lot about
is in this move of the brexit
what happens to the infrastructure the
channel the airports that these things
that are actually the stitching of
policies and of relationships but also
of a kind of aesthetic of being able to
move through these things that
architects are always involved in at
some level even if we don't like to talk
about infrastructure is an aesthetic
project infrastructure is an aesthetic
project there's something I want to add
which is that I think every I mean the
state bureaucracies and border agencies
and especially in the secure and
technological paradigm always work with
classifications so the border is never
in the experience of a border of or of a
difference between us and someone else
goes through a very very structured
power
I mean structured classifications
influenced by power relations
colonialism racism and so on and so
forth and nowadays there are you know
software that you know boys the
cognition face the cognition that
classifies me versus something else
right so these all this apparatus of
control and surveillance which is
infrastructural it's very bad and that
has a very important role to play when
we're talking about borders a part of
the physicality of a non-existent line
of division there's also you know spaces
and and machines of control of that
which is sometimes are incomprehensible
to us and the north is full of data
centers as well but in a way play a
fundamental role in these
classifications in storing these
classifications but also they have a
very specific speciality right and
architectures
I mean one thing I wanted to add that
was actually a word that all of you
brought up in in your presentations in
the summer forum which was this idea of
smoothness and you think in the
conversation mattias smoothness would be
the ideal outcome but I thought what was
really great was that all of you to kind
of critique your question concept of
smoothness I think what I'm talking
about how the smoothness within Europe
is as a result of kind of weird acts of
violence everywhere else I think we're
showing you talks about the smoothness
between city centers of course Europe
across Europe and connecting them and
also connecting with new peripheries to
other countries but not necessarily
connecting the city with its periphery
and then I think Michael with your
presentation the idea of smoothness is
an aesthetic like that something smooth
to hide cover up or the mask to hide
away it was really fascinating and I
think to return to your question about
the role of the architect potentially in
creating these new tools like to
negotiate smoothness or to critique
smoothness and to maybe create more
house through the kind of friction and
conflict we can actually find ways
forward to actually confront the other
on the other side of the wall or
actually I mean I'm curious sister what
do you think are some of the tools we
can use to I think the smoothness is an
interesting aspect because I I think
that one way to initially think about it
and talk about it is if there's no
borders then there's there's smooth
exchange between it but actually at the
same time when you think about one of
the reasons why certain factors within
the United States want that border or
certain factors and other places want
that border is for us to create a
smoothness not of movement through a
border but of a long a border because it
gives all of a sudden I just use the
word fiction because it is a total
fiction borders are always conflicts
but it presents the idea of now we can
be us and they can be them and smoothly
we'll just slide past each other and
this border will litter I literal eyes
that and just allow us to be us and them
to be them and that's great but that's
there's such such a problematic thought
and there's no way to remove the
interconnectivity in which we are all
existing it and and so it's only
increasing problems when that kind of
desire for for smoothness of adjacency
is proposed well I would say that this
could also be on the agenda for
architects not necessarily to look for a
solution but to make visible so the
smoothness consists to a large degree of
making things invisible so there's all
these high levels of control that are
way higher of course than decades ago
but we don't see them because they're
hidden both in the aesthetics of the
infrastructure that you mentioned of
airports and they are welcoming lounge
like spaces but in fact of course they
are also spaces of control and all these
classifications that exist within that
and to make that visible in all its
degrees I think that would paint a very
different picture of of our cities and
the making the making visible is an
important aspect in one thing I wanted
to maybe bring up with you and maybe
talk about as well in the North Sea and
the Arctic the appearance of the
borderless because of the real struggle
being actually the oil that's underneath
the ice and underneath the sea so that
there's a there's a huge conflict going
on over what doesn't look like a border
but actually isn't border and I don't
know maybe in your research you've come
across different ways this this happens
or absolutely I mean it's that's a very
important point and the North Sea is
actually a laboratory of all these new
definitions or definitions of borders
and spaces of control
all that defined not even traditional
sense I mean as you were saying in when
you are talking about borders in in land
where we have something very specific
speciality in mind right either a
physical separation between a and B or
all the spaces that we experience every
day terminals airports so we know a we
know what it means for subjects to go
through these physical spaces when we
are talking about borders and areas of
resource extraction in under C or under
the water right it's a completely
different speciality which has its own
representations Maps algorithmic
calculations risk management and
assessment so it's a very to us it's a
very interesting thing to investigators
as architects as well and this is not
just I mean this for us even fishing is
a form of intense resource extraction
because you know fish doesn't know
borders I mean but of course with
climate change and which is under par
genic of course this even the you know
the the flow of the population of fish
and how these territories change is
something that you know communities all
over the world have experienced and
changes that everyday like their habits
their mode of living which I think it's
some that we should never somehow I mean
it's as it some that we should
investigate
it's an infrastructural space as well I
mean that's
I think the other thing that that
implies to is that the borders that were
confronting are not just borders for
people and populations but for a huge
variety of non-human entities borders
for the flow of petroleum borders for
the flow of economies borders for the
flow of information borders like there's
there's a whole nother level in which
this conversation becomes really strange
really quickly and what's going on with
the border for the Boers between Denmark
and Germany they're gonna make a border
wall there is a border wall coming up
now between the northern Germany and
Denmark you don't know people you know
about it they're not yeah because
there's a certain disease with with
Boers in northern Germany and there's a
very big big industry in them in Denmark
so they're now designing it I think it 2
feet I bore their wall between them two
men but it describes sort of the
specificity know of lines that we're
trying to draw and it's almost that
everybody it's clear that there are so
many different types of borders and
everybody needs their own border but I'm
still wondering if we could so I
appreciate the idea of of making it
visible and and so the either through
aesthetics or just drawing it the way
Michele is describing it I'm wondering I
don't think anybody here like I'm still
wondering how we could draw better lines
basically right because it seems like we
are all observing the the multitude of
lines that are being drawn on your work
we're putting them into question and
even after we make them visible again we
actually draw you know better borders
which is very
I have something that's gonna it's kind
of sound first from the field but then I
think it'll be able to be brought back
in and by the way did you think that the
bore wall is also going to keep out
toddlers I think so now the toddlers
aren't gonna be able to move between
anyway that you know like very small
very small creatures but here's what
kind of say a little bit like when you
you come very directly to a parking spot
you spin out and slide into it hopefully
lines on grounds versus marks and
matrices this is an aesthetic debate
between drawing and painting but what it
also is is every time you draw a line on
a piece of paper it immediately creates
an insight outside a bounding contour
figure-ground
every line creates a ground and that's
that's isn't as an aesthetic aspect of
drawing marks and matrices there in
painting there's no line painting is
just building up colored marks and if
those differences begin to become sharp
enough we say that's a figure and then
we say okay then that must be a ground
that it's not but it actually painting
doesn't work through lines on paper it
works through marks and matrices all of
our computational space works through
marks and matrices meaning that anything
we see as a division is actually just a
gradation of hues in saturations and
brightnesses and then why this kind of
brings it up in an interesting manner is
all the data collection is essentially
creating borders through those kind of
subtle hues of variation of intensity of
information I'm gonna show one of the
one of the most important things I think
you brought up is the idea of
temporality and that we tend to think as
borders or we can think problematically
about borders has lines on grounds as if
this is demarcating something with
finality but every mark in a matrix is
creating difference that's variable
through perception how long you look at
it when you look at it
how fuzzy it gets how fine it gets in
one of the most important questions and
problems facing this debate today is the
idea that there is not a magic bullet
solution to this and the problem is
temporary things that happen over long
periods of time continual flows of
migration what happens when migrants
come and then become part of the society
and how and in which ways those things
happen and the eternal desire to
continually try to solve it through a
one-time immediate solution either in
policy or in architecture is a little
bit like thinking we can do it by
drawing a line in the ground or a line
in the sand and actually we need to
think more broadly about the variations
of transformations of hue and intensity
and how that changes over time so we
should paint our lines we should as
architects yeah
Architects typically don't think that
they're painters but the fact that we
use these things means we are there you
know there's no lines in here just write
marks and matrices yeah I think yeah
there's the temporary temporalities also
has to do a lot to do with the political
systems that the the management and the
policies for our cities derive from
especially in Western Europe you see
that the whole idea of a stable society
that has been built over the over the
last 50 60 years reflects in the
regulations that we have for for housing
for city building etc and so it's not of
course we we should ask the question
like what can architects planners
historians bring to this question but
it's it's so much the the question is so
much broader and so complex that we need
to be aware of that and I think also
pick our battles wisely so
this topic of borders is indeed like a
very broad discussion so what is it
actually that you can tweak and so that
we can you know mean something Hey hi
Michael
I really like everything you said it's I
mean I understand 50% of it but I found
it's really fascinating
the language you used to put like
boundary border aesthetics and
aesthetics put a lot of contrasting
words all together I just wanna like go
back going back to the fundamental men
theories how would you define space and
how would you define aesthetics and
you'd have to make a synthesis between
space and aesthetics who will be your
response on that it's a really nice
presentation for all of the things
really very thanks for Microsoft Word
thank you i define aesthetics as every
manner in which the world becomes
sensible and that it's it's an initial
relationship that our initial
relationship with everything is
primarily starts with an aesthetic
relation and then those aesthetics can
lead to the desire for knowledge the
desire to behave differently and then
that re transforms the ways in which we
positioned argue and establish aesthetic
relationships in the world and this can
happen between humans in the world and
also between
many different things so it's a
relational question and once there's a
relational question then there's a
question about space so I wouldn't I
can't put space in a different category
than aesthetics I think space is a term
that we've developed to speak about a
certain kind of aesthetic relationship
and it also from that and I mean I don't
you all you're all architects here so
it's some moment we had this this
conversation very early in our
architectural career which is a
professor comes over and says I don't
see the space you've had that
conversation right I remember the first
one over that oh my what's what's he
talking about
like air well you can't see the air you
can't see the volume but then no you
realize by being disciplined into the
discipline through representation that
you can articulate relationships between
things and those then allow space to
become visible in in the process of
making that which is invisible visible
and so that may initially be an
aesthetic relationship but then very
rapidly and very quickly once we have
spaces of aesthetics that allow people
to identify relationships amongst them
each other we have a political
relationship we have a space of politics
where groups are forming informed
identities that give them a potential
voice this is a an idea that comes to me
at least from jacques ranciere
the redistribution of the sensible no I
would like to ask you something
like if you would be called and someone
asked you like would you like to get a
big design assignment designed the the
wall between us and Mexico what would
you say maybe this is where I would
agree with with Florian maybe I would
walk away and and that does sound like a
cop-out and and but at least in the way
in which it is argued the the the this
this this guy who's the president of my
country
I wouldn't engage that I would have to
resist it now if it was put on the table
that there would be another way another
way in which to attempt to architectural
II articulate the problems of borders
that I'd be very interested in but to
design a wall I would refuse not even
the most beautiful aesthetically
pleasing there because those aesthetics
are problematic fundamentally just to
get that clear please I'm not talking
about designing a pretty wall
yeah good thank you any other questions
or people would like to contribute yeah
thanks very much yeah discussion I was
if you guys are pretty nice over the
answers but if you guys think that we
need boundaries in order to find
ourselves
so beyond recognizing the differences
between ourselves and other people
having the boundary which is your skin
and your body and the way that you
define yourself as different someone
else or obviously celebrating your
culture as being something that's
different to someone else and
celebrating different cultures a new
kind of things do we need boundaries
between us do we need the borders
between the countries and stuff and I
also had a second question which was to
do with boundaries in the city and
borders in the city and if you feel that
there's any architecture apart from a
wall apart from a fence or river or
whenever there's any architecture that
exemplifies the idea of a boundary or
borders and if there's anywhere which is
completely free of borders and
boundaries just these questions are so
big yeah where to start I would say that
even well that's maybe past your
question if they're if they need to be
there but they exist and that there is
something interesting that we haven't
dealt with as as architects and
designers which is the boundaries
between the nation-states of Western
Europe for instance they have become
increasingly important as a definer of
identities of national identities and
they have sort of been this discussion
has been hijacked by right-wing mostly
who have a way of sort of taking this
identity discussion and making it into a
political one this also connects to
brexit of course but we see it in every
country in Western Europe
and one thing that so now we're talking
about designing the narrative so this
narrative that is opposite to this sort
of nostalgic idealizing the history of a
nation state that that narrative that
hasn't been looked into hasn't been
designed and we're all we speaking as
the architects professionals are kind of
weary of this discussion it's Adam and
it's a dangerous question and we all
know why but I think this narrative is
something that we cannot leave to the
other side as it were and and in not to
go back to infrastructure but I've been
in New York for almost two decades but
originally I'm on los Angelino and Los
Angeles which a lot of people would
describe as this kind of homogenous just
drift of zone of cultures and people and
everything else its freeway system its
infrastructure of highways produce in
the produce divisions and there's tent
cities all over Los Angeles in an
ever-increasing intense manner and so
those those freeways those highways will
create divisions for instance here's
there's an example I'm not gonna get too
specific I don't know how many of you
guys know know Los Angeles but I was
born in one neighborhood
moved to another one in between was it
was it was a third neighborhood which I
never experienced until I was 18 but
it's five minutes away from either side
because we bypassed it through a freeway
a highway and and so those things that
the structures of cities are very
strange very important and very real and
that's a border that was created by
ostensibly making a more quick quicker
connection yeah do we need borders is
the the other part of that question
Florian well I ended feeding a as we
have pointed out these borders are
inevitable right or there are borders
everywhere indeed you describe even the
the the the border of your own body and
so it seems that we and what I like what
you were saying is about certain
sensibility about this edge actually may
be that the border becomes more sensible
to a certain extent and we're all
speaking about different awareness of
these borders and being able to
highlight these borders being able to
make these borders or developing a
sensitivity about these borders I think
that's something that maybe it comes out
of this conversation but then I was
thinking can you make like a smart
border and immediately becomes very
scary right at the moment that we start
designing sort of what the sensibility
of that border would be well immediately
the the ethics come into play and so I'm
wondering indeed I think the one great
provocation is indeed can you can we
design a non ethical border which
doesn't become a discussion about this
is a beautiful fence or not right which
basically is can we imagine a
non-judgmental border maybe and I think
that's I think if we could train our
architects to develop an awareness so to
say of indeed our yeah it's it's like a
deep investigation though into the
instead of the character of these
borders but still I think it's almost
impossible to not enter into the
discussion of ethics
adds that just because you brought up
this idea of how skin is the border I
teach a unit here as well and one of my
students somewhere in this building is
investigating what borders at the micro
scale because actually our skin isn't
this rigid line between us and
everything else things that we share
with other people and we have a kind of
a collective understanding of that and
she's using that as a way to kind of
develop a new role for the architect in
in redrawing lines that are fuzzier and
are blurred and and that rethink kind of
where does this building end and
everything else begins
so borders exist but they can be
rethought to be more very different
entity and a much more spacial entity
than the kind of singular line that
they're often drawn us and I think
that's a lot of what everyone here
tonight has been talking about - two
things that pop up into my mind
especially since we're on this question
about bodies I was having this
conversation last week in Germany with
an artist named Michael Boucher and he
did a sculpture and he's not the only
one to work with this working with
scents and perfumes and then and then
tying them into the HVAC system of the
building
to create this different kind of
landscape of scent but the way he
explained it to me was was what kind of
struck me so and he said this is the
biggest sculpture that building can ever
have because it fills everything
including you yeah that's right that's a
pretty interesting than the strange way
does it to say it and it's an entirely
non visible but interpenetrating and
coexisting with what we call the insides
of ourselves the other thing this is
this is even stranger to me but vision
we're talking about aesthetics we always
we always view our you know our eyeballs
is inside us as if what starts starts
there but everybody has done this I know
because I was talking about this with my
kids you can feel the back of your
eyeball if you just do that you can
actually feel the back of your eyeball
which means that these things are
actually kind of halfway in and halfway
outside of our bodies and and so maybe
another way I know that super weird and
gross and kind of freaky but maybe the
other thing about the borders which we
do need in in many ways but when is when
is it hard when is it soft and when is
it actually flip back and forth in allow
the spaces of transgression or maybe
even encourage spaces of transgression
that's to me is an interesting question
so can we have a world without
difference no we can't just all
homogeneously flow in and out of each
other do we want to all claim our own
island even though some people may say
we're all alone together in our in our
little bubbles that's that's depressing
to me but can we establish potentially
relationships where transgression and
this is where ethics becomes interesting
because we cannot predetermine what will
happen in the spaces of transgression
but it's actually important that they
exist what happens in the shadow of the
data surveillance
other questions
um I was hoping we could get a little
bit deeper into the borders of economics
and of ownership
I think Michelle what you're talking
about of the milton keynes being a form
of borders that is actually very porous
that that our infrastructure allows our
border to actually be airports or rather
than the sort of the channel but equally
the the sort of public private park that
is developing much more frequently as a
collie park that kind of very very fluid
and very non visible kind of border that
is increasingly but sort of forming how
we interact with the city and equally in
terms of the the sort of the wealthy
migrant versus the the unwelcome migrant
that sort of realm of ownership i think
that within a city becomes a very strong
murder that often we pass through many
times doing a day
and the question yeah maybe it's not a
very well-defined question because it is
such an it will define border but it's
it's how how these spaces manifest
themselves I mean maybe this is obvious
in some ways just in in in ownership but
that often it's much more about
narrative and identity and and about
these stories that we've told each other
about who owns what that becomes yeah I
think this is about visibility again so
about making visible these invisible
borders that exist in numerous places
like you were talking about the the the
Parliament of the North Sea and the
lines of the of the fishery that becomes
so important but also a reinterpretation
like Milton Keynes you would consider to
be in between London and Birmingham
maybe but now if you look at it in a
different way and in a real-estate way
it would say it's in its on the border
on the edge of London so this is also
changing over time of course what is in
the board of what is within what is
without and to make this visible I think
it's the very first thing because some
borders why we're talking about it it's
because borders are everywhere some are
positive we don't talk about them but
the negative ones we want to get rid of
them because they like the freeways in
Los Angeles they they rub certain places
of possibilities or they make certain
parts of the city into an island or
whatever you know that kind of borders
is something that needs to be on the
agenda
and I think there is a someone has to do
with the real estate and housing crisis
in London and elsewhere that has a lot
to do with forms of investment and and
things that are allowed to happen and
you know conditions reporters are porous
and quite flexible so for example you
know the golden visa thing that we have
here but also elsewhere you can invest
an X amount of money to property
immediately get a passport or you know
the way displacement and dispossession
happens in cities and how many quality
is related to a series of you know
investments and placement of investment
in real estate and how this affects
vulnerable individuals or migrants and
refugees and how these classifications
affect the organization of cities and
infrastructure and access all these are
very important I think you know if we
want to relate you know it's a more
physical architectural borders and
boundaries and things that we do in our
discipline with a much broader
conversation about national
international borders I think issues
like you know access to housing and how
this is manifested in cities like London
is something that we can start doing in
a way
I was thinking of a rager surrounded
them painting boarders
maybe we should because it seems we
haven't been able to define yet what is
the best way to draw a line right so
then I'm wondering and I was thinking of
the I don't know people know that erased
the coning that worked by over russian
burg where you still see the traces of
the coatings drawing and I was thinking
maybe we should draw any raise and draw
any race and draw and he raised over and
over that you make really fuzzy sort of
bad lines but maybe we should teach
better how to erase rather than how to
draw fuzzy and I don't know so would it
be the same as connecting erase not
necessarily because I think connect is
like if you erase you don't necessarily
predict what will happen right whereas
as soon as you connect you already have
an intention so I think they actually
removal and not being sure how things
will play out and taking a step back and
trying to control I think could be maybe
a very interesting task in a in say a
field learn how to draw lines I think
it's very noble in this era which is in
I don't think the brexit is about
erasing borders no so that's a
ideologically very a good goal
yeah I like it too
quite a bit as an analogical way of
thinking through it in representation
but then the next question is all right
so what does that what does that
actually mean architectural II what what
is the equivalent of the ratio the
scumbling the left over because a ratio
R implies there's something left over
yeah yeah so not not total duration
partial erasure and what would be an
architectural partial erasure and I'm
the conversation was brought up of what
is called in New York and maybe here in
London to the the pops the privately
owned public spaces and and there you
don't see the division of economy which
is actually creating a border based on
property ownership in control and
surveillance yet visibly it looks like
that's public space that I can go to I'm
not gonna have my sandwich and we can be
in the city so is that is that a how
would you erase that or what would be
the architectural way yeah because if
you literal eyes it like if you
literally make that bad border of
private property ownership visible like
by building a fence or wall or something
you actually kill a certain thing that
that's working within the city
positively even though you are also then
literally making a certain thing that
operates in the city negatively
available for people to understand do
you know what I'm saying it's it's like
both its there's an ambiguity there we
should know that we're being watched
even though we all know we're being
watched
I mean think about these things we carry
around in our in our pockets we all know
we're being watched but we all act as if
we're not being watched just like the
inverted Pentagon it's it's in this to
these privately owned public spaces if
we literalized them and seal them off
immediately our city looks like it has
much less public space but
we'll then also gain the knowledge of
how much we are controlled so yeah yeah
yeah you don't have to seal them off you
could also dress like and behave like a
hobo and try to sit down in one of these
places and then you will also find that
these are not real public spaces so
there's numerous ways that you can make
that visible I think that's a great
example and I think it goes back to that
point made earlier but how do we disrupt
smoothness and I was doing some research
into privatized public spaces recently
and I think the Occupy movement in 2011
when they were occupying Paternoster
Square in London the only way they found
out that it was privately owned was when
they tried to occupy it and then they
were removed by court order because it
was owned by the Mitsubishi state
company so sometimes the best way to
maybe maybe the first stage in Eurasia
is actually revealing who owns what and
that is through a kind of destroyer that
I'm anyway on that note I'm sure we
could continue this conversation for
like the whole night if necessary but I
think it's a nice point to kind of end
on I'm kind of questioning what are
these ways of for Asia and I wanted to
take this moment to thank everyone for
coming to thank our panelist but also to
remind you to come to the third lecture
in the series on the 4th of March on the
topic of Exodus which picks up on a lot
of these themes of moving people between
spaces and and what happens to the space
left behind once the kind of mass
migration has happened and to continue
the conversation please join us upstairs
for some drinks
where you can chat war to us because so
thank you very much
[Applause]
