hi thank you for coming thanks
emotionally for helping organize the
this event is but it's a cross draw the
weight event that in a way tries to
bring together certain aspects of the
way which graduate courses operate and
work in the DAA in this case is the
questions of simulations the idea is
that there are many types of simulations
in terms of the scale the approach the
material they work with and its master
works with them in a separate way and
the idea would be to discuss how we do
the simulations and how what are the
different paths no that that lead from
the different models the different
approaches nature different forms of
abstraction behind the simulation
towards the fabrication of design
concepts and design these courses the
idea is that oh this is one event that
maybe two other events or perhaps other
moments where we also share more ideas
share resources with it whatever type of
resources those maybe a along along the
along the years and be a bit about the
strength known in the AEA of how the
school in a way approaches this type of
phenomenon and the way this is meant to
be working is we will start with mtech
presenting two projects with a leaf
introducing two student projects and
then having a couple of questions and
answers about those projects then Lu
will Google representing two student
projects or actually we will introduce a
bit more a facility that we are now
operating in new studio and then we will
end up with a CD and at the end we'll
have a roundtable discussion of how I
mean how do we how each of us sees each
other it would be good if the students
ask the questions to other students and
it's just us as she talked are talking
about amongst each other so having said
that I
the World Relief so yeah just to
elaborate on that so we want to discuss
the meaning of simulation today its role
and its impact in designer research
practices and so we are representing
here mtech led by dr. michael Weinstock
as you know and just to give a brief
introduction about the types of work
that we produce an mtech we mainly we
have three main areas of research and
one of them is dynamic material systems
and their fabrication including robotic
technologies use an example of that
another area of research we focuses
ecological urban design in emergent
biomes and another more recent area is
immersive technologies meaning the use
of ARB our technologies for
participatory design and user feedback
and in a general sense the way we
approach computational simulation is
that you know we deal with many areas
including computational for finding
geometry rationalization simulation of
material behavior as well as fabrication
assembly including robotics and so it
involves many different scales and
research areas and we are very
interested in the overlap of those
research areas and scales so having said
that I'd like to introduce our first
team and they will be presenting a
innermark animate a messiah and and a
Marc project that they've been
developing for a year and a half past
year and a half and the focus was
developing in AI we are - for
participatory design and you guys wanna
come over
thank you guys
[Music]
[Music]
good afternoon we are
Maria Elena Maria Cristina and Karolina
who is absent today and we're presenting
our thesis project which is errand leach
so this project aims to examine a new
approach in participatory design by
using immersive technologies in an
attempt to enhance the communication
between the designer and the users while
targeting the issue of unused public
spaces in London so participatory design
usually involves all stakeholders in the
design process
pursuing I designed outcome but better
fit their needs
participatory tools are workshop surveys
and consultation and usually take place
either before or after the design stage
this research project aims to involve
stakeholders in all the deeper design
layers introducing a new participatory
design to using immersive technologies
so a virtual reality virtual reality
creates an immersive experience where
players are able to design within the
platform in real time and also visualize
an updated design outcome serious games
are games with with them sorry
educational character with an
educational purpose rather than punic
pure entertainment so introducing a
serious game within a virtual reality
environment helps in the enhancement of
the motivation of the players as it
creates a playful and educational
environment where players are assigned
tasks so this research project is
structured in three stages the first
stage focuses on the development of the
virtual reality platform and the
expression of the people's opinion
within eat the second-stage focuses on a
feedback loop where the design outcome
is fed back to the virtual reality
platform and people are able to evaluate
it and also redesign by altering certain
parameters the third stage is twofold
and it focuses on the one hand on the
introduction of multiplayer scenario
where players in turn interact with each
other and also on the other hand it
focuses on the creation of an adaptable
space where stakeholders can express
their opinion at any time so the first
step in creating the virtual reality
platform was the creation of visually
consistent and realistic 3d environment
of the of an experimental site this site
was of medium size it demanded around
600 photographs in a consecutive
shooting pattern so the common points of
these of these photographs through a
photogrammetry software created a 3d
point cloud that provided us with with
the mesh and the texture that sorry the
geometry and the texture of the mesh of
the site due to its excessive number of
polygons we use the polygon reduction
software and finally 3d graphic software
allowed us to reproject
the original texture on the low polygon
model in order to obtain a low
resolution but high Paris model so after
investigating
public and new spaces in London will
focus on new era state which is in
Hoxton and it has us around 350 people
the most interesting feature about the
side is that it's a really close
community which is an asset for our
purpose as the people would be more
invested in the redesign process of the
public space and aiming to gain a deeper
understanding about the site
efficiencies we conducted an on-site
survey where many residents but also
people who interact daily with her
public space expressed their opinion
about certain major issues the most
important deficiency was the lack of
communal activities due to lack of
facilities and most interviews refer to
lack of green areas balconies sport
facilities resting areas which we
classified in four categories greenery
street furniture building additions and
a customized one in order to form the
design program of our application the
game itself was built as 3d generator of
spatial ideas that were built as
simplified geometries its environment
featured the realistic image of the site
as a derived from the 3d scanning and we
aimed to create an accurate experience
of the space that would bring together
all the flaws and the problems that it
would have the building unit the players
were given were 50 by 50 by 50
centimeters cube and they were able to
create different assemblages as they
wished we also gave them the
programmatic categories that you see
that derived from the questionnaire that
Maria Cristina mentioned earlier while
playing the players also had a live
information feature which basically was
a sort of an uncoded expert that was
meant to make them aware of some spatial
features that do not necessarily come to
mind to someone who's not expert in
designing so these features were the
suitable area the amount of shading
and the the flow the flow of people on
the ground floor and the visualizations
of these information writers you're
gonna see in the video
so at first you were just giving some
information for yourself as a player for
us to keep some statistics and then
there was this introduction saying what
the task of the game is and what your
regard to do you begin by selecting the
category you're gonna design for but
you're able to change that any minute
then you're able to navigate through the
site you see the purple are common
locations of this category as it will
explain later you're also able to add
some comments specifying exactly what
you want something to be because the
queue was a very generic representation
this is the visualization of the
suitable area so everything that is in
blue is supposed to be something you can
sit on and you see the black lines on
the floor of the flow lines of the
ground level so you can see actively how
you're changing them with the modules
that you place from a computational
infrastructure of the game is based on
the existence of an underlying 50 by 50
by 50 centimeters 3d grid that is
invisible to the players and basically
every time a player is adding a module
on the site during runtime the closest
point of the grid is taking the value of
1 and this organization helped us
achieve two major things one of them is
that we were able to run we gained an
advantage of speed on the live
calculations because some of them would
require significant computer speed
computer resources and causing the game
to lag and disrupt the flow of the
players and the second one is that with
the scalar field that was that was
deriving from this voting system it was
coupled with marching cubes algorithm
and basically were able to extract as a
surface envelopes of preference so we
somehow gods density maps density
definitions of voting for what people
preferred and where the first worst
works of was completed and it counted 65
participants of various backgrounds and
and based on the game structure the
results that we were able to extract the
road data were able to extract featured
the individual solutions of the players
so basically everything they designed
and the density definitions of their
other servers envelopes but we also made
some post personalities on those data
based on distance from the grid points
rather than yes or no it's occupied or
it's not which enabled us to extract a
more gradient density Maps in 2d and 3d
formats as you're gonna see so this is
sort of a visualization application are
you gonna be able to see all this data
the first one are as I said the
individual solutions of the players so
basically you can slide through
everything everyone designed
then you're able to see the evolution of
its program category so like a growth
pattern
everything everyone designed according
to program the program Hotspurs which as
I said were based on if a point is a
grid point was occupied or not they
didn't exactly give the indicators of
preference and we're hoping and that's
why we produce that analysis of distance
rather than this which resulted in this
more gradient isosurfaces and then the
heat maps that were basically horizontal
slices on those either services that
were indicating density not only as a
boundary curve but also an area in
specific Heights
and there was also a grouping of the
players comments which enabled us to
have a more refined idea of what they
were won what they wanted to create
through the cubes so we released these
data to architects in a design
invitation that was shared through
social media and aiming to see how
different designers were gonna interpret
this data into design proposals and so
we got four design proposals we got four
design proposals and the next stage
included of how we're gonna refeed this
proposal into the game so that we would
create a loop between the designers and
architects and not just a linear
interaction so I mean the first goal of
the phase two was identifying the
designers elements and translate them
according to the game's language so
initially we took each of the of these
elements for example the Leafs the
platforms arranged them according to the
different design categories of the game
plus transforming their shape to this
modular logic of the game once again we
run a second experiment
where the player is able to see this
transformed geometry and we gave him the
specific parameters so they can evaluate
them so if they picked one of the
geometries this panel appeared following
a specific threshold that we gave him
they were able to scale the geometries
to move them in three different axes to
change them at the materiality in the
form of three different opacities as you
can see the last bit is they can also
add comments and like or dislike other
people's solutions so with this
experiment we achieved the last stage
towards validating our tool which now in
the architectural sorry now in in the in
mark stage we wanted to explore its
potential to to adapt space periodically
according to the moving tenants
preferences which in most of the cases
in London or high populated cities in
the context of social rented
neighborhoods they don't really find
that the public or the private spaces
respond to their to their needs so we
wanted to test this seeking to the sign
a collective proposal which is derived
from a private change that thanks to the
urbanely tool we were able to define
using more than more than well people
income so basically at this stage we
also wanted to explore a different
manner of collaboration of butyl
collaboration and as well we proposed to
use or to upgrade the platform to
multiplayer
so in this experiment we show how an
individual is able to propose a private
change and send it as an invitation to
other players so in this case initially
they send the description which are
specifically a building extension and
the invitees are able to accept this
invitation see other participants such
as such as the architects or owners or
planners don't really participate
actively but in a passive way so that
they can follow the design process in a
net since an early stage so within the
virtual environment the players are able
to to to develop what the initial
proposal and from this experiment we
obtained two main observations the first
one is that people tend to organize in
design clusters which can enhance
participation in the way that people
feel more confident on their skills to
twin to carry out this kind of activity
of this activity and secondly the
outcome given them initially a proposal
or a clear goal the design outcomes are
better define
[Applause]
so again following our methodology we
analyzed the data from this experiment
and it gave us specific design drivers
from which we were able to inform our
design for example we observed that it
was highly evaluated a permeable non
structural element occur for site
overlooking or the potential to extend
the proposal to the upper levels
so with this sorry it's not showing well
I will skip to the final design we did
it with this design we proposed a
combination of heavyweight and
lightweight elements that act in a very
adaptable manner that when coupled with
the with the tool shows the real
potential of the method of developing
when used more times by different
tenants can generate a different
architectural outcome so singing think
back now we come to the conclusion that
using the virtual reality in
participatory design specifically there
is the possibility to create this middle
ground between the designers and the
users because they both come from a
different point of view regarding space
the designers have this expert opinion
and they use this obstructed way of
designing whereas the users they have
the personal experience with the space
that is coming from many years of living
there so we believe that through virtual
reality there is a way of bridging their
gaps in their perceptual and conceptual
thresholds by creating this dynamic
ground where they're able to exchange
ideas and reach a common solution
regarding user using direction
this virtual test we explore different
collaboration techniques that the latest
stage we we confirmed that the
multiplayer is the best approach towards
obtaining this group thinking that
helped us developing a better form
design an enhanced participation so
applying became mentality and
introducing tasks and an incentive to
the virtual reality game enhance the
players motivation which led to a more
effective participation the design
process so also virtual reality helped
in the better understanding of the scale
and the actual design of untrained
players so combining immersive
technologies and serious games enhance
the communication between the players as
the girls have already said in a
collective activity but also between the
players and be architect in a more
informative process thank you yeah I
would have to speak about the Jesus
project which was developed recently in
emerging technologies and design studio
and it's a teamwork
with my teammate min suna who is
unfortunately not here today and I'm
gonna talk about the value of digital
simulations and computational design in
this project and how we actually
combined together and brought everything
into one integrated system so let me
briefly introduce our design ambition in
aim basically looking at carrying our
take scenarios and chance we realize
that there is the predicted population
influx Jude through local and global
factors the local factor is them moving
away from the coastline due to a coastal
erosion and a global trend is happening
because of the global warming and more
availability of potential resources
therefore we looked into this as the
opportunity to create an integrated
fabrication system in order to mitigate
this potential population influx and we
also observed an interesting phenomenon
which is called thermokarst lakes which
are appearing due to permafrost zoning
where there is a lot of abundance of
peat
on the late stages of lake development
and we wanted to use this potential
abundance of resources as as our main
material in order to utilize
utilize it and use it locally therefore
our research question was how can
locally sourced feed material be
utilized to create an efficient
fabrication system that responds to
changing Arctic environments in
near future and the main challenge we
faced in the project was the highly
interconnected data from environmental
factors from material experiments were
conducted and also from fabrication
system which were decided to go for the
fabrication system was selected was the
robotic fabrication due to challenges of
constructions which are currently
presented in the Arctic such as
dangerous construction and lack of human
labour so we decided to go for complete
housing settlements which will be
adopted to this environmental and social
criteria so we started from develop and
yeah so we started from development of
the primitive which was basically the
translation of all the social needs of
people in this area into one housing
unit which is basically the connection
of dome-like shapes because dome shapes
are structurally stable and they have
extensive presence in Arctic
construction so on a global scale
we conducted a genetic algorithm which
was incorporating both environmental
material and fabrication criteria the
environmental criteria we used were
maximization of solar exposure and
minimization of wind exposure the
fabrication of criteria right from the
robotic reach of the selected robot as
well as from the fact that all our
structures must be compression only so
the placement is only from outside
therefore we decided that our criteria
would be the minimization of robotic
tracks length in the material criteria
was the actual minimization of material
usage which can also potentially lead to
minimization of time of construction
and all of these criteria are
accompanied with parameters which are
basically a set of actions which can
happen with primitive units within the
settlement so this kind of set of rules
in which compound units are connected or
not connected between each other
so we selected a set of genes or set of
actions which can happen to the
primitive and they happen both of global
on global and local scale such as change
of proportion between body parts within
one house and certain one housing unit
retains rotation of the whole unit or
moving of the units between each other
also we implemented two rules in order
to fulfill the criteria of robotic reach
and adjust the robotic more for space if
units are too close to each other and
the compound house is not reachable by
the robot they can they have the
possibility to move away from each other
or rotate away from each other
therefore by implementing this
simulation we were able to see the
impact of different clustering scenarios
such as completely compound a scenario
in which houses are all interconnected
which between each other in a maximum
amount of primitive units within one
house
what we observed that even this type of
clustering is highly efficient
of course wind exposure and toolpath
tanks it's completely unofficial for
solar exposure due to a minimum of
exposed area of the house the dispersed
settlement was actually the opposite
scenario due to the fact that houses
were completely detached from each other
it was an efficient for wind exposure
therefore
the intermediate settlement clustering
system was selected as a balanced
solution between all the criterias what
was important to mention in this kind of
simulation is that the scale of
simulation was really important and
obstruction of data was important as
well
we couldn't implement on the
environmental criteria within one
simulation so we needed to choose
carefully the second set of experiments
was conducted in order to determine the
thermal performance of the house which
was really important to understand due
to harsh environmental conditions in the
Arctic the temperature can span from
minus 10 to minus 30 degrees in a cold
winter month
therefore we conducted several
experiments working both in section or
in 3d model of the house what is
important to mention is that due to a
high complexity of thermal performance
and data input for the simulation the
actual house we observed was really
simplified in order to understand the
result button so in the first experiment
we observed the impact of the base to
the house which actually increased the
determine performance and decrease the
heat loss in a transitional space
between housing unit and the ground up
to forty percent due to this low solar
gain the actual Sun heating was an
efficient therefore we proposed
underfloor heating for the whole house
as you can see from the diagrams
underfloor heating provided us the
uniformed thermal performance within the
house and efficient thermal comfort even
in cold winter month
then after the global experiment we
obstructed one house to be explored in
detail what we understood is that global
experiment doesn't really give us a
structurally stable shape so we needed
to optimize it and we selected of force
driven form fighting as a way to create
a structurally stable system which is
also a compression only it was important
for our material and our environment and
the inputs for this experiment were the
outline of the shell from programmatic
distribution the height differentiation
and the height limit due to a high wind
load and basically the shape is created
by manipulating the force flow
equilibrium as you can see from the
video and the morphology of the shell is
changing simultaneously given us the
outcome they design outcome which we are
aiming to achieve as a conclusion of
this experiment we can admit that for
stream inform firing was an efficient
tool to create structurally stable
compression on these systems however
high differentiation within the dome
shape creates high forces within the
valleys which means that the more
differentiation we want the more forces
we are getting within the structure in
regards to the tessellation the
customized cutting pattern was developed
through abstraction of different
datasets strong from structural analysis
therefore the horizontal cutting lines
are actually either curves which are
moved down in the areas of the biggest
utilization and moved up in the areas of
smallest utilization therefore the
efficient interlocking is created and
the vertical cutting lines are
destructed out of physical force lines
with customized density also we
developed our custom tool for
planarization of the panel's because it
was important for material to have flat
panels only it was not possible to
produce double curved panels however our
shell was doubly curved so mmm we
developed a two-step process and the
second step which you can see on the
video it was the customized 2
analyzation algorithm which basically
fulfilled two criteria it was moving
points of each panel towards cope
linearity without disturbing the
continuity of a surface as a result of
this experiment we can admit that
customized tessellation brings a lot of
complexity into the cutting pattern
because each panel is in the end
difference and the planarization
algorithm although it worked efficiently
it brought distortion to the panels
again and finally we needed to use some
simulations in in order to simulate
something which you can't really
simulate physically which is robotic
picking place and through the experiment
we could actually track the amount of
rotations within the robot and the
amount of angles which the panel needs
to to be rotated within and we could
maximize it hood or minimize it
accordingly to our needs
therefore we tested three different
interlocking patterns within the robotic
system and the last robotic pattern
actually integrated the main feature of
robotic pick-and-place such as no
friction while panel is placed and
sufficient friction when panel is is
staying within its place
so what we realized is that we need a
two different two different criterias
and two different methods in order to
create horizontal and vertical
interlocking so for horizontal
interlocking we introduced a tapering
and for vertical interlocking we
introduced inclined plane which is
inclined against the direction of panels
collapse what was also important is the
implementation of this of these
simulations within the customized within
the customized tool for the robotic
picking place and through different
iterations we created an end effector
out of gripper and connection point to
the robot which was basically able to
fulfill our criterias to increase the
grip in order to pick the panel's
efficiently but also not to increase the
length of the whole system in order to
prevent singularities and increase egde
of additional rotations
therefore the simulation itself helped
us a lot to actually derive the toolpath
of the robot the toolpath itself is the
sequential is discipline chalo buttock
move from one oriented plane to another
oriented plane and from opened gripper
position to closed gripper position it's
worth to mention that due to previously
mentioned custom tessellation pattern
each panel shape was different and even
within one panel each angle is different
therefore a highly expensive computation
within this simulation was actually
really important
in terms of global assembly
we used incremental analysis which you
can see on your on the right in order to
derive our assembly sequence so that
assembly itself consists of sequential
placement of self-sufficient dome-like
shapes and the last part is the cow
which is placed which is assembled on
the ground then secured by the cable and
place the last therefore the combination
the sequential combination of the
simulations on global and local scale
helped us to translate different
environmental and fabrication all data
with an actual design proposal also it
helped us to evaluate our fabrication
system in order to understand its place
within the within existing robotic
fabrication systems what we realized is
that the rate of our system the speed of
our system is much more almost three
times more than speed of human labor
however it's more or less on the same
level with the existing fabrication
systems as a conclusion I can admit that
architectural simulations helped us a
lot to bring together this different
data into one integrated system and
genetic algorithm for us was helpful on
a global scale it was helpful to
determine topological relationships
within the settlement various robotic
simulations and force driven for finding
helped us to understand the structural
performance of one compound house
therefore this sequence from global to
local in our opinion is necessary for
efficient fabrication system design
speaking about limitations we can admit
that these types of simulations with
environmental and fabrication data they
are really computational expansional
expensive and they require a lot of time
to proceed scale of simulation is
important as well the simulation should
be conducted within one scale and
moreover digital experiments should
always be followed by physical
experiments in order to prevent further
errors and actually prove the concept
thank you the landscape urbanism bit of
the afternoon what we are going to see
is one a just finished project that the
remark project that is dealing with some
form of video simulation of sand dunes
and the second project is not going to
be a student one sitting project but
more about introduction of our facility
that we've just opened in near the
earliest to do that is a lob facility
which will be open for any students
about physical simulations so rim Jim
will actually follow on a bit on her
presentation talking about of how she
has dealt as well with ribbon modeling
and then I will chip in to introduce
this facility the sort of physical
modeling and then we will show some sort
of like first results that we have
obtained over the last couple of weeks
because this facility was opened only
just for Christmas so I leave it to wind
in to introduce her project hello good
afternoon everyone I'm Jin Jin Chauhan
and I'm about to discuss one of the
projects that we did this past year
which was done by a team of three people
Mattias IAD
Towson and me included it was a project
about Canary Islands I'm pretty sure a
lot of you have heard about them there
a set of Spanish islands in the Atlantic
Ocean and they're really popular
nowadays as a tourist destination and
it's because of their amazing sunny
weather a lot of their beautiful
landscapes and but what we don't know
about it is that there's a lot of land
abandonment in the area and a lot of
issues spatial issues a lot of economic
issues that are rooted within the all
the islands in the archipelago and the
abandonment is the agricultural
abandonment it's and it's even more
alarming when you consider that just 60
years ago all of the economy was based
on agriculture and fisheries so the
question dealt in this project was how
does a how does a territory which was so
deeply rooted and connected with their
land
get so disconnected with it so we had a
visit last spring to Canary Islands and
spoiler alert its tourism no don't get
me wrong
tourism is very important in Canary
Islands in fact back in the sixties the
islands had experienced a huge economic
boost due to the infrastructural
development of the islands for tourism
but it also led and it also led to
better trade relations in all of the
European Union but it also led to more
food imports which meant that the local
production suffered and it led to
abandonment all over the islands towards
the primary sector and not in our site
visit and interviews we found that there
was one island in particular that this
this was really rampant in which is
island of Lanzarote now it has a drive
diverse range of agricultural landscapes
like the large area a vine landscape and
the paso de la playa san scape which you
can see in this box here it's it's a
corridor way in which San moves across
the island with from from the beaches so
it's marine Sun moving across it was
just wind so it's a really pretty
corridor of
just sign in the middle of black
volcanic soils and it has this very
peculiar variation of sand depth in
which there are locally known regions of
varying sand depths which are important
because those different sand depths mean
that there are a different variety of
crops that can be grown in each depth
for example in the red bands as you see
fleshy fruits such as melons watermelons
zucchinis can be grown and in the yellow
parts there are potatoes and other
staged sturdier crops so it looks a bit
like this it's really flat not not like
sand dunes or anything else and sheets
and it's really pretty but a lot of it
is abandoned so it suffers ecologically
as well as in terms of tourist
visitation as well because there's
nothing to see there and the part that
are simulations and our analysis talked
about was how this sand circulates so
because it is such a complex phenomenon
that happens here it leaves with sand
rotation and how the crops themselves
need to get rotated for a season so but
all this the landscape the beauty of the
landscape lies in this complexity so we
had to take a look at all the factors of
where these sand Epps take place where
the crop rotation takes place and what
the sand rotation actually looks like
into consideration and with that we came
to simulating what these processes were
these Aeolian processes would be so we
used a lot of softwares for wind as well
as sand simulations for wind we
primarily used software's for both the
kinds the software's that the
simulations work on they work on a
system called
cellular automata which I'm sure a lot
of us are familiar with already and so
so cellular automata works on the fact
that there is a grid of cells and
whatever happens in one cells gets it
gets
replicated in the other cells aspirin
iteration that takes place and that this
we can take take sort of simulations of
alluvial or a Olien systems so the
sediments were like each cell in the
grid of a particular landscape that we
take paths all passes on the effect
through the other cells that it works in
sand and sand and wind simulations in a
similar matter in a similar manner and
the simulations that we worked on worked
on various scales of operations so if
this is like the close-up of the the
corridor of sand
we had several simulations working on
whether we were working on the macro
scale or the micro scale so our Vince
simulations which we did in our chest a
flow analyst and as well as Autodesk
flow design they worked on getting
getting an idea of the slope in the
terrain because it's not a very Terranea
site it's really gradual slope but since
the deposition takes place as a result
of sand saltation it leads to very
interesting sort of spectrum of velocity
in depth and it leads it led to the
diagram that we had seen before we had
the red green bands so we'd extracted it
from the simulations and got a velocity
in depth spectrum which led us to
demarcate the areas where we could grow
particular crops or have certain
infrastructures so and the sand
simulations we worked with a Python
script which simulates and as per the
Warner model of sand dunes and so what
we done was that each crop because it's
grown inside it has a different
variation of the planting frame than we
would see normally so we put these
frames in simulations and we had
catalog of the Sun channeling that takes
place through these interventions and
all the macroscale they lead to very
very interesting formations of dunes and
sand mounds in longitudinal variations
and so these are some of the ones that
we had in particular had had a
experimentation with so if you see that
we have extracted some of the medial
axis as well and we drive to retry to
demarcate where the accumulation of
sands are and then we try to do it as
per the grid plantation frame as well
[Music]
and all of this was a step towards de
marketing it in on a macro or
territorial basis where we were dividing
those those green and those red bands
that we saw previously into different
areas there we where each segment was
allotted to different crops and it led
to a gradual formation of a sandscape
which we will see further as well so at
the north eastern most edge of the site
we will we had pumpkins and you can see
some of the label dynamics that we had
researched into as well and so the next
step was as we know that in cellular
automata they when we simulate certain
things there is a sand shadow that forms
while we are simulating so in the sand
shadow the next bit of the band of crops
was planned where which need low sand F
which is such a zucchini and then we get
the second sand
band of mel melons and then we move on
to water melons so this led to a sort of
cyclic rotation well I wouldn't call it
rotation but that's the easiest way to
describe it of science such as seen in
this diagram as well and we had certain
breaks in these bands so the so as to
make
the sizes of the fields a bit more
manageable as well and this works on on
a same on the same principle as America
should work that it has a more easier
access for the farmers that have fields
right next to them
then because the sand is is is a
resource that enables them to cultivate
because of this sign they don't have to
irrigate their fields because it acts as
a layer of protection of the moisture so
in certain areas we had these sand
caches where the sand would flow more
freely and be more accessible to the
fees that were downwind of the sand flow
and then we see how how we put a
different different sea seasonality of
crop rotations as for the prevailing
wind direction of that season and it all
takes place at a stretch of three years
and then we get we come up we arrive at
this sort of science cape which
generated itself with a process that was
taken out of simulations so each step
comes after the other because it is a
result of the previous band of San scape
that we came so with this choreography
and a system of crop and sand rotation
San scape which is generated and it also
has a system of in stress structure such
as storages accommodations and farm
stays which we integrated within the
generation of the landscape now the
quantitative data would obviously come
from the labor dynamics but when we
define it qualitatively we had another
set of more detailed simulations that we
took on the micro territorial level so
this is an area right over here this
area it's an area between one of the red
bands and one of the yellow bands
and it's it's it was chosen to be a farm
stay for the tourists to come and
interact and be part of the agricultural
landscape and for this what we did was
we we had simulations with at all
obstacles in north of the site and they
formed a sort of two to three meters of
mounds and you can see the simulation
the basic simulation that we had and we
extracted the medial axis from and then
we extrapolated certain grids that were
used in the planning of the plantation
as well and then what we did was we took
these medial axis and then we you we
chose certain grids to have placement of
obstacles so that we can see how the
sand accumulation on a smaller scale is
affected as well and that led to a
certain catalogue of different type
ologies of architecture morphologies
that we could come up with and as you
can see in this we have taken three
iterations of that simulation and we've
worked out how the transition of the
dune takes place across the micro
landscape so you can see in the diagram
how pick certain built forms can be
built out of these these geometries that
we get from those obstacles is there and
so this is an animation of how the dune
moves through this and this these walls
are also placed in certain stages so
that the sand when it gets manipulated
for example when we did like three
hydrations after that we installed
another ball so that the sound we can
see how it moves with the wall as well
and so we come up with this sort of
architectural mop and design apology
that arises from the simulations
themselves and then this when we work it
up to the larger scale of the whole
sanski we can see how the
and the produce and the labors the they
come back into this whole socio-economic
and landscape linkage this relationship
which works on the largest scale of the
whole what we call a group reductive
sandscape and these little mechanisms of
the Sun moving from one place to another
also go into these this diagram of flow
of the people as well as the sand as a
resource then this simulation then we
replicated as to how they would it would
work in a certain projective scenario
for example if when we take this module
as a prototype to in the whole corridor
of San and place it we have certain
areas which where it would be viable and
according to the circumstances like
social circumstances and the physical
geomorphological attributes of that area
they can be adapted to the similar
design principles and policies and
replicated over the landscape in certain
different phases and this would link
this would this would make the tourism
as this this would make this place more
lively and the tourism can start
interacting with the area and also in
also result in an inflow of people in
this area and make it more economically
productive and ecologically more
balanced because the science scape is
something that was formed from the AG
reproductive dynamics that happened
traditionally now with this we also have
certain other simulations that that we
usually do in ALU which are more of
flooville simulations which are done
with river and water systems and it uses
certain different softwares than the
ones we've discussed right now it uses
Caesar and it uses a certain ArcGIS
input as well
so as you know like there are certain
different typology of rivers that arises
from the geomorphology of the terrain as
well as the amount of water that the
area receives so these different
variations and classifications they have
a certain method of how these come out
to be for example meandering river works
by having one channel which opened wines
its way across a terrain and creates
creates a flood plain and it deposits
sediments on the insides of the curves
leading to a point part deposits and
erodes the outsides of banks which leads
to a wider black Payson and we usually
use Caesar as a software for this it's
easier than other software that works on
the cellular automata model and it has
certain variations that can be done in
the parameters for example you can use
the catchment mode which is for rainfall
data or you can use the reach reach mode
which is basically the water that gets
input into the stream itself for example
this is a simulation example of a
simulation that works in Caesar so in
this you can see how a meandering a
traditional meandering river can have a
much more potential form of meandering
and across the whole time line this was
around 5000 days worth of projected
simulations it didn't actually take 5000
days and it gives a lot of results in
terms of the topography what the flow
velocity would be what the erosion and
sedimentation would be and you can take
this into other sort of modeling
software's and make certain analysis
through the outputs that you get
for example here we can see how the
emulsions in the river take place and
you can measure that the diameter of the
curvature of the river here's an example
of the river depths and the flow
velocity and the certain shift in the
channel of the major channel of the
river as well and like through all these
simulations you can see how we can we
can visualize certain known more for
geomorphology of rivers and like another
thing that we did like during this one
of these projects was how we can
intervene in them so another thing you
can do in Caesar is you can intervene
and put barriers or create channels and
then you can put them in the middle of
the simulations and you can have it as
an input and then the output you to do
certain more changes then you do run
another simulation on it and as you can
see how if you're trying to accelerate
the river or you can do if you're
widening the channel what repercussions
that would have on the landscape it's an
it's an easy visualization to have now
while when we work on Caesar and CEM
models it's it's easier - it's easier
for larger landscapes which have a lot
of complexities and you can visualize
that digitally but for smaller
simulations in which you just want to
see how the curvature of the river works
or how certain meander takes place or
how an oxbow is formed it's better to do
certain small skill physical simulations
and for that I'll hand over to Eduardo
just a quick note a forgot to mention
that the sand simulations we've seen
before if they were brought initially
three years ago from University of
Southampton with a scholar that actually
gave us access to to the code and the
CSR the bit that you've seen from the
river comes from a B G as the bridges
British Geological Survey and we
actually have somebody
from BTS every year sort of like giving
an intro of how to use the support prior
tree Tara closed software so what we are
going to see now is we've just recently
open a.m. with we've built small-scale
physical simulation of a river and sort
of an aquatic systems in the a live
studio we've this is part of a
longer-term research at who's carried
before of how can we approach the
different morphologies of the landscape
and how models that explain how the
landscape changes both digitally as
you've seen and physically so physically
we can actually get hold of some models
that explain for example how me Anders
braided systems dejection combs work in
terms of River estuaries tidal creeks
and longshore drift perhaps but
definitely as sandbars and tidal creeks
we can simulate physically with models
which are physical models small-scale
very sort of reality we can then move in
to deal where Delta's which is only one
type of Delta's digital deltas are a bit
difficult to do you can also do dunes
although physically with physical
simulations we'll use a bit tricky you
can get the entire studio full of sand
glaciers are a bit tricky as well but
you can do something ratios and test
physical simulations typically work on
the principle of similitude in that if
you get materials small they do behave
similarly to the large scale however
there are principles of dynamic
measurement that starts to sort of like
fail if we come down too much for
example in terms of water systems you
can scale down a process 30 times and
still measure stuff and it'd be accurate
sediments for example cells we'll see it
ends have been a bit more I would say
qualitative or not so much
quantitative yet still work for certain
actions no the idea or the difficulty is
being able to capture the date and
you'll see that although the effort is
how do you get from the sort of like
material stuff that is there and you
bring it back into the computer that's
the bit that is in a use to the old the
idea is that is shared facility so if
anybody
to use it over the year just give it a
ring and we can see how can we share
students will not be using in Lu all the
time this facility and the idea is that
this is one of all the facilities that
we can build over the years in the a a
try to bring in this sort of like
physical approach modeling and data
capturing and that can be followed by
the wind simulation or sort of like wind
tunnels and so on and so forth but that
is already there it's just as you get
into the Elise to do a bit on the Left
no and it's a physical insulated how it
works and Jimmy will show you what we've
done so far which is a couple of weeks
worth of how we've been trying to
capture later hello
so yeah okay so pretty much with with
this physical simulation tank it's
really just trying to understand the
relationship between the water and the
sediments that we use so looking at how
much water we use in ratio with the sand
we have to understand like the
constraints and attributes that goes
along with them looking at the tank
itself meaning you would need a layer
and in the understanding like how it's
being captured physically but then also
trying to see I would capture this
physical model into a digital format so
we have having to have it digitally we
start to then transform into the in the
form of artificial intelligent way of
capturing this this model and trying to
understand these these physicalities
that that we can understand further
along the along the way
we use real-time captioning using color
coded were painted and we want to use in
the future the training data basically
using photogrammetry to fabricate our 3d
which helps smoother by using less hope
you can use machine learning to clean up
the real calculator so that something is
always happy to sketch and will be
charged
and so here's a just a quick video of
what we were experimenting with these
simulations the one on the left right
here it's really trying to see the
relationship between the slope and also
the sediments and water as we have the
slope and we would naturally get a
straight line but also creating a delta
in this situation this was a lapse of
four hours in this case right here we
were trying to accelerate this process
but with the slope of not pretty much
almost up to a flat level but not really
getting too many results in this case
due to the fact that we now have better
understanding of the sediment properties
but also the water flow rate as well so
we understand that more as well so this
one right here is more of a an example
of like a next result of the model this
is what we've created based on
introduced pools and trying to
understand different type of different
forms with the sand and in relation to
the water this one right here is just
trying to simulate the digital model but
introducing it to - to capture through
artificial intelligence and it's trying
to understand how we could capture the
physical model but really just kind of
have the computer to like to capture it
in live real-time yeah this one right
here as well and so this is the the last
result result of the of the model of
simulating the D tank with with pools
and meandering effects of the sand with
with the water so this one was this is a
four and a half hour run so yeah
oh so there's noise I'm on the nose the
idea is that in the future the
[Music]
[Applause]
differentiation between the MST and
many discussions and
like this or shall I put so that the
differentiation that we will be provided
as an explanation of the difference
between the energy and the amorites that
the embassy is research that is done
recipe is done individually that allows
the student to determine the area of
design applicability of that research
and the desirability may be the original
within the country different climatic
zones and so forth or different building
types the products of the research being
different the student selects a site
somewhere user in their own context and
that start to come next
the project is an embodiment of the
research the simulation is really an
extremely interesting thing it could be
very very abstract as a process that
lead to very specifically doubts or
vice-versa
there appear to be very specific and
then the results are very abstract and
in their lives both the excitement
intellectually and physically and also
the risks because there are very great
risks that if we're not able to
interpret correctly or if you don't
understand the principles behind the
software great errors can take place
now what becomes really know something
about the results the results are not
just anything they are an indication of
performance a performance that can be
compared with something else a target a
benchmark and so forth now why should we
believe the results of simulation of any
simulation it is a very good question
and I think it was on where it was
already mentioned one of the presenters
we shouldn't necessarily believe unless
we have some indication that we should
believe at least a little and so what we
do for this is to take measurements we
take measurements in real buildings and
then we try to calibrate our computer
software with these measurements and of
course we don't necessarily need to do
with in great precision each time
because once we have done it properly
and we start believing that yes indeed
we can trust simulation to give us
meaningful realistic credible results
that we can use for design and also for
comparing our building with such
standards benchmarks and and so forth so
here you see for example certain
measurements have been taken spot
measurements we
instruments that registered the
temperature and then assimilation the
results are compared with temperature
readings taken by a data logger over a
period of a week or so and do we expect
to find complete agreement no but how
much this agreement should be acceptable
well it's an open question and the
experience is needed to tell us here I
can tell you that the agreement is
reasonable the Green is I think the
recording of the temperatures and and
and in fact one can go into the question
of by how much they are in this
agreement and and want that and what
that means but I won't do that now
having obtained a meaningful agreement
then we can proceed in running
simulations where we change the values
of parameters in order to move toward
certain results that interests us and
results which confirm our design or
which make us want to change it and so
over the years performance and in terms
of environmental design has been
measured by a number of different
metrics one important metric has been
energy in the sense that this is a
resource that's non-renewable in the way
in which it is used now
and and so we measure it and being able
to reduce its use then becomes a
positive achievement but as over the
years we have been able to reduce the
energy use in buildings quite
dramatically now building satisfaction
satisfaction of occupants comfort within
the buildings and outside the buildings
become another metric and and so now we
will proceed with these presentations
first MSE project and then animart
project which have been under undertaken
and completed recently in inner city
good afternoon my name is Kiera military
I completed my Hama scene sustainable
environmental design this year so in
September 2017 and my MSC dissertation
focused on of this building ciseaux on
commercial offices in London and the
choice bertadawn of these buildings
because the scale of the problem
obviously is quite large it focused on
architectural features and passive
design strategies aimed at achieving
energy energy savings and occupants
comfort so simulation tools were
extremely important for the development
of this research because its aim was to
produce guidelines for future designs
based on measurable values and proven
results so as I said as I mentioned the
reason why I chose office buildings is
that workplaces are extremely complex
environments and there is a huge
potential with this kind of analysis and
simulations to achieve to improve their
design their energy performance and in
general the occupancy satisfaction
so my pre research analysis
highlighted that contemporary workspaces
are characterized by extremely high
internal loads due mainly related to
three main factors and so the high
occupancy the office equipment and
interior lighting as far as for as for
the occupants in current trends are
moving toward a more intense use of
space which means high design densities
especially related to modern sharing
models such as working on asking which
obviously rise the number of people per
square per square meter and also the
reality open sea is is rising related to
to the topic of a coupon see is there is
the team of rising demand for technology
because modern offices are characterized
by a huge amount of IT devices which
obviously produce a huge amount of heat
and finally the interior lighting so the
simulation tools also that we used them
that we we learnt during our program so
in a city were used basically to conduct
daylight analysis and thermal analysis
the simulation where were useful to test
the different design strategies of
different measures to improve the
daylight and the thermal performance and
also to test to discover which measures
are the most effective some the most
effective for daylight analysis we used
the plugins for for rhino rust opera and
ladybug
whereas for
thermal analysis we were using opens the
open studio interface which is a more
user user-friendly software for the
energy plus engine the outcome of this
research help me optimize a prototype
building design and a number of just
about variants that can serve a
different side conditions and design
brief the first cycle of simulation were
were run on a basic Showbox model which
is the one that you can see on your
right sorry on your left and was a very
basic model in order to test the impact
of different parameters this model was
further developed in a more complex
building which embodied basically all
the knowledge that we gained during
during the Yazidi program so the
architectural features were already
chosen in order to achieve very good
performance about the in terms of
daylight and thermal performance and I
mean some doubters but are quite
technical so I shown this is not a very
technical presentation because it would
have would have been very boring
so the first simulation that I conducted
were related to daylight per 4 months
and the first cycle of simulation was
was performed in an obstructed condition
as a second step I tested impact of more
realistic condition so the eurobank
context and abstraction and finally I
test the impact of of the shade Inga
which can be very useful even in cold
climates like the one of lung
so this is a typical daylight simulation
this is showing the dialect factor and
as I said at the beginning the first
cycles of simulation were run on a very
basic Showbox model so as you can see
the daylight factor is consistently
impacted by the the urban context so a
typical third floor unit which is the
unobstructed condition is receiving is
showing a 5% direct factor whereas a
typical first flow unit is receiving all
most of the daylight as the mean
daylight factor is around 2.5 this
section are summarizing the results of
the of the daylight simulation and
thanks to this section I mapped the the
depth of passive zone we can define the
passive zone as the area of a floor
plate that receive enough daylight like
satisfying levels of daylight to be
throughout the year to be almost
independent from artificial lighting and
as you can see the depth of the passive
zone is always reduced by the impact of
different factors and one of these
factors is obviously the abstraction so
other cycles of daylight simulation we
run to optimize the performance on south
or norian tation and for this reason and
overhangs shading devices where we're
test the impact of shading devices to
contrast over illumination
their problems were tested whereas other
simulation regarded the typical daylight
devices such as light shafts internal
external external only which helps
generally speaking to better distribute
the light throughout the depth of the
room as you can see it's quite it's
quite important to evaluate also the
different sky conditions when
considering daylight because in a
typical sunny day in midseason the area
close to the window in on the soundin
orientation is showing clearly over
illumination Pro problems and for this
reason shading devices can be very
helpful obviously it also is very useful
taking into account that you jump amount
of hours during here are characterized
by overcast condition in this climate so
a balance need to be achieved the second
part of my studies regarded related to
thermal performance and as you can see
the I mean from the info boxes the all
the values regarding internal loads and
design density were set quite high in
order to test the building under stress
condition the prototype building that I
developed is an a3 Billingham so it's
quite different from the typical layout
of commercial offices which usually have
the course and services in the central
in a central position basically with my
dissertation I wanted to discover and to
explore the potential of an a3 in
improving
determine performance of a building so
what I did was to study very successful
proceedings which relocated the function
of meeting space and course and
facilities from the central area to
peripheral area in in the case of my
building I relocated dysfunctions toward
a west orientation which is usually the
less suitable for working activities as
its it is the most difficult to shelter
to protect and the daylight condition
are usually the less favorable so these
are some of the tests of the measures
that Indian resulted to be the most
efficient in improving the thermal
performance of the building so I tested
the the impact of natural ventilation in
reducing the cooling loads the shading
of the glaze it hath room as I mentioned
before overhangs and light shafts based
on the analysis that I previously
conducted for daylight performance and
in the end I explored the potential of
using the through mud to cross ventilate
the building so yeah different
ventilation strategies were used for
different were tested for different
periods of the year and results were
quite impressive because starting from a
base case of a typical mechanical
ventilation only building although we
are already talking about a very well
performing building because as I
mentioned its features were already had
already been optimized thanks to the
knowledge that I gained during during
the year I 88% for almost a 90%
reduction in cooling loads which is
quite impressive and the heating loads
by recirculating the area the D hair the
pre heated hair in India theorem helped
me achieve 20% reduction of heating
loads so the results of this of this
research were finally embodied in
planning proposals schematic the
planning proposals for design
applicability and obviously this this
schematic second server for future
designs as general principles so the
first step was organizing the functions
in a clever way
according to the results of the research
the passive zones were overlaid on on
the floor plates and different
adjustments were were made to optimize
or to maximise the benefit of placing
the workstation in the area so it could
daylight availability and finally all
the results of the research were
embodied in embodied in this planning
proposal so the the areas of of the
floor plate which were suffering from
poor daylight were devoted to activities
like support activities or circulation
spaces whereas
all the work station affixed shared
hotspot desks where were placed in in
the areas where daylight is quite
consistent so these are different
proposals basically the theater room is
always is always present in the
schematics that I developed as it was
proven to be a very effective and a very
successful feature for an office
buildings whereas facilities and course
and media spaces were relocated in in
different orientation to explore
different design possibilities so in the
end I mean simulation tools in in this
case was extremely useful to to develop
better designs and to to help measure
which I mean the achievement the
achievement in terms of energy
efficiency that we can that we can have
sorry it was a little bit unprepared to
the conclusion paisa thank you
[Applause]
good afternoon everyone
eh my name is Raphael and I'm gonna show
you a bit of a welcome of my research I
didn't mark last year and this was my
meditation project in a CD we use the
simulation tools for mainly like outside
two on two levels
one would be to assess the physical
conditions that buildings are providing
to the occupants and to improve them and
when they are not met than to quantify
the energy needed for on these buildings
to provide these these conditions so
what I'm gonna show you is a design
application that was conducted here in
in London it relates to ers research
it's an office building in London also
which is located in that red tiny bit on
the corner next to all Street we have
there
so all throughout the design process we
do simulation tools to identify the
design constraints and potentials and
how to use them to provide a better
environment for for the users because
they decide for the office building as
you can see it's a rectangular site
roughly 30 25 by 70 meters with a tiny
big on the corner it's located in a very
narrow environment these trees the
streets on the east and west are roughly
6 meters wide and the ones are north and
south are a bit wider like 1015 meters
currently the site is occupied by a car
park
that is one storey below 311 which
provides the cars with a very nice sunny
environment
so this is what we what we have at the
moment a very constrained site as you
can see under sections on the top it
gets very very narrow on the east and
west side and a bit better on south and
north to design a sustainable building
in such an environment requires to to
analyze the actual site precisely to see
what are the constraints and the
potential that we can use such a dense
urban environment it's mainly pol Matic
for daylight you can imagine honest we
have seen now how the building so close
to our building constrained daylight and
then Cyril axis so the first thing that
that I did was a simulation during
winter to identify what are what is the
areas of potential boxy building would
enjoy with with sunlight only the cell
facade there's a bit of Sun and the
under roof which is not very useful then
that potential box building if we
analyze daylight axis we start seeing
patterns that we can use for later
design stage we can we can see how the
corners enjoy a much better daylight and
how the central part of the whole plot
is very obstructed with barely nothing
reaching the interior space all these
results are used as a starting point to
start thinking what would be the
footprint on the layout of the building
so the first design decision was to
introduce a ramp on the ends of the
building on the peak on the top big
corner that would lead to semi semi
public underground space that would be
used for co-working spaces or or for
other public activities on top of which
the first floor would be would be
located the first floor as we have seen
has a very restrained daylight
availability and the footprint of the of
the building was designed according to
situation the two curves were excavated
on the massing to create two other
spaces on both sides that enjoy a Sun
solar access and on key moments of the
year and also reduce a not optimized in
a way be daylight inside our potential
floor plate from there the final massing
was a fine for any with an architectural
architectural reasons and taking into
account the potential solar access that
we could have so instead of having only
one facet to the south will have to the
volume on the north is like the hires
two floors while the one result is one
and that allows to have a sunny terrace
on top for the work for the people
working the office to have a break on to
enjoy doing during winter or the mind
season or even summer so back to our
lower floor plate this is the the first
floor and it was used as an initial step
on how to layout on how to organize the
in the floor plate it's quite obvious
that only a small part of the building
has a adequate daylight and there's a
very deep plan happening all the way
here so it became quite straightforward
that the building would need an atrium
or two weight rooms one in each side
there is a problem with items and office
building some developers in central
London every square meter of item that
you have is a square meter that you
cannot rent or that you cannot sell so
nobody likes them we people from a city
we like them because they are very
useful for the Latin for ventilation so
in order to find the right compromise
there were quite a significant number of
simulations that were testing different
diameters for the north atrium for the
south atrium and what would be the
impact over daylight to find an adequate
daylight on the floor plate and the
floor area of the of the building at the
end what it was decided that
a floor area with over 80 person and 80%
of the floor area with good daylight
would be sufficient as a remaining 20%
can be used for the course for services
or for something else I'm from there the
the diameters of the a tomb were chosen
and then fed back into into the design
so the eight rooms and the cores are
located into the most problematic areas
according to daylight I'm those were
shaped in in concrete for structural for
secular reasons the this project that
was particular interested into embodied
carbon which is like the energy and the
carbon we used to manufacture the
buildings and that's why after some
research on different case studies the
conclusion was that there's a need to
find the right balance in between the
thermal inertia provided by the concrete
and the embodied carbon in this concrete
and that's why there's a mix structure
of wood mainly with the course in in
concrete when it comes to the elevations
there's another potential problem that
we find when we're designing is that the
lower we are the less daylight available
that we have and the bigger that we need
the windows the bigger the windows the
more heat that we lose and the less
comfortable the space so in order to to
find the right balance between daylight
and comfort I tested a number of
iterations in every floor plate in every
storing to find the minimum window size
that would still provide views to the
outdoor and good daylight for the for
the building and those were chosen and
design in back into the building so at
the end the spaces are designed provide
both a gwaan a qualitative space based
on the output of all the simulations and
also quantitative quantitative oh I
forgot that one
dimension of the of the building we're
designing
here we can see daylight on any given
moment of the year and how all their
workspaces and on the tables in doing
like a fair amount of daylight and here
in the bottom we can see how the
building performs naturally this is a
temperature of our typical winter week
and we can see how for another
temperature between 510 degrees be the
sign that we have been evolving reaches
temperatures almost inside the comfort
zone
they would just need we would just need
a bit of energy during these days that
is a bit colder or emptier the office to
be in comfort when we summarize these
temperature results over a year and we
map them into space we can see for every
space in our building the amount of time
that that space is into comfort
conditions and we're gonna start
designing and filling this back into
into our design loop in this case mmm
all the spaces were about 70 80 % of the
occupied time into in comfort naturally
so there was no need to fit feedback and
then at the end there was the conclusion
of my design application of our SED
simulations thank you
[Applause]
the question which relates to the first
question I had asked before that in our
program in sed we we have the
dissertations being done individually
and so now I realize that the damn tech
and landscape urbanism you can do it as
as a team it would be very interesting
very instructive very informative for me
to to know your reactions to that like
for example at first sight it looks like
it is possible to do much more if we
have a team rather than being able to do
it individually but on the other hand
doing it individually allows you more
freedom like in our case to choose where
you set your your buildings and so forth
I mean could any of you give some
comments on that yeah basically I do
believe that teamwork gives you much
more opportunities if it's the right
team of course
but let's assume that in a there is
always the writing so in regards to
freedom you get basically different
people they have different interests so
you develop your own interest within the
project and you have your own freedom
and by combining these two different
streams you are actually getting
different perspectives on a project
whereas if you develop it by your own
it's really limiting in a way of your
vision of the field of the research you
are doing so ya do believe in teamwork
for I think that's throughout the year
with the term 1 and term to project it's
very good to win a team then given our
like different backgrounds and how much
do we were led to specific like climate
or context I think that in our case is
very good to be to make it individually
though you always have like a group or
your friends around to check when you're
getting a bit like lost or crazy into
your personal topic but I found it very
better it we individual to pursue my own
interests in this case
well you want to discuss about the issue
of simulations now that you all have
finished the teacher projects and you
use simulations to produce them what do
you think is the advantage or to use
simulations I mean did you think is
something crucial right now to to be
part of the design process could you do
your design without simulations but that
would be one half of the question and
the other how do you think that changed
the role of the designer not because in
some cases it seems that let's say the
conventional role of the designer a
taking care of every part of the project
is is not any more there no so so what
do you see that as a good sign as a bad
sign or a where are you reflections on
that personally I think that the role of
the designer is still crucial I mean I
wouldn't use simulation as I mean the
only way I I see to use simulation is as
a guidance but the more you simulate the
more you learn so you can basically
embody those pros the results even
before starting in your own project I
mean as far as you gain more confidence
in the results and you are used to read
the results
you basically embody those principles so
you are of course from my point of view
so for thermal and Jaina light
simulation so for environmental
simulation the principles are embodied
in a project even before starting when
you are used to read the data so I would
I think that a project guided
just by simulation would be very I don't
know very sad it will lose the poetic it
will lose everything they they need to
be a support not not a starting point I
would say in a way also the more you
simulate the less simulation that you
need to do because you know what is
going to happen and you can predict it
in advance though when you're trying to
prove all the concepts and all the
knowledge that you have sometimes in
front of other people or clients is very
to have like the objective data for
simulation that validates all the
principles that you have people you have
been putting into into the design so as
a final thing of the design for sure
it's still needed and as an iteration
that it depends on the constraints on
the project I would say I also like to
add that I mean with simulations too
it's also what's interesting about
simulation is that sometimes you always
you you can anticipate the results but
sometimes you can't really understand
what yet you get some undesired results
in so to understand you know I never
knew this is gonna happen this kind of
helps you it kind of guides what you may
decide what you're gonna do in a way
it's sometimes those undesired result
results gonna make you have a better
understanding of the project and how you
could better inform yourself what you
can do with these simulations is how I
see it at the same time you always I
mean for us simulation not only in our
project but also in the design and build
project that we did you always have to
go back to the physical part because you
simulate something and it gives you some
results and then you built it and
everything is different so you always
need to have this balance between the
physical and the digital and also my
personal perspective is that there are
only so many so many things you can
simulate I mean there's some point that
some things that can't be simulate
and for me for example I don't believe
that you can simulate human behavior to
the extent that it actually resembles
the human behavior you can do space
index you can observe and simulate maybe
the flows but I don't really believe
that you can simulate the reaction of
human beings and as architects we have
to deal with that so yeah we can also
talk about what actually simulation is
like are we constrained to the
computational or digital realm or a
simulation can also be a physical
simulation so in the case of your tank
for example that's a physical simulation
and it helps to validate vice-versa the
results that you achieve in the in the
computational simulations as if I
understood correctly who's that right I
I mean in that sense I have a question
about a physical simulation part which
is is that system like the tank setup
and everything is it scalable to a real
want one scale so the tank simulation
it's really understanding the materials
that you use in terms of like the
materiality of what we use this the
grain size of the sediments you know
it's it's actually different from like
the real-life River simulation where in
real life the actual clay sediments or
Ferry or the sands they're actually
finer and the rivers are in larger scale
but at least what's really interesting
about the physical simulation itself is
that it helps us understand how the
water actually acts but in a way that we
we have to understand like the different
grain sizes or four or even the
materials that we use we need to
understand how does that really affect
our experiment and so that really
dictates you know what can happen in the
physical aspect of things so
understanding what what we feed into our
our projects or the parameters that we
give it we must understand all the
ranges that we can add to is weaned on
and where there's flow rate or there's a
screen size of the center we using clay
always insane are we using rot larger
rocks whatever it may be when you
understand these constraints but also
possibilities it should work
qualitatively force and sediment
movement because it's actually quite
difficult to scale materials you would
need ultralight material you would you
would be to work with anthracite or
different materials to make sure that
they are lighter than what they really
are but it it gives you a qualitative
idea of what's happening how Delta's
form how to look at nature how layering
of material works if you just custom
section etc etc in terms of water it
works up to 130 so what one in 30 so you
can scale down something 30 times and
still mentally does still stack up if
you do it it's a bit difficult it may be
difficult because the velocities may be
high so you may end up with waves that
spanned milliseconds as opposed to
seconds but still if you manage to
measure it it just stacks up to 150 time
reduction 30 time would be like
stretching it over for water
okay I basically learned in the
beginning of MTAC I downloaded Rhino
grasshopper and everything here in a
computer lab so you kind of can
understand the yeah that time limits we
had it's possible same for me I had
never used a grasshopper nor Rhino
before starting this program and in one
here I learned all the softer so more or
less seven soft seven different
software's in three months the first
three months were pretty intense but
after I mean after surviving to that we
managed to do great things for with the
knowledge gained in just three months
which is amazing well in in our case
getting used to all this a gaming side
of our work was pretty intense and we
need to find a lot of external sources
in order to develop our work so for
example self learning was vital in in
our you know where exercise and
basically since the beginning that's why
for example I grew a big group help in
our case is because getting used to
these new tools they they required a lot
of teamwork effort and that's why it was
very positive in our case and also I'm
tech is a program that gives you hard
deadlines so
you you you will learn the software in
two weeks you will experiment a lot you
will have a purpose and I mean it's it's
very personal in the end if you're
interested yes
[Music]
um I think for me was more of
understanding the behavior of the
simulation - you know it's really hard
to say let's simulate this this is how
the sand dunes are gonna move or this is
how the rivers gonna move because in a
way in a way natural processes are very
unpredictable but at least what we could
use it for is maybe understand behavior
and understand what may be implemented
and what we complete you know predict
and understand more maybe that could be
a relationship between I guess like that
merging between what we know in the
software type also understanding things
in the natural type and understanding
the behavior is what I think yeah
relax what aspect is it possible to to
channeling all those simulation together
in the same
yeah basically it's always the case that
you always need to abstract something
and you never can input everything you
even know inside one simulation it's
just not possible and the more you know
let's say the more software is developed
the more you don't know and the more
things you want to input so I feel like
it's your role as an architect to
develop your own vision and your own
level of abstraction and it's your role
to say okay this is important for me and
this is not important for me but yeah
input everything in one software is not
important not not only because of the
fact that it will be crazy computational
expensive but also in because it's
highly interrelated processes and highly
generated scales so you can't really
combine global needs or micro scale in
one simulation it's also a matter of
whether the processes they are they
interact and they there would say call
Co gradient or co-planner knowing that
we haven't shown but we've seen some
simulations of sand that they are
simulated simultaneously with the
ecology of plants grow because it is
true in certain areas the landscape is
formed by how the plants stop the dunes
and they fabricate a different type of
landscape so you could mix many things
but unless you have an intuition that
they are actually going to fabricate a
new pattern I think it wouldn't be worth
making the huge effort because you can
really get into quite a lot of of
problem and I'd like to us perhaps a
question to each of the on the demasters
how do you see the simulation in in your
role as more of a validating agent or
something that tells you whether what
you already knew works or it doesn't
work or more generative as a tool that
in a way shows you stuff that actually
you didn't Reno or you were about you
know
there how do you see the simulation in
that sense in your master and also for
personal
somehow I think that in a CD in depends
a bit on the constraints of the site and
the program itself the more complex
building or location you are trying to
build the more difficult it is to expect
the results and the more generative
simulations can be on easier sites it's
a bit easier to like understand what's
going on and use them to validate what
you can already read from this roundings
on the on the building you're trying to
make so it depends a bit on mainly on
the context and on the context but maybe
I mean at the beginning you may want to
validate that you're going to the right
direction but then through the
simulation you come across all this data
that they're now quantified and you have
access to them so I mean at some point
they do drive your intent as an
architect to be based on them to start
your proposal I think yes in our case I
think it's simulation tools are more
used and more useful to measure what the
results are because basically as Rafa
said we can always I mean often predict
the results of our simulation when we
are used to use this kind of tools that
of course the incredible advantages to
have proven data and measurable data so
I can say exactly okay I'm saving the
20% or I'm saving the 40% in terms of
energy performance or I'm achieving the
60% or 80% so I mean this measure is
worth to be used or not so in our case
can be actually very supportive and
generative when we have to take design
decisions
um I feel like in our case maybe because
we used a lot of simulation tools and
our design actually much more from
environment rather than our design
intention I feel like simulations was
actually one of the main drivers are now
of our project and mostly for example if
you use genetic algorithms you input
conflicting criteria so you as a
designer you can't put you only can put
weight on one of those but you can't
really decide that's why you use these
simulations so most of the times the
result is not completely unpredictable
but you really can't do it by your own
so you don't use these tools as a
validation tools and in terms of for
example robotic simulations even though
it's a physical object and you possibly
can predict how it will behave the
result is unpredictable as well because
the way how you can implement all these
simulations within the design process
this is the most important part because
I I also use simulations now that work
and in very skeptical when you cannot
predict the result or predict what will
be the direction of the result I'm very
skeptical because at the end we're
inputting so many numbers and so many
parameters and if you means the thermal
conductivity of one of the materials
that will lead you like a completely
wrong result so it's always good to be
able to predict more or less what will
happen to verify that you didn't like
make a mistake in the whole process of
setting up the simulation itself just
want to try that maybe we can also look
at it from the perspective of how
architecture interacts with different
technologies and different disciplines
right so for example we use multi
parameter optimization tools you know
it's highly situated and in biology or
immersive technologies that are coming
from gaming or robotic that that we kind
of imported from car industries so these
types of different technologies and
different you know approaches on
different disciplines really I think
opens up new avenues for us as
architects in design
fabrication so I think in that science
is highly generative because it allows
us to think in ways that we would not be
able to without without those
technologies so I mean they kind of will
beyond being just the tool but they open
up I think kind of new ideas you know
you know kind of thinking ways as well
well I just wanted to add to this big
but precisely on the one hand but at the
same time it's important to realize that
the results from one do not necessarily
combine with the results from another
and over the years they've been many
issues like for example in our field of
Environmental Design there has been
software to do simulation for at least
50 years and it is the same software
more or less that continues to be used
in different sort of refreshments and
and extensions but it hasn't integrated
so when we when we say thermal we mean
thermal and it's very easy for somebody
who doesn't know the principles to
consider that because you're running
something which is predicting what
appears to be the performance of the
building that it's doing everything
whereas it's only doing thermal not in
this case for example air flow or
daylighting
which you may need to do separately and
if you do them separately it doesn't
mean that the results you found there
you can feed them immediately now I
think the the colleague that was asking
about implicitly about more integration
of software so that let's have a
software that does life you know
everything
now that would be useless software
because it would never run because it
would never be able to fit it enough but
the so therefore the simpler the
software is that the less it does
perhaps the better because then very
quickly we learn what it does and it
teaches us what it does and then we can
predict it results in we no longer need
it so then we can go a step further the
other thing is about human behavior
which as you rightly said is is is
unpredictable but its unpredictable at
any given point by any particular group
of people but we can create scenarios
about what individual people or or a
whole group might do and therefore
simulation allows us it's the only thing
the only available tools that allows us
to say that if people did that then this
will happen to the system that I'm
studying by simulation if they did
something else that this would happen
now to the extent that the results might
be very similar then it doesn't really
matter what people do fantastic result
to the extent that they are dramatically
different then we have to rethink you
know the the whole nature of what we are
doing so we in either way we have
learned quite a lot
hello everyone
so the question which I have is like
apart from the academics if we come into
the real life scenario the clients don't
usually understand certain terminologies
which will be using for simulations and
all so how do we interpret that to a
client who doesn't have a scientific
background or an architectural
background to understand that kind of
your simulation results or whatever you
are trying to do because at this point
of time everyone is after sustainable
designing or green designing and
everything at a building level but they
don't really understand the building
physics behind it so what are the
parameters which you think would be it
would actually be able to bridge this
gap between the client and what we are
actually doing through simulations for
enviromental for ACD clients or regular
clients they care about money so you
have to translate what you simulate and
what you care into their terms that is
financial for example for offices when
you talk about comfort you talk about
well-being and you can explain them that
in ninety percent of the money spent by
any company goes into salaries so if you
provide a more comfortable environment
the people working there will go more to
work and will be happier so the
productivity Rises so in a way you care
about comfort and well-being but you
sell it as a productivity for the
company that will occupied in the
building and when it comes to houses
it's like it will have like a higher
rent or it will be solved more expensive
but clients or most of them it's
translating your terms into into money
through its real life
that question was interesting and I just
wanted to respond that because as as you
are presenting an analysis as a designer
not as an engineer you are in a way
taking responsibility of that analysis
is working correct and by not getting
any engineering consultancy you're
putting yourself into risk so that's
actually a good question because at what
point that's that's bringing up the
question at what point as US architects
should be involved in analysis and in
which point we should give that
responsibility to the engineers and
because if you try to take all different
responsibilities in the project such as
structural design environmental design
crowd simulation in some projects this
this will put you in a place that you
you can't move on any any mistake that
you make will both cause problems such
as in walkie-talkie tower that the the
shading devices they had to add and cost
quite a lot of money and so it's it's
quite a tricky territory and after that
I want to continue with the question
that's similar and I want to ask
students that about how you so two
things about a simulation one thing is
justification after after your
simulation how you justify your design
decisions or or is it just a validation
or do you continuously get feedback and
if it's if it's a validation to how you
make sure that your proposal the action
that you made is the right one and and
the second question is about the term
abstraction that actually came to
mind after seeing the the the the with
the CFD analysis on the topography and
in the landscape project in in which
extent that you think that the
abstraction of the geometry or
abstraction of the local condition is
acceptable and I think that's important
because especially if you are working
with multi criteria optimization in a
single criteria it's acceptable to two
to go into some sort of abstraction
because you can see the result directly
but if you are dealing with multi
criteria optimization the the
abstraction that you bring for each
different analysis model might might end
up causing a huge conflict and in the
mislead in the design so what do you
guys think about it I would like to
respond to the first observation which I
mean if you are a professional and
you're conducting analysis you have to
trust the results of your analysis you
have to make sure that you chose the
right team boots but I mean as an
architect I think I have the same I mean
I'm using the same tools so that
engineers use and I learned in very high
quality schools
I do trust the results I take real
responsibilities of the simulation that
I do I mean I wouldn't I don't see the
the reason why I should leave engineers
do I mean the same things that I can do
it's not about deciding how to split the
responsibility assess about what you do
so if you are if you're doing that kind
of analysis you have to trust the
results that these simulations are
producing so you just have to make sure
that you are doing correctly your job so
I don't see it is the region of
responsibilities between architects and
and engineers I just want to add on to
your comment I think it's really
interesting because it's it's also
looking at how we're using these tools
that are you know create from your
engineers or these specialists but it's
it's also seeing an architect's
perspective and how we could use it in
our perspective but also better inform
you know what is what what is useful in
our end but also trying to maybe consult
with the engineer and trying to
collaborate with engineers but also
using on our end so we we understand
like this almost like this understanding
of what is useful for us and the in a
way it's not it shouldn't be like Oh
engineer you do this and I do this it
should be like this collaborative effort
yes collaborative effort of
understanding our perspective in
addition we should understand their
perspective and they should understand
our perspective how we see the analysis
how they help us as a tool yeah I think
that actually the separation complete
separation between architects and
engineers is obsolete or should be
obsolete and it's more about who knows
and who takes responsibility for certain
aspects of the design often quite often
you can find like architects on a
consulting firm or engineers in
architectural practice and the more that
we can like integrate both disciplines
the richer the design on the on the
better
particularly with the case of
simulations that are quite positive
seeing of the river government they
don't need to design that actually even
scalable to water but I'd like to see
you gather it using these tools to
understand
stepping like mention of the process and
then whenever they have to see to the
main engineers that a speeding without
being the underlings project but they
actually grab the engineer by the
legate's is actually I know you can
actually obtain least RIT let's push
this over we side know where is occupied
the river even though is to you
calculate your it is project is one one
but imagination you know
whenever they go out practice on these
people unites each other
I know what you have you
in
whether it is something that happens in
reality a and the client wants to do it
why don't they you know hire a game
designer and not you
so the familiar question is like well
the architect maybe is using a tool from
another discipline to actually brings up
perspective from a different type of
problem that the game designers are
working on not so in a way is more
taking the advantage of what the
technology is kind of providing you but
looking at different lenses with a
different lens no I don't know what you
think but that would be probably one of
the main points today you know like how
what are the type of issues problems
projects that we are or you are
interested in or like in different
scales in different type of projects in
how the tools can enhance or not to
solve or to at least you know propose
alternatives or those issues to be
responded well in passing I can say that
the the the tools that we use in sed are
all developed by physicists and
engineers but what is very interesting
is that all they can all they do is
about the architecture essentially and
and so there are no apologies for us
getting the knowledge in the sense that
when we made the windows bigger somebody
criticized that too large because they
were criteria that were showing that
this was bad or you make them too small
then there was somebody else says no not
good enough and so forth so then by
using the software now
as I was saying before we understand the
principles better and also result are
able to use the same metrics by which we
were being judged before and we will be
founded false or no apology where's the
colleague no apologies for knowledge and
in fact for taking back what used to be
ours I wanna maybe just quickly to
follow up on the comment from Seema I
think it's exactly what you mentioned
something that was once may be perceived
as the concept of the Renaissance
architect the one who had the knowledge
about many different aspects but at a
level where he would be or she would be
able to communicate with the other
people about the project it's time comes
back with the use of those tools and
congratulations to the students across
the programs and the tutors for helping
you to tame those tools in those tough
deadlines and everything but at the end
of the day the value comes to the fact
that we can communicate not just with
the client which is money based
obviously but with the other colleagues
other engineers and the actual title
there is entitled called architecture
engineer which it's also useful to
remember that there's another side of
our education is architects which brings
me to a question which interests me more
because it's all about coupling
simulation physical and digital and the
tank project now on you seems to be
giving a potential to kind of run
parallel and something you said that you
might do and since you started very
early a couple of months ago I wonder
did you ever try the exact same
experiment both digitally and physically
because I think you captured the digital
and then you made it the physical medium
digital lets you do exactly the same
thing or maybe
sitting up toes yeah on the software and
then setting up the physical yeah
haven't done it before but just one
signal things in the back literally sat
down to try to see if it was working and
it kind of a little bit but I think it
would be nice to actually try to
validate corners beats details I think
the physical one is quite good for
details that in a way you would not you
would never be able to to check because
there are things that you you don't see
in the physical it has already digital
different see and suddenly the physical
you see how I'm not jumping and you
would never be able to do it in a
digital because neither you don't say
things jumping so there is that sort of
like let's say typically they would use
physical visible forest would use
physical to make sure that particular
aspects are not being bypassed in the
digital but they would never try to
match one to one because I have it
it's one one comment on actually I just
thought that this tools actually some
kind of language in which you
communicate with engineers and even if
you don't understand them completely as
an engineer engineers can increase the
resolution of your project but they
can't lead your project in that
particular direction so when you develop
it you can actually qualify it in a
terms which engineers will use so that's
why these tools are really useful as
this transition let's say tool we make
us I just wanted to make like a comment
on on on the discussion that we will
hold him before about him the way I
think like our cadets are like using
these simulation tools and I just simply
wanted to out like a a more critical
point of view because although I think
and I agree will calculate a random and
I really do like we can be really
serious about this and we can really
change my case if I take it like very
seriously when I when I do this kind of
stuff but if I recognize and I have I
think we have to be critical about this
that in sometimes I will really make a
very in use this let's say of
dissimulation tools in order to produce
very like sophisticated or formal
outputs now and it's something that we
do really well because in terms of
graphics I would do all this much better
than most engineers or whatever no so I
think that all the tools that we've seen
here or capes are producing like amazing
videos and outputs and everything but I
think that in our case and in these
programs and I think that we are trying
to do that also in the landscape
urbanism program we really have to make
an effort and not just only to focus on
because it's really easy to really go in
that direction or to focus on producing
like amazing and attractive outputs but
also trying to be accurate and serious
and really understand as you were saying
before
them good it's really behind him is each
of these models now and I honestly I
know that you have like very tight and
dates and you have to all really happen
and then how to use a software or
whatever
so I think that this is something that
we have really to take care of so
otherwise we are going to become
sophisticated graphic designers now so
if we really want to keep on playing a
relevant role in in these things we are
the first ones that have to take this
seriously you know and also try to be
accurate and also to control the kind of
inputs as we and not to worried that
that much only about the graphics Tanner
is it like a critical reflection
[Music]
I was wondering what would be the
outcome of combination of two of two
studios for a dissertation project
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
like change
what would you - what things would you
meet would you add to what you know what
of course we thought about it but it's
[Music]
for for no for it for entire set of
monsters so they that thing is biggie
okay we are we talked about it
[Music]
[Music]
have you thought about you know creating
a space where you can have a number of
physical models that I think the
physical model gives a certain extra
stuff very difficult explain that really
bad sense
okay thanks very much
[Music]
[Applause]
