yes so I want to say thank you so much
for inviting me to come I'm very honored
to be here and after 30 years also a
little surprised in deciding what I
thought I should do tonight I
I kind of assumed that the worst idea
would be to do a sort of a kind of a
lamentable anguish slideshow of past
work in which case I try and knit
together some semblance of memory and
kind of like hackneyed
anecdotes to somehow suture 30 years of
artworks together
and impress you and while you with a
kind of kind of a backward-looking
confessional of works and you know you
know and I kind of realize against the
huge lattice overview the usual linear
slideshow with a cringing narrative of
apologies and just awry in my stride but
you know so this idea of sort thinking
well you know what am I supposed to do
why am I supposed to account for this
stuff thirty years of it which what
percentage of out won't even recognize
given that I'm 53 and dementia is kind
of setting in so you know and also the
other thing is that given the presence
of Parveen atoms the idea of sort of
somehow kind of baring my soul to you in
terms of some first-order explanation of
the work would would kind of somehow
lead towards some you know confessional
you know she might miss country this is
misconstrue is some kind of confessional
apology in which case I'd find myself a
much deeper ship than their normal you
know because we know what she's capable
of you know in a nice way
I mean I have to say that I you know
knowing that I was coming here and my
kind of excitement about being here at
this place is one thing but my
excitement is really embodied by the
fact that I will at some point be
sitting there with Parveen discussing my
work which is so this is the kind of
preamble you know the the apparent 25 or
30 minutes that I'm supposed to kind of
some give some kind of account for what
I've been doing for 30 years which even
as I'm looking at these things it seems
yeah you know that's that's gonna be
tricky so I'm providing you with some
images which are you know you can look
up that might be relatively entertaining
give given the fact that we're moving
from the age of entertainment into the
age of light entertainment so this
should be you know you should gaze of
these things lovingly you know before we
get on to the kind of psychoanalytic
River section that's to come so and the
problem is I can't guarantee any kind of
real sort of you know entertainment for
you here nor any kind of tormented
romantic sense of sort of you know kind
of existential angst in which case you
might feel sorry for me if there's none
of that so on one hand provide pictures
which you can look at and be slightly
mesmerized by in a kind of sort of
slightly you know disinterested way and
then I can I'm gonna read from my new
novel actually which could sound like it
could be exciting but it's really not
it's the first public airing of this
thing so there's no guarantee that it's
going to be pleasant for you to hear or
pleasant for me to read it's fine but in
terms of fantasies we discuss about yeah
yeah so so again I'd like to do is I
would like to kind of somehow compress
the 25 or 30 minutes to kind of maybe 10
minutes just based upon a consolidation
of your boredom and my reluctance to
keep reading against the groans and
sighs which I anticipate will happen to
then somehow get to the point at which
me and Parveen will sit there
and then we'll have a conversation
that's that's the point of me being here
my monologue is kind of just a monologue
this and kind of an apologetic kind of
preamble a kind of a piece of
autobiographical chaos but without
anecdotes because I have quite cleverly
avoided talking about myself so this is
my new novel it's called American Psycho
revised by Brittany Easton Ellis and you
have to put it's very new to me too so
you have to apologize for my you know my
tongue-tied so anyway yeah American
Psycho revised by Brittany Easton Ellis
and the kind of first tech the first
kind of quote is the psychotic lapses
back into nature and that's Adorno so
the wellness is next to godliness is
scrawled in washed out rainbow lettering
on the side of the Chemical Bank near
the corner of eleventh and first and is
large enough to be seen from the back
seat of the cab as it lurches forward in
the traffic leaving Wall Street and just
as Timothy R price notices the words of
a bus pull up the advertisement for
Linda Blair miserable err on the side
blocking her view but price who is with
clients earth and 26 politely request
the driver to turn the radio down a
smouldering female acoustic version of
walk on the wild side on w fu V and the
driver white American moonlighting on
uber to fund some hairbrained startup
utilizing the intimacy of his Prius as a
networking two-faced duster by mindful
prices saying I'm creative I'm young
principled compassionate thoughtful in
essence what I'm saying is that society
cannot afford to lose an influence the
influencer like me I'm relevant the
price calms down
continues to stare out the cab's window
probably at the word love sprayed and
red graffiti on the side of a planet
organic on 7th and fourth I mean the
fact remains that sadly not everyone
cares about the planet and that's why
what we do is so important I love my job
you love yours but where do we go from
here back to Los Angeles because it's
cleaner it's not really an option I
didn't transfer from UCLA to Stanford to
put up with this indifference I mean
alone in thinking we're actually
changing the world here like in a movie
another bus appears another poster
Philip mr. habla replaces the word not
the same bus because someone has written
the word occupy over at burnings face
timothy alerts how we have a communist
up here I advise on radical
environmental policy regulations for
climate change we're establishing a
drop-in hub for the in the Hamptons for
Christ's sakes
the Carius traumatization blame
compassion compassion fatigue I say Oh
would you mind turning down that down a
little she says but distractedly to the
driver and all the women of color go
[Music]
do-do-do-do-do-do still billowing from
the radio sure I can do that for you
maybe the driver says timethere thanks
Simon that continues I could stay living
in this city if they just installed
aromatherapy grouch convention Grouch
prevention sprays in the cabs
maybe the witch hazel Orem or or or
lavender her voice softens even more
here either or I don't mind
she unplug her Apple earbuds verging on
complaint I hate to complain I really do
about the trash the unrecycled garbage
the poverty and disease about how toxic
this city is and you know and I know
that it's a sty she continues talking as
she opens her new Maharishi rollaway
backpack she got from the official
Maharishi website she places the buds in
their case alongside her humble 5s with
it's shattered screen
she had an iPhone X but returned it
because it was weird because she was
weirded out by facial recognition and
retrieves a copy of today's free news
pitch news newspapers shoved in the
footwell in one issue in one issue she
says let's see here
estrogen compound synthesizers detected
in drinking water
airborne pollution at an all-time high
at men going their own way celibacy
rally weird genetic mutations that alt
right she flips through the pages
excitedly to baseball players suffer HIV
denialism too many electric cars and not
enough hookups gridlock the homeless
various domestic terrorists asthmatics
dropping like flies in the streets
regretful surrogate mothers the tragic
real-life death of an actor killed off
in the script of a popular soap opera
immigrants who broke into a zoo to eat
various animals alive
the big question mass extinction or eco
fascism and the joke is the punchline is
it's not just in this city it's
everywhere it sucks wait more all right
baby sellers black market babies HIV
babies baby Junkers sackler Gallery
collapses on baby
maniac baby gridlock opiate art museum
collapses her voice stops she takes in a
breath and then says a slightly crazed
eyes eyes fixed on a beggar at the
corner of 2nd and 5th
that's the 24th one I've seen today I've
kept count then she asked without
looking over why aren't you wearing your
cute army surplus shirt with those grey
pants I shrug the price tells me she's
wearing a Maharishi Upside called m51
kimono rib jacket a maharishi white
eagle tall silk jumpsuit and maharishi
nike air max there's a moderately
interesting story on in the post
concerning two people who disappeared at
a party aboard a Greenpeace yacht while
the boat was circling the island a
residue of spattered blood and three
smashed Veggie we're champagne glasses
are the only clues foul play is
suspected and police think the perhaps a
machete was the killer's weapon because
of certain grooves and indentations
found on the deck no bodies have been
found there are no suspects price began
her monologue today over over lunch and
then brought it up her monologue not her
lunch again during Pilates and continued
continued ranting over drinks at
Harriet's where she'd gone on over what
Colonel I'm much more interest
interestingly about the Fisher debacle
the Paula Owen is handling which
concerns the illegal disposal of hormone
disrupting chemicals price will not calm
down diseases she explains her face
tenses with pain there's this insane
theory going around that if you can
catch meningitis from a vaccination then
and then having sex with someone who is
vaccinated means you can catch anything
whether it's a virus per say Alzheimer's
muscular dystrophy haemophilia leukemia
anorexia diabetes cancer multiple
sclerosis cystic fibrosis cerebral palsy
dyslexia for chrissakes they're saying
you can get dyslexia from a penis
I'm not sure but I don't think dyslexia
is a virus I say oh I know that they
know that it's a popular scare tactic
outside this cab on the sidewalks
pigeons peck they're pieces of diced
tofu in front of what used to be Gray's
papaya while a trans parade and its
chaperone police car cruise the wrong
way down a one-way street and the sky is
immense and blue and in an uber that
stopped in traffic across from this one
a woman who looks a lot like Luiza
Caritas waves over at Timothy Rand when
Timothy R doesn't return the wave the
woman straight brunette hair with a
short French plat Paul geek glasses
realizes it's not who she thought it was
then looks back at her own discarded
copy of a USA Today panning down to the
sidewalk there's an old homeless bag man
holding a bunting flag he waves it had
the pigeons who ignore it as they
continue to take turns to peck at the
remains of the tofu and the police car
disappears into an automated carwash but
then when you just come to the point
when you read your reaction to the times
is one of total and sheer acceptance
when your body has become somehow tuned
in to the insanity and you reach that
point where it all makes sense when it
clicks we get some poor homeless Nonsuch
who's making a stand and actually once
listen to me Patricia wants to be out on
the streets this those streets see those
she points and we have a mayor who won't
listen to him a mayor who won't let this
poor soul exert his rights
holy Christ let the poor soul poor soul
stay on the street if he wants let him
be let him live outside this madman made
goddamn misery and look you're back
where you started contradicted
number 24 no 25 who's going to be at
evidence wait let me guess she holds up
a hand attached too worried closed
between fingernails ashley courtney mold
and martin charles am I right so far
maybe one of evens banker friends from
oh my god these Village you know the
type the ones who make compensation for
the planet by asking even if she has a
nice free - free free range dry
Chardonnay
she puts a hand over her forehead and
shuts her eyes and now she mutters jaw
clenched I'm leaving and dumping
Meredith he's essentially daring me to
like him I'm gone
why don't take me so long to realize
that he has all the person
goddamn shame game show host 26:27 I
mean I tell him I'm hypersensitive I
told him I was still freaked out by
Fukushima I can feel the radiation in my
bones I can feel their pain their loss
what more does he want I make the call
active I mean I'm determined to make a
difference I'm optimistic about the
future about tackling mass extinction I
mean aren't you I say sure every
mushroom cloud has a silver lining
and all I get is from him 28:29
holy is have goddamn city of the
Damned I tell you she stopped suddenly
as if exhausted by the burden of
compassion and turning away from a net
from another advertisement remembering
something important says did you read
about the priest from that Catholic
school he raped two teenage boys
depraved pic Pig shocking really
shocking price waits for a reaction
there's none suddenly Upper West Side
it's cold for April and price walks
briskly down the street towards
evening's brownstone whistling no woman
no cry the heat from a mouth creating
smoky white dreadlock plumes of steam
and swinging her maharishi rollaway
backpack a figure with straight brunette
hair a short for French plaid and cool
geek grasses approaches in the distance
wearing a mare is she off to choose
Russia - she geisha print cotton
gabardine shirt with maha russia maha
cropped wide leg job as a Maharishi
Sueko Kiku no three-toed tabby sandal
and carrying the exact same Maharishi
rollaway backpack that price has and
timethere wonders aloud is it Victoria
Powell it can't be the woman passes
under the LED LED glare of a steep
street lamp with a troubled look on her
face that momentarily curls her lips
into a slight smile and she glances at
price always as if they were acquainted
but just as quickly she realized that
she doesn't know price and just as
quickly price realizes it's not Victoria
Powell and the woman moves on thank God
price mutters as she hear this she nears
evenings it looked a lot like
I move out the kitchen into the communal
space where a table has just been
casually set an array of mandarin goji
candles from scent lit on small dishes
nothing about stash is maharishi nor
Vanden but he has a cute green streaks
he has a cute green streak in his hair
he stares at an Abba promo from the last
century playing on TV while vaping Laham
Eickhoff abandon looks over where he
probably drugged to the eyeballs stash
doesn't move hi Patricia Bateman I say
I'm Patricia Patricia Bateman I say
sorry
waving they see my reflection in a
mirror hung on the wall and smiling at
how radiant I appear she waves back limp
nice - pretends to inspect her
fingernails - just get them out of here
prices seething they're both wasted and
I want to watch the goddamn blue planet
Evelyn is still opening large bottles of
artists and beer and absently afflicted
by some residue of the days before
plant-based sushi saying we've got to
eat this stuff soon or else we're all
going to be poisoned he's got a cute
green streak in his hair I tell him but
this vape isn't even CBD Bateman
timotheus says still glaring even yes I
say to you Timothy you're being
problematic Oh Patricia even if she says
but she's the girl next door that's
Patricia you're not problematic are you
honey even those on Mars and I moved
towards the bar to make myself another
drink girl next door to me Thea smirks
and nods and then reverses her
expression hostile asks evil and again
if she has a safety pin even and
finishes opening the beer bottles and
tells Courtenay to fetch stash and
Brandon so we have to eat this now or
else we're going to be poisoned he
murmured slowly we have to eat this now
moving his head taking in the kitchen
making sure he hasn't forgotten anything
we're all going to be poisoned anyway on
account of all the toxic heavy metals in
shiitake mushrooms Courtney says before
exiting I have to talk to you evening
says what about I come up - no he says
then pointing at Timothy ax - price
timotheus still glares at him fiercely I
say nothing and timotheus and Tim and
Timothy it takes another drink a beer
sweetheart beer sweetheart he sells
tells me and place the sushi on the
table Tim pours on the pan and wondering
where evylyn got the sushi the enoki
mushrooms the shiitake mushrooms the
pompon mushrooms and even mats who cut
suit Aki or seen
so fresh and their piles of wasabi and
pops of ginger placed strategically
around the platter but I also like the
idea that I don't know we'll never know
will never ask where it came from and
that the sushi will sit there in the
middle of the glass table from Furnish
green that evenings Hipp father bought
him like some mysterious apparition as i
set the set the slate plated down i
captured glimpse of my reflection on the
surface of the table my skin seems
glowing because of the candlelight and i
noticed how nice the little DIY trim I
did looks I make myself another drink I
still worry about the sodium level in
the faux soy sauce four of us sit around
the table waiting for evening timethere
to return from getting price a safety
pin I sit at the head of the table line
taking large swallows of J&B Vanden sits
at the other side reading
disinterestedly from one of evens old
threadbare student books called the
revolution of everyday life stash has
pushed a chopstick into a lone piece of
anivia mushroom that lies on the middle
of a plate like some shiny impaled
insects and the chopsticks stand
straight up
stash occasionally moves the piece of
sushi around the plate while the
chopstick but with the chopstick but
never looks up at either myself or
Vanden or Courtney who sits next to me
sipping Saki from an old tin mug
evylyn and Timothy had come back perhaps
20 minutes after we seated ourselves and
even looks only slightly flushed
Timothy eclairs at me as she takes the
seat next to mine a fresh drink in hand
and she leans over towards me about to
say to admits to admit something when
suddenly even interrupts not there
Timothy Timothy then barely a whisper
girl boy boy boy boy girl girl girl he
gestures towards the empty beanbag next
serve and and timotheus shifts her glaze
her glare to evylyn and hesitantly takes
the beanbag next to Vanden who yawns in
terms of page of the book while
everybody even even says smiling pleased
with the meal he has presented dig in
and then after noticing the piece of
sushi that stash has pinned
she's now bent and low over the plate
whispering at it even his composure
falters but he smiles bravely and chirps
Misaki everyone no one says anything
until Kourtney who was staring at
Stash's plate lifts his mark uncertainly
and says trying to smile is delicious
even stash doesn't speak even though
he's probably bored at the table and
can't identify with anyone else in the
room but hair is red voluptuous
so jet black clothes neat and fitted her
personal net worth proves it presumably
obscene and not a green dollar to be
counted and this is why she can afford
to lack any intrapersonal warrant and
sits there as if perplexed by the piece
of plant-based sushi as just as the
table is about to start eating she sits
up and loudly declares pointing an
accusing finger at a plate it
moved
Timothy Blair's at her with a contempt
so total that I can't fully equal but I
must throw enough energy to come close
Vanden seems mused so now unfortunately
does Kourtney who I'm beginning to think
finds this monster attractive but I
suppose if I were dating Louise and
Carruthers I might too even laughs good
naturedly and says I've stash you're a
riot
and even then then worriedly tempura
evylyn is an advocate for corporate
sustainability for your information I'll
have some I tell him and I lift a piece
of eggplant off the platter though I
won't eat it because it's fried in
something other than extra-virgin olive
oil that the table begins to serve
themselves yes
stop I'm happy totally have to stop
sweet we do this that's good
I'm happy
[Laughter]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
these ones yes kind of a bit of a weird
view from there it's just a it's just a
random hodgepodge isn't yeah probably in
the past few years yeah
okay I won't forgot to talk for five
minutes before I asked you can I tell me
when to stop
is that okay for the back
[Music]
[Applause]
there's a desk to you yeah as far as I'm
writing him and se and then realized I
was I would place your work in the field
of comedy comedy is not laughter
laughter deals with disfigurements of
many sorts and of course even in recent
times the maimed the disfigured the
mutated think of the human known as the
Elephant Man were invited
they were exhibited to invite an
exciting after you have gestured to
Victor Hugo's 1869 the man who lost and
referenced a chapter heading
it was the utilization of the
unfortunate by the fortunate his face
had been chiseled the mouth enlarged the
lips cut away the gums laid bare the
ears distended the cartilage cut the
eyes displaced the cheeks enlarged and
more the face bears a forced and a
removable laugh audiences responded with
laughter laughter in the face vibrators
injury none of that has to do with
comedy but it is raw material for you
here is my definition of comedy the only
psychotic thing the element in comedy
that satisfies us that makes us
appreciate it is full human dimension
not excluding the unconscious is not so
much the triumph of life as its flight
the fact that life slips away runs off
escapes all those barriers that oppose
it including precisely those that are
most essential those that are
constituted by the agency in the
signifier the phallus is a signifier of
this flight life slips away runs off
escapes all rules and regulations
through something that is produced
between the original and that original
after you have worked it over and in
between space something new produced
through the similarities and differences
between the two it is I'm sorry I'm
respecting this audience who may not
know your work something new is produced
for the similarities and differences
between the two it is no longer goriias
original representation no is it the
Chapmans image what emerges is a new
Goya you can't say the Chapmans fathered
this new Moya and you can say the Goya
fathered the Chapmans in the in-between
life slips away escapes so this might
seem odd because your work seems
more much more about death than life but
I think it is about life
so that's trust that is just my my
comment what I wanted to ask you was
there isolated questions but great deeds
against the dead and I do wish she heard
it from Gloria's disasters of war it's
being constant in your world I think
since your GCSE exams so once you're
working on this at the same time the GS
were done we worse it's true we went to
cramming College in Notting Hill but
what you had done was to take the
figures of the tree there are your three
dead figures on the tree in the original
and you made a sculpture of him a really
horrific structure where you went much
further innocence
you fragmented them all you read them
over the tree and I think it really
contesta okay only because actually I
kind of because I think the they're kind
of the kind of embedded metaphysics and
the prints in terms of the grain and in
terms of the kind of the kind of accent
their existential you know kind of
density of the drawing compared to the
the sculpture which was just even by
enlarging work was already a way of
actually sort of shedding the client
that kind of you know that intensity of
the work so they were they were in it's
kind of in its kind of extension into
natural real life scale and I think I
think in a way it became kind of like a
an awful an awfully superfluous
representation of something which had a
kind of a kind of a veracity in a sense
of violence to it I mean I think I think
and I think that in a sense that that
what's interesting about the transition
from one to the other is that is that
there's a certain amount of optimism
that kind of went from one to the other
where but if you that if you that if you
have this kind of drawing which is kind
of this big that has this kind of
focusing intensity to it that with you
if you if you if you engineer a version
of it which is life size that you would
presume that if you had some kind of
empathy for or some compassion for the
images for the for the subjects of this
image that you would necessarily
translate it and it would become even
more intensified by its becoming real
life because real life you would you
would get confused for real life has
been real real life is being
naturalistic but in actual fact the idea
that entropy you know those things
became they became actually trivial
because the materiality of her there was
no intent to actually try and sort of
sustain the kind of existential value of
the world from this from its from its
own authentic incarnation
what you mean by gentleness yeah it had
a kind of a you know in a sense I guess
the reason that we are have been kind of
repeatedly interested in this image
because if you were going to take this
as a kind of a forensic error document
of kind of humanistic pain in its most
elemental form like as if somehow you
could come some I'll pick one thing
which would be a fossil of our pathos
and then you emptied it of its pay for
us by producing this thing which does
nothing more nothing less other than
copier but in terms of the idea of
actually how that thing is reproduced is
that the materiality of it cannot
sustain you know the reason that we keep
big is because it's like saying you know
the the metaphysics involved in this
work or I would say superimposed over
this work because I don't think I think
this I think what's interesting about
that work is that it undermines its own
metaphysics is our our repeat return to
the scene of this crime it's not in
order to kind of amplify as metaphysics
but it's to actually drain it but I i
I've been talking them sorry in my head
was the etchings of the which you you
paint and I think what you've just said
is not quite the thing you would say
about that I imagine what so this is the
period when you are making the plastic
mannequins yes and even casting some of
them yeah and the deadness is really
quite I mean what what made you grip on
it so much because he then did well the
glasses were you did all 89 a times
before you bought your first made those
one of them into tiny tiny sculpture yes
and then he did something is he
videos and they haven't stopped but you
bought them anyway two sets of them yeah
and I just it's awesome it's this
particular one graty's gets deadened
somehow so I wonder wait how did it
begin do you mean the big sculpture of
stuff no no you're interested um
because I think that there's a kind of
you know Weaver on a very you know pack
nerd historical view of this work the
idea of saying the emergence of a kind
of a notion of progressive modernity
which must have at some point there's
kind of a some evolutionary sort of
crawling from the of the primal soup in
terms of like shifting from religious
icon iconographic representation where
all representation is determined by some
you know some some you know formal
requirement to describe the divine you
know for purposes of a kind of formula
so the idea of saying that well was
three down already
so so the idea so the idea of saying
that what's kind of you know that you
kind of lay the blame for you know
certainly with you know goriias sort of
interest in enlightenment in the
transition in a sense form this notion
of an art which which has a kind of a
pragmatic relationship to iconographic
representation to an art that suddenly
invents this notion of the psyche that
has this concept of what it is to be
human which is not negotiated by some
divine notion of redemption and quite
clearly this one picture that if you're
going to look at this kind of this kind
of divergence away from the
representation of the body as being
something kind of you know sometimes
something which which has this kind of
transcendental accord with sort divinity
is this suddenly you have this image
where there are three people hanging on
a tree and in a sense there's a kind of
a really interesting reverberation in
terms of its trinity there are three
figures the kind of the fact in which
this tree is you know okay it's okay
it's it's kind of optimistic to think
that it has some cruciform element to it
but it is something to do with hanging
it is something to do the idea that what
happens with these bodies as opposed to
walk by all other bodies representation
represented in Christianity is that what
they suffer is they suffer the burden of
physics which is Mitch means to say that
these bodies drip into the soil and
there's no redemption for these for
these figures so this is a hugely
heretical image you know hugely
heretical image it's kind of like you
know the whole bone painting Dostoyevsky
says that you could leave your faith by
looking at ISM and and the brilliance of
this painting of this kind of elongated
christ is the reason it's elongated
it's because it's demonstrating the
effect of gravity and the effect of
gravity on christ's body if you imagine
the site of that to work out that
actually more comparing in terms of this
ass of your own crucifixion it's not
redemption the sense in which this thing
has some kind of an ability to return as
new what you have is
you have this thing which is longer than
it was when it was when it was you know
what that demonstrates is this sense in
which this new forms of religion as he
physics which Goya was you know this the
idea that well here was this thing where
what is so brutal about this images
there's no sense of redemption in this
image at all these bodies are doomed to
gravity and so that enter that into the
into the you know they're kind of the
simple redemption of matter I was
actually going to ask you what other
dating altarpiece is the same thing
because Christ you know you're kind of
the kind of the lepers you know sitting
around you know as Christ is on the
cross Christ is also a little you know
that there are these kind of these
interventions in terms of the sacredness
of the flesh where suddenly you see that
the flesh of Christ is being also played
during play burden which is kind of like
you know how that was that kind of
fitting with the notion of you know
Christianity
okay basic quotations for me sighs yes
in question there is fundamental appeal
to a reality a version of reality that
offers nothing practical nothing
utilitarian nothing than for me to human
scale nothing useful
nothing truthful another quote a return
to a set of ideas and a set of failed
solutions over and over as we have
stated many times like a dog returns to
its vomit which is also the title you
gave for the little pictures we are
interested we're interested in the
redemptive value of transgression
producing things with zero cultural
value to produce aesthetic inertia
and particularly since in what you have
to say about the repetition of failed
solutions and one says in every artists
goodness a and here you reference to
things that I found really interesting
one was Assad and the other was Rosalind
Krauss writing on solve it and if you
just stay with sod for the first you've
said about a hundred twenty days of
Sodom while the book may be exhaustive
in terms of this description of death
and torture ultimately the reading has
nothing to do with that it has to do
with the individual passage of wasteful
time I agree but then I have a question
where one defeat thought about it
and which is what God does in his
writing how he treats the body and you
have said it at one point you say
something about you want to know how
bodies become buddies and I think this
is one maybe place where I'd like you to
you elaborate Pat's off-the-cuff perhaps
if salsa travels but there is a
fantastic violence on the body so you
haven't vanished imaginary space in
Assad every thought of that mirrors
everything is reflected and so it's a
closed space where everything is visible
and as it were the violence you desire
has already been displaced by something
from the stars like a self religious
instructions and Juliette gives anything
yeah how you get rid of desire first you
lie down and given think about something
it's besties but the end result of this
and I agree with the wasteful time
things together but what do you how to
think of this sardian body yeah I mean I
don't know how to think about at all I
just would like to know yeah yeah yeah I
mean I guess I supposed to you know
thinking about sad you know rather than
you know the idea of saying that why
would 120 days be interesting from the
point of view of
disavowing the content you know which I
guess is what I'm kind of suggesting
that what what's interesting about art
is that you have this insider thing
cyclope did description of transgression
where transgression in itself has no
intrinsic value that what he does is is
that by kind of by exhausting the plane
of description do you end up with no we
aren't you end up you end up where when
desire itself sexuality itself become
completely obliterated there's no you
don't recover any sense and I guess that
my interest in that would be the VAT
Deena Ford Assad's encyclopedic
description of of blasphemy after
violence would be an entirely perfect
example of capital okay because because
in some sense the idea of you know Freud
says is that the idea of kind of you
know voyeurism the idea of scope of
failure what it does is it supplants the
object of sexuality with things which
become desirable without the actual act
you know so the purpose of the
repression
so the repression of the primary desires
in favor of secondary returns and I
think in some sense you could look at
that side has been this perfect example
of you know in terms of the deviation of
how the notion of a naturalistic notion
of sex
it's completely it's completely kind of
you know it's intensified by the idea of
saying any kind of in 220 studio 103
days by you know the Pasolini film you
know it culminates in that thing where
the person has the the the binoculars
and rather than wanting to see the image
they turn their don't they turn the
binoculars around so that in fact what
they can't see is the image of I think
it's someone being tortured at the end
so it demonstrates the notion of saying
that you know the the idea of assuming
that sexuality has some natural kind of
frame of reference it's not there's just
inconvenience of this just what the
place of this tortured body is
undergoing to it but that's you know it
was just a query but the second thing is
was the Rosalind Krauss and she was
absolutely brilliant on when talking
about Sala which did very irrational but
system systems and she compares it to a
passage in Beckett's Malloy where you
have yes it's by sucking stones and he
has four pockets two in his jacket two
houses and therefore Stern's in each of
the pockets and he's going to book take
them all you so he does this and if
they're many things how do I know that
I've rotated each of the stones and so
there's a as he goes along if he makes
more rules to be sure that every one of
the sixteen stones would have done in
you know whatever party you know it
would go on and this is compared to a
Solomon's
what you referred to it I have just one
thing to say about it which is that some
of its work and and the stones story
they are a system which revolves with
nothing inside empty space I don't think
your work is like that and well okay I
mean so you know there's something kind
of extremely visceral about you know
Beckett's account of this stone
circulation - sucking pocketing
returning returning the confusion
confused about what the process of these
own languages and the interesting thing
about Krauss applying mr. Soloway is
that you would see this all of it is
more within the register of something
kind of like aesthetically scientific
schematic there's a structure to it so
you know the analogy wouldn't seem to
fit really but in terms of the
relationship between solo it and say the
kind of an expressionistic painter right
the next expressionist ik painter would
seem to be someone who who has a kind of
a confessional attachment the work that
the work the representation the way in
which the work is perceived that would
someone viewing work could actually
engage with the notion this is a
language that they could then you would
look at the soul of it so what's the
soul work compared to a monk you know
you'd look at soul of it and say well
it's barren it has know if
expressionistic value whatsoever it has
i would say that not facetious but i
think our work is kind of in terms of
you know if you think about the kind of
the schematic procedural mannequin
pieces you know in a sense that you know
that what they do is they you know they
present this notion of saying that they
have this content
but in fact all they are is there with
some kind of exaggerated huge but that's
why there are two examples I want to
reference in relation to the failed
solution
I wonder if they made any difference
because they seem different in kind to
your usual interventions one was bright
all right apparently your gallery Bochy
is brewing over 22,000
oh I didn't know I think it was kind of
like it was like okay you painted over
it of course it was a crucifixion
I was I only met this very recently and
i felt quite uncomfortable you had
worked on a canvas of which there was
only one unlike the etchings so i had
got myself out yeah i had not really
pushed the idea as original but did it
give you any slight qualms whatever
oh the misapprehension is thinking we
had you know that somehow the kind of
the gesture of working on a gun on a
Goya print was kind of you know you
could compensate that by thinking
there's lots of them lots more of them
so this gesture can be kind of you know
limited damage limitation to just one
set of Goya Israel you know one one
Bruegel you know I think so far we've
worked on maybe eight sets of disasters
war maybe yeah I don't know how many
Caprice I mean our aim is is is to work
on all of them
nobody said the misapprehension is just
simply because there's one Bruegel that
you what you thought we'd have any kind
of qualms about working on it
no we're we we have a slush fund of all
the money that's paid for the big
lawyers in this case but now we have to
send these kind of sort of you know kind
of anonymous people into auctions and
stuff to buy the Goya's for us because
they're wise to it and also actually the
price of Goya's has gone up for us
drawing the serious thing about this is
that is that you know the purpose of
drawing on these things is that you know
you you know if you want any questions
let me just do my last thing the second
example of something new was this 2017
show it plain Southern which so clearly
shows the process you have a building on
what was filled endless you because you
include things through the giant and the
combination of breathtaking and and very
funny
but what's topping is the collage that
you collage stuff with going edgings
left me speechless why could I have the
14 images that I just want shown one
after the other place and we then we
stop is it because somebody to do this
is definitely not gonna do it
[Music]
oh no these are not so what be sure ah
this lot the collage ones but you can
see this was this was building on the
building on the building everything from
the past work no can we just stop can we
stop briefly but it's not the one I want
so we can go on a bit further message
free again yes Anu the Goya yeah and
what I think it's very interesting why I
bother to bring it up is I don't know
any collages to just business and that
is because you are copying the plastic
kind of draw nice things ongoing thing
is that what you can do is you can solve
you know they they're kind of you know
there is a rare there's a kind of sort
of an arrogance in terms of the fact
that if you do something you know that
the idea in the incapacity of say for
example a commentator who will call it
and vandalism there's something quite
hilarious about the fact that you know
that that vandalism is a kind of an
incredibly impotent complaint really
given the fact that actually there's a
kind of a you know there's that there's
an element of artists and all skill in
terms of a lovely little paintings and
so that so that what's what's
demonstrated in that kind of that kind
of gesture of kind of like you know kind
of anger by saying it's vandalism is to
say they're all quite clearly not
actually looking at it so so the idea of
saying that on the one hand that you
could you know that part of the argument
for these works when the the Goya the
drawing on the Goya's display some kind
of talented drawing but it kind of cited
some slightly mitigates
the the the obscenity by saying well at
least they kind of did something quite
nice on it you know the think about the
good collages it's quite funny about it
is the you know it's like they've
just cut things out and stuck them on
the idea of the guy who has been sort of
kind of like transgressed by pretty
snake that's just too much to bear back
it's just too much to bear
you can draw all over them but as long
as you're showing some skill but if you
stick on a stupid picture of children
the game in this sense is that there's a
kind of detail yeah and I've never seen
a collage issue this is because it's
your signature which is copying well you
know the only time you know this is I am
gonna go I mean they're gonna fall into
anecdotal storytelling it's funny it's
funny it's just funny I'm not gonna
apologize for it but I mean you're
putting places on lawyers whatever you
know sticking pictures on but when we
had that when we had the Hitler
paintings we had Hitler's in a box we
bought these Hitler's and they sat in a
box the Box glowed for about six months
it was like Indiana Jones and the Temple
of Doom we we didn't have the guts even
singing out of the box because it was so
like it's like oh it's a great idea of
draw on Hitler's yeah but I don't want
to take them out I don't even want to
touch them anyway came the day when we
were very you know kind of brave one day
we got them out and
I remember you know you know the thing
is the same thing like working out what
would be the most insulting thing we
have got this great book this amazing
book called Hitler the unknown artist
which well-known genocide but the
unknown artist you know so anyway so so
we had these do these kind of Hitler
watercolors you know creatively
ostensibly
you know someone must be fake some of
them must be real also actually what's
interesting is that we had these some
provenance letters from people saying
you know I first got this this this
painting from this Hitler original from
my dentist's pet dog sister's wife's
husband so these kind of extracted sort
of you know anyway so when we sat down
to paint these things I remember I
started the first one I have to say that
Dino's was a little bit more squeamish
about it you know and so we were kind of
like what would be the worst thing what
would what would be the worst thing for
Adolf what could we do that would be the
most awful thing it's like I think maybe
rainbows rainbows so if anyone's ever
done watercolors this is kind of
extended anecdote but you know when you
do when you do when you do watercolors
you tend to do this you know you tend to
use the brush and then you dip you know
you do to the paint and you have this
more two colors for any amount of time
you there's this kind of the club
artistic tick that you have where you
point the brush with your mouth just so
you get a nice line so I'm doing this
thing drawing these water this kind of
rainbow coloring it in pointing brush
and Deena said do you think that when
Hitler did that watercolor
he pointed it with his mouth do you
think I've got a little bit of Hitler
DNA in my mouth okay so I can't resist
and it's got nothing to do anything that
I would like to know what you think of
Francis Bacon's work um I just can't
help thinking Freud eggs and bacon
brilliant you have a show good fried
eggs and bacon
I'm interested in the relation between
redemption and redeem ability because if
you do these things on a reproduction
yeah especially did you tell these days
you can redeem anything yeah you could
just you know press reverse yeah and
it's gone
but clearly you've done something which
is irreversible and unredeemable at the
same time some somewhere around in the
background is the larger meaning of
redemption and redemption mm-hmm I
wondered if you could enlarge the last
[Music]
I don't think I mean I think that you
know I mean I guess it's the idea of
sort of rewriting Bret Easton Ellis's
but from the point of view of a woman
you know or working on Goya's work is is
you know this is that it's kind of
echoed by the idea of me and Dion's
working together you know the idea of
two people making one person's work is
that it already
it already pushes to work into an area
of kind of untrustworthiness you know
because you know for another kind of the
kind of I guess the conventional notion
of an artist is that that they do
something which can be treated as though
it's trustworthy because it's a thing
which has no reason to lie and it's a
thing which has a kind of a slightly
confessional element in terms of the
fact that the kind of transaction
between the person who looks at it and
the person who makes it is that you
trust that they know they're not lying
I don't know I'm joking so the idea of
working on someone else's work I guess
it just extends that notion
[Music]
one of the things that I think of again
University of goryeo work
I think the Freud's Rat Man yeah and the
Rat Man came to Freud told him a story
of torture a rat torture right got his
name the right put up the anus as
torture and what Roy described was and
the inner this it was Rat Man was
horrified when stop saying this but
Freud discerned look on his face that
was one of enjoyment so it's like a
hidden enjoyment in a sense of what
you're bringing out his is that
enjoyment
oh you're bringing it out that's really
true because I think if you look at how
easily is to sort of separate yourself
from the experience as the workers by
calling it shocking when you call
something shocking
you kind of sever any kind of engagement
with the world saying that it's nothing
to do with the end with me because my
experience of it is that I'm rejecting
him by saying is this you know but
actually in a sense you know shocking is
is this is a kind of a little bit more
little bit more um symptom you know it's
a symptom of coat of pleasure of course
it is
yes is there a mic here it's just kind
of curious how you felt when you and
your brother were somehow working on
your own work we we were talking about
this last night one asaji storage
facilities basically burns and you guys
had to recreate basically your health
pieces and in some way at the same time
that kind of reminded me a little bit
and in conversation we were talking
about about the saris idea babe you know
burning his his paintings and it's kind
of conceptual yeah as a way to sort of
almost liberate this kind of conceptual
art and even one Praveen is talking
about collage even Baldessari's idea of
putting dots on things in sort of
subverting these things and kind of
curious how you guys basically thought
about that reconstruction aspect because
very different from a lot of the other
work on working somebody else's yeah I
mean we were very happy when we heard
about the fire because before it was
just Damien and Tracy and everyone else
and then someone said we actually had
the biggest piece in there which is not
so funny it was like here so as there's
a were clip took two-and-a-half years to
make and you know and I mean the thing
about this is that you know it's you
know people phoning up saying is it true
that the hell's on fire
you know journalist who the hell's on
phone yes you know you couldn't not see
that as being you know the word when I
existed was a very you know problematic
work in terms of where it was shown and
stuff so it didn't it didn't exist in
any kind of positive eyes way you know
in actual fact what you could notice is
that once it was burn people had much
more affection for it its loss and it
was once it was turn to kind of dust it
was like but also one of the things that
we did is we also you know we had this
idea you know we had this idea of
thinking well you know you know this
idea sort of thinking that you know
making art is a kind of you know failed
you know but that kind of its kind of
failed but it doesn't is normal it's not
heading towards the notion of perfection
you know in our case but the idea of
sort of work burning was that you know
pragmatically it was upsetting because
that thing didn't exist anymore but the
art but the but the but the wealth of
stuff that came from it that was you
couldn't fail to see that was not was
also kind of worthwhile was also
actually became part of the work you
know it was really you could really see
that has been kind of actually quite
there's a way of actually you know that
the idea that actually what you could do
is he could repudiate the sadness that
you you were expected to feel by your
work burning and then say we'll just
make another one the
there's nothing more sort of blasphemous
than piggybacking the sense of sort of
sentimentalism that you'd feel if your
work was burn you know so being and guys
I can never do again we just instantly
said we'll just do another one you know
and so in some sense is what that did is
that reinforce the notion of making the
work that the work wasn't kind of
organized our some kind of you know
tricky emotional you know and also
actually you know we we had this idea of
saying that what we would also do is we
we would remake every other work of art
that was burned
we've remade traces ten and then we've
got all of it and we couldn't be
bothered with doing any more so we still
have traces ten which is really kind of
flat it's quite good I tried to get we
tried to give it to the tape you know
but they wouldn't take it they would
have to scared of Tracy yeah we actually
offered to I threatened to put it in a
Luton ban and take it and dump it on
their front lawn I want to ask you about
I rather cruel thing you did it's a four
foot 8 inches I think it said by the
hell nutrients is it
oh he's there's a lot of work no but we
did the big massive sculpture with him
on his computer and his find you I don't
know this bee was kind of rubbish
because he was uh he was in an
appropriate subject
you know he was a completely
inappropriate subject and I'm you know
the idea of sort of you know kind of you
know this notion of saying that you know
who Berman this kind of Superman well
you know you're confronted with this
night ideas saying well hey he's an
appropriate subject but also be he's
been presented as this kind of unit this
is Superman you know Superman because
actually you know you don't need you has
that great thing is history it's not
it's no longer survival of the fittest
it's the survival of the weakest what
determines civilization is not fitness
its weakness which is a kind of a
fantastic idea it's a brilliant idea
that's not I mean that you know poor old
Nietzsche's misaligned by you know this
notion that what he presents us the idea
of the over man as being something
better than human he's just saying
there's something beyond human not
better there's no kind of you know
there's no fascism involved in it
whatsoever you know in your mind it
[Music]
10 the other way around have a not
surprisingly a kind of religious source
and to get particularly I mean it seems
me one of the cruelest and at the same
time funniest still statements by like
st. Augustine is by someone says you
know will the body be alive in hell he
kind of says yeah but you know it's
gonna be so like me kind of different
yeah the body in hell it's gonna be
slightly different in the following way
you can't fake now you think that
someone actually seriously proposing let
me think about engine I want to give a
kind of accurate answer on this hell
business and I think I mean in a funny
way he's right I mean in a sense our
notion of
death whatever is culled from a life
which however terrible can at least end
the sort of pretty one in one that just
can't wear kind of immortality is just
the most vile thing in the world and
what just outside the world
I read obscurely I mean it also kind of
touches on the question of like what the
difference we the joke and laughter is
because I think that obviously enjoy
catastrophic events even though it's
very soon repressed or you know children
are told not to look at it or whatever I
mean I seem to remember like the fifties
the entire period when you're in the car
being told not to look outside this has
been accident why you weren't allowed to
you know you just saw why can't we pop
and disappear but there is there's like
a very discrete difference between a
joke and laughter yeah the joke why did
the chicken cross the road to get to the
other side which is not funny but why
did the chicken kill itself to get to
the other side which is funny oops
mr. born involves pain and death and one
just involves a chicken
[Music]
yeah I had the image of this man who was
terrified he was gonna be eaten by a
chicken so it's just the kind of fairy
would have and checks himself into a
hospital and they say after four night
we think you're cured and you can God he
said what do you feel about chickens he
said I no longer fear that they're
coming to eat me and so everything's all
right
please there's no fight does anyone told
the chickens okay
[Music]
in the back yes yes I have them like fun
um have you ever or do you ever have in
mind when you're working that perhaps um
future generation may also take your
work and then build upon it in the same
way that no I just wondered if you'd
ever reflected on this about what the
future life of your works might be or if
they may be treated in the same way and
if so how that might make you feel I
mean well I always I've always kind of
looked at the mannequin feet of
mannequin sculptures for example
thinking that um you know maybe in the
future that you know there'll be a kind
of an inversion of what's what's kind of
valuable about it that in some ways what
will happen is that they'll get the
sculptures in 100 years time chocolate
sculptures away and they'll have the
sneakers I don't know really you know I
don't really it's kind of it's a
horrible thought slates um when I was
looking through years last holiday stamp
doesn't mean you know I don't you know
we used to do this thing I just you know
I mean it's kind of minty but when we
made some sculptures before we had this
idea of saying God you know what about
the idea of the future what would happen
if I think I had to go and go to the
tape once when they had something and
they went through this there this pencil
and me they there's some winner kind of
my wife's they kind of pointed to
everything thing and said how's that
made how was that made and I said mostly
superglue at which point they just
winced to every dinner because obviously
that you know at certain point maybe
2023 everything we've ever made it in
would just like put super glue in it
there's gonna be this kind of like
something like Dafoe
an event where everything just can go by
that and there's not gonna be any work
left but what we used is that we used to
know I know what you said you guys - no
no it's a future work I don't know
really I mean you know they I mean I
don't really think that ask I had this
idea of thinking that you know that if
in the future there was a kind of you
know because we're kind of bossy now we
haven't mentioned kind of mass
extinction which is kind of like the
figure we should have talked about but
imagining and you know in the near
distant future versus this idea of how
human culture will be sort of perceived
or raked over by alien anthropologists
that will come down and work out what
was going on with this kind of
supposedly intelligent set of people
they kind of they've come across the
Tate Gallery and it would be kind of
burning embers and kind of bricks and
whatever and let's step over the walls
and into this you know space that they
would see as being some kind of sacred
kind of area in which these rituals
would have occurred and they would look
at them and think wow you know what
these people you know obviously art must
have been this thing that they venerated
above everything else this thing that
they poured money and and they had this
value and they'll look for it and they
won't be able to find it in this gallery
and what they'll be doing is they'll be
stepping over Carl Andre brickworks
without noticing but that's actually not
part of the building you know that's
that's my that's my image for the future
well good fight your attempts to
sabotage me
[Laughter]
