hello everyone I'm Lawrence parse and
I'm one of the directors of the housing
and urbanism program at the graduate
school at the architectural Association
and we're here in London today to tell
you a few things about our program for
those who are interested perhaps in
joining us so the Housing and urbanism
program has been part of the heart of
the Graduate School heart of the AAA for
four decades now and we're very much at
the center of activities here but I
suspect there's a lot that a lot of
questions that you will all have now I'm
here today with two of my two of my
friends and colleagues I have with me
niot ipagora
who is one of our faculty and I also
have with me Zack Lawson and later we'll
introduce to you some of our other
students what I want to do today is to
tell you a little bit about about the
program and I want to tell you what it
is that makes our program distinctive
I'd like to help you understand how the
program is structured and I want to let
you know who we are what kinds of
students come and join our program and
finally to let you know something of the
student experience that we have now the
the program is one where we have quite a
generous relationship between students
and faculty we have nine regular faculty
members who are with students throughout
the course that is for a 12-month ma or
16 month and mark you will be seeing all
nine of these tutors regularly every
week so I'm part of the senior
leadership of the of the course that we
have working with us six others who are
all involved in practice and bring with
them a wealth of a wealth of knowledge
about the field urbanism and the field
of Housing and can help develop the the
understanding of the
the program now what makes housing and
urbanism distinctive well first of all
we don't have a particular attitude
about style we don't have a particular
attitude or about form or a formal
preoccupation or a methodological one
what we're really most interested in is
making sure that students have a very
good understanding of what makes cities
work how people live in them how changes
are being developed in the world of work
life
we want students to have a good
understanding of the kinds of plans that
are driving urban projects around the
world the sort of trends that are
forcing shifts in the way in which
projects become successful we want
students to be able to have a very
critical and well-founded understanding
of the field and part of the way that we
get there is that we ensure that
students have a lot of opportunity to
compare projects from around the world
so we not only look at European examples
but we're very clear to understand some
of the challenges that students face or
that cities face in in other parts of
the world we want to make sure that
students also understand that cities are
about an everyday kind of life so we we
go to some lengths to ensure that it's
not just plans and not just forms that
are discussed but the challenges that
cities face we want students to be able
to recognize what it is that is going to
be driving change and introducing this
sort of complexity that they'll have to
deal with them and they practice as
Urbanus so if we look at the trends that
are driving the knowledge economy today
that are driving change and the way in
which cities work and how they develop
that gives us a chance to help students
understand what they need to know to
become more effective as architects
practicing as urban as
now the course is structured in three
main components on the left hand side
here you'll see that we've got a list of
courses and I'll come back to those in a
moment on the right hand side you'll see
that we have a series of design
workshops and study trips a particularly
intensive international workshop that we
run every year with host University and
host cities elsewhere and we also then
the third and main component of the
course all work leads toward a student
dissertation either for an MA or an M
arc and we'll come back to that in a
moment now if I focus on the courses you
can see here that we've we run through
the first three first two terms we run
six courses in these six courses form
the foundation of a student's awareness
of the history the traditions of the
field current changes and the way in
which economies are altering in the
cities around the world we also want to
make sure that students spend a good
part of their time in the library as
well as the studio so one of the things
that actually makes our course quite
distinctive is that we really bridge the
gap between a good understanding of the
history and traditions and literature of
the field as well as the design aspects
of the field but in order to do that
effectively we also need to allow
students time to get out in the city and
see the way in which the city is
changing and in that respect London is a
marvelous laboratory so right around us
we have opportunity to observe the way
in which work spaces are changing we're
finding new ways to bring living
environments and office environments and
making environments together we we teach
students what the state of the art is in
housing design and so we focus a lot of
our attention on understanding how
how housing becomes part of successful
plans that we see emerging around the
world so we spend a lot of time
understanding how plans work who are the
actors who will enable plans to become
successful and the key thing that we're
trying to do is to help students
understand how their design work will
enable more effective collaboration to
deliver outstanding examples of urban
projects around the world today so we we
go we spend time with our courses
showing students how projects have been
developed what was the architectural
content who were the actors that enabled
enabled cities to effectively bring
design together and to do this students
have to understand how to draw in such a
way that they will actually bring bring
their own sort of skill and their own
artistic talent their own insight into
the process that will support others in
more effective building in the city this
also means that we need to show you
something about the history of the field
so right down inside the the heart of
the program we we show you a lot of the
trends that have driven previous shifts
within the field of architecture and
urbanism so we take you inside the
design thinking that led to new
approaches within modernism that
developed different attitudes about
housing that now create an opportunity
for a much different kind of city today
now the third component I mentioned to
you is our design workshop or I'm sorry
our second component or the design
workshops we'll come to the thesis and
dissertation work in a moment the design
workshops are something that run
throughout the year we begin with
relatively simple exercises that bring
the students together as teams in the
autumn progress towards more complex
challenges where we take London
our laboratory in taking London is our
laboratory we have a city where we have
all different kinds of environments from
office environments industrial
environments high-density environments
environments that are developing rapidly
others that remain in process for you
know quite long periods of time we we
see a city that is got almost every kind
of condition available for students to
observe and so our design workshop
allows students to take live challenges
and work on them in such a way that they
can bring to bear architectural
reasoning and help and and understand
how architects participate support a
process in which political actors
investors and others have to make
challenging decisions now this is
throughout the year they work in teams
within the design workshop we have very
close tutorial relationship throughout
the year one of the things that we're
always doing is trying to ensure that
everyone gets an opportunity to push
forward their ideas in the context where
they use their drawing and their
intellectual development to persuade
others what might be the strongest
approach both to design and to an urban
strategy and to get we work together
very closely with faculty members who
were involved in the field and are doing
this as part of their job day in and day
out now I'd like to come to the third
part of our program and that's the
dissertation the design the design based
MA thesis or the design based the design
based a Marc thesis but before I do I
would like to give my students a gloss
and a chance to describe some of his
experience
the way in which the design workshop
relates to the relates to the thesis
that he developed but just to sort of
set the scene for all of the thesis work
that students do they take an existing
challenge within the city for example
the transformation of a formerly
industrial site students then begin to
investigate how the interiors of some of
those sheds or warehouses might be
altered but then they also start to ask
the question what can be added to this
kind of environment that will genuinely
transform it into an area of where
people can live work effectively so in
the background of our program is always
the opportunity to work on a live
project and understand how design will
help when address current trends so Zack
is going to talk a little bit about the
way in which he worked on it on a
project in Camden Town which is a
Central City part of London and then the
the lessons he learned from that that
work led on to some ideas for his his
current thesis project absolutely hi
everyone
so as Larry has just mentioned within
the city there's a series of urban
conditions and in the temperature
workshop in Camden we focused on this
trend of return to the city centre of
living environments but also
collaborative environments work
environments and really the center of
the city as a as a platform for us
architects to engage in building robust
social networks and there's a series of
values which are really driving the
ambitions for these new residential and
and also work environments values such
as collaboration diversity mobility
accessibility convenience and even even
learning parallel to this the group
which worked closely with with Larry and
also Anna Shapiro and Dominic popper in
parallel to the
living and working environments we
looked at neighborhood institutions and
and service deliveries looking
specifically at supermarkets health and
well-being centers and schools and
started to explore potential
investigated potential synergies and
relationships within these service
providers but also within housing and
also workspace environments and so in
doing so we could fundamentally alter or
explore these institutions how they
operated in how they delivered a service
to a neighborhood and we explored this
through a spatial understanding of
spatial rethinking and so when I say a
rethinking spatially a great precedent
that comes to mind is the D and Charles
Wiley theater in Dallas by rethinking
the theater as an open ground open open
plain institution by moving the front of
house in the back of house to above them
and below house it started to ask
fundamental questions about how a
theater operated within the city what
would it begin to do outside of its
traditional role and it also extended to
questions about how various programs
might begin to relate with one another
also in a time scale and also asked
fundamental questions about funding
models of that library and how
operational costs might be covered so
really a priest in like that begins to
ask a series of complex questions which
then we start to explore within a
certain site so in Camden
we specifically started to began by
challenging the idea of the Camden block
the Camden block interestingly enough is
made up of a series of landowners and it
becomes extremely difficult to densify
and also create areal buildings of value
and so as I said by challenging this
block morphology we began to ask
questions
now sorry we began to try and
demonstrate how possible transformations
might begin to take place and how
manageable they might be so by
reorganizing the block by exploring a
series of different morphologies we
began to understand that if we opt for
deeper floor plates we could begin to
create more diverse organisational types
of flow plates how then that might
influence a series of different
stakeholders to come into the building
begin to potentially create a very
diverse range of tenants within the
building and then also how that then
begins to inform a different
collaborative workspace within the city
of Camden and that's that's kind of the
core of what led on to your arguments
for the thesis wasn't it when you then
switched over to the - the idea of a
library that could be at the heart of a
new kind of urban strategy for a for a
neighborhood transformation yeah so by
rethinking you know as a single building
you could also then begin to imagine or
establish a vision for a wider wider
area and so my thesis begins to question
the role of the library so in in recent
decades the library has become in
community environments sort of hubs for
education health entertainment study
whereas in corporate environments
becomes a place of collaborative and
sort of diverse work spaces so as well
as as well as understanding these and
sort of the ascendency of maker and the
knowledge economy really there's a
series of new design questions but also
procurement challenges which begin to
need to be addressed in a sort of a
spatial manner yeah and so that's what
I'm exploring in my thesis which is
entitled common libraries that's
fantastic thanks very much thank you
you know we if we can have a look at
what Zach has just described he's
described the way in which
a series of a series of lessons learned
through engagement with the challenge
that we see in London enables him to
pose a design problem that he can work
on through his thesis now I just like to
tell you a little bit about the two
different kinds of the two different
kinds of master's degrees we offer we
offer an MA that is a 12-month program
and we offer a Master of Architecture
that is a 16 month program now both of
these place emphasis on an ability to
understand the relationship between
design and enabling the formation of
successful cities but the difference is
that the MA is focused a little bit more
upon the analysis of projects and
lessons learned from elsewhere in the
world and how they might become
applicable to a challenge that a student
may encounter in the future the earmark
by contrast is focused much more upon a
comprehensive project where the emphasis
will be less on the analysis and more on
the development of the designs it's
really about design development
developing your design skills as a way
of reasoning through a process now these
two these two different master's
programs then enable us to have a fairly
comprehensive approach to the
development of new Urbanists architects
and others who have some background in
spatial design and enabling them to
become very proficient in the
relationship between design and urban
reasoning now we're going to now ask the
question who are we and in order to
discuss that more I'm going to ask Nara
to tell you a little bit more about the
students who come into our program yes
the question of who our students are
so the background Oh father our students
is very international any given year
about a third of our students come from
Asia another third comes from the
Americas and I know the third come from
Europe or the Middle East you've always
seen the example of sac who was
introduced earlier that he's from
Australia and I would like to introduce
two more students along this session one
of them is symptom syndrome is one of
our students from this academic year and
she has been having the chance you
learned about London as this design
laboratory but also she just came from
the field the unit trip where they've
been learning also about Berlin yeah so
hi I'm Simran and we just like you
saying we came from Berlin a month ago
and the city was just so exciting the
first thing you notice when you you know
arrive in the city is the infrastructure
and it's extensive public transport
system and then you know we we mostly
explored the city on foot and we we got
a better understanding that way of
Berlin's famous and historical block
structure not only that we were guided
by our own tutors and architects in the
city and we just you know we discussed
how how the Berlin's
of the cities pattern and green has
evolved all over the years I think
the most important part of the trip was
you know getting to talk to the
architects whose housing projects we
actually got a study internally as well
and I think that was really helpful
because we could relate it back to our
our design workshop back in London but
also on you know on a personal note just
this chance to get to know the
background of you know my fellow
classmates and you know getting to learn
the different skills and the cultural
backgrounds they've come from it's it's
just one of the integral part of the EI
education so I think I think the trip
was certainly
great learning experience and now you're
applying all your knowledge right to
your design worship the enter man
whatever we learned throughout the trip
it's definitely being used amongst
ourselves and the students great yeah I
mean following through that I would like
to point out with the majority of our
students are architects or hold a degree
in architecture but not all we have had
over the years outstanding students that
actually could be coming from finance
graduates or they are geographers or the
research anthropologist so we have a
very diverse sort of student core we're
looking for students that are curious
and motivated and passionate about
cities and we want them to contribute to
this outstanding design process and
really contributing they succeed to
succeed in this design process where we
are looking for live and work
environments and we're challenging how
this has been changing over the years I
would like to introduce you to another
student of us Elise Elise actually has
graduated two years ago from our studio
and he already started working in the
real world so we want to share a little
bit of how he learned from his thesis
avaa and what was the challenges of his
thesis that later on he could apply it
in the real life I leave everyone and in
fact one other thing that I would like
to say about Ellis is that he in fact
joined our teaching team this last year
on her study trip abroad so last year we
went to work with the city the city of
Bogota and the Universidad de los Andes
and and Ellis was a key part of our team
then
a map project we'll be going back there
again this year in fact and so I'm sure
yes but anyway Ellis we were hoping you
would tell us a bit about your thesis
yeah for sure well hi everyone I think
well I will give a short summary I think
the whole experience has been fantastic
since I came to London and I think the
way this program showed me how to
experience the city and experience where
is architecture in relation to the city
is unique and basically you know I can
tell you I have to talk about my thesis
and I have a very funny story about that
because everything started with an
article on the newspaper so basically my
thesis is about how industrial
landscapes are changing how can they may
interact with housing and even the
knowledge sitting which is one of the
things that we explore quite in detail
in in our program so in you know I come
from Mexico City and actually I was
trying to do my thesis in Mexico but as
Larry mentioned this program shows
London as a lab and the good thing about
this lab is that you can use this
knowledge and put it all over the world
because we learn from cities like London
like and Europe that especially Berlin
as well and Switzerland how can we use
this methodology how the trains are
moving how societies are moving a whole
technology is moving and basically all
this exploration bus place in Park Road
here in London which is a largest
industrial estate and the good thing
about this place is the proximity and
connectivity with the city centre so the
question the main question was like how
can we retain employment in the city
centre instead of you know what
in the last century we did we we
separated the uses the industrial I went
outside of the city but now we live in
an area where this kind of elements can
have direct synergies and can contribute
to a new kind of societies so you can
see by the the use of different drawings
we start to explore the conditions of
the area and actually
this kind of industrial conditions are
repeated all over UK so you can see how
Pedroia had a very unique context but
then you can go to Leeds and apply the
same condition so you can see how you
know what you're looking at now is a
drawings about the canal how probably
that was a main a way to connect goods
between the city and industrial state
but now it's changing over time and now
this kind of environments are completely
transforming into residential units or
environments that we can see even in
Kings Cross in internal control and in a
way what you're doing here is looking at
an environment that looks very chaotic
and you're finding a way to see it as a
regular pattern in the grain that can be
worked with in design terms yeah and in
fact it's really interesting how you
mentioned the library in the previous
because you have to go back in time to
see how this housing topologies can
shape an industrial landscape you know
because this induction lasts but they
don't have any value at all there are
very messy but how look into the right
typology can develop the different kind
of environments and can bring people to
those industrial areas so you know the
problem with the industrial landlords is
like they want to completely change the
use of that into either housing or
indoor shell but now we can see with
these drawings that a possible to senior
year can be developed from yeah and in a
way what what you began to do is to
think about the way in which living and
working or coming so close together that
a robotic site could be a key part of a
new residential neighborhood right and
this allows us to think differently
about the kinds of collaborators that
will come along and really build up a
new kind of city in areas that we used
to think had only one sort of you right
yeah and actually we can see how the
landscape sometimes we talk about a lot
the public realm what we see the public
remo on the isolation but I think this
kind of thesis explores a different way
how can we approach the to the to the
public realm is a place of knowledge
it's a place of
explint annual event that can change our
everyday life so you can see this the
last drawing is what happened in the
term of your apartment probably will
look a little bit messy but I think it's
very dynamic and one of the things that
we want to bring to this in dosha all
areas is vitality intensity and 24/7 use
which is really hard to achieve we have
examples like Stratford East Village
where you know it's only is that so it
will change over time but we need this
kind of explorations on how to activate
and bring more to our cities yeah I mean
I think one of the common aspects of
these theses that you and Psyche are
developing is a multi scholar approach
to other cities where we are looking at
the other vision of what's happening in
a very large scale but at the end you
also have images of what happens in the
room and I think the articulation of all
these multicolored
relationships is very enriching and is
very challenging as well through the
process yeah and it's very challenging
and now what you mention already in the
real life if I can say it like that
but you can see how all these
explorations that we will have the time
to do it now private investors are
looking for that they are really
completely changing they were thinking
they don't want the traditional product
because families are not interested in
that or young professional like us they
want to move over to more exciting
environment where they can they can
develop and can create a community a
sense of community which is really hard
for new kind of housing developments oh
yeah
well I noticed that there are a couple
of questions that have come in from from
some of our participants online one of
the questions is can they apply without
an architecture degree is an
undergraduate yes as Nyota has mentioned
we have we do have applicants that come
with other degrees what we're looking
for though our students who will
nevertheless have an interest in and a
curiosity about cities and their design
and an ability to develop some kind of
design attitude
understanding that doesn't necessarily
mean that one has been trained as an
architect however most of our students
are architects but but we can we can
certainly accommodate students with
other degree programs in their
background now another question that has
come in is is what are my career
prospects after I complete this program
and I think that's a very interesting
question is since we actually have Ellis
right here so Ellis is now in his in his
second is working with his second
practice after after having left our
program but perhaps you'd say something
about why you were able to get your
first job and then what led you to think
that that wasn't enough and one today a
different practice me a second one well
actually it was very interesting and I
think the key point was the interview
that I had with my previous practice and
I think the interview where I could
explain my whole thesis in one hour
one-hour interview no fight exhausting
but they can really tell how you
understand London and UK because
basically the two practices are one of
the top 10 in UK so you can see that
they are very interested in this kind of
background that you may have about the
city how you understand the city how how
do you know the different areas and
basically I have the opportunity to work
in two different sectors which is the
business space and housing and what this
this program brings you that you will be
very flexible if like you want only work
in housing you will be able to ship
around business space as you can see
from different MRC sees we explore a lot
about employment because it is about the
performance and production of goods but
as well living them them between them so
I think that interview Gabe game is a
you know they were really excited about
drawings I think one of the things that
I really developed in this play was a
way to express myself in terms of
drawings yes well the first two moons
were quite challenging you know studying
it but then you see the reward of that
and then they're very interesting
have a few diagrams you can express your
idea how you understand the different
skills the molarity that you were
talking about and my experience in the
first practice was basically business
space and one of the very interesting
facts is like in our workshops we
studied about what a connectivity
between between different cities and now
in London is happening the hs2 yeah and
I will bring people from Leeds to London
in about 30 minutes 40 minutes and you
can see how I explore it the first two
months and as well in my thesis because
it's a background of my thesis but you
can see now how clients are moving too
based on those kind of different economy
so I think and then well I was a little
tired of in the space when I switched to
housing and I in my second interview I
presented my whole thesis well again
once again and you know that the
director was really excited telling me
like ok you really understand you could
really get it you don't have to spend
three hours explaining your main points
you really get your idea and one of the
things that this program gave to me it
was just to summarize yeah don't you
talk a lot just go straight to the point
and I'm very happy about that yes well
you know I think we're we're near nearly
at the end of our time but I would like
to encourage any of you who have an
interest in our program and would like
to join us applications are now open and
we are certainly very happy to ask
answer any additional questions you
might have we have a really great
admissions department and they can also
answer most the questions you might have
and if you want further information in
the detail of our program you can write
to us directly in housing and urbanism
so thank you very much for your time
it's been a very nice opportunity to get
together and share with you our program
thanks very much
