thanks again for coming today to be
symposium so let's get started
it has a meter above sea level exists
what climbers call the dead zone this
altitude marked the limit for human
habitation about which our species
cannot survive which right in the life
zone the earth surfaces the land oceans
its geological layers we need the
dynamic atmosphere sabab all affected by
gravitational and magnetic forces this
living world is a constantly being
transformed in wrapping in copper this
by our social economic and political
interactions rebuilding our integrated
dependencies on the earth and its
systems according to science fiction
writer Kim Stanley Robinson science
fiction is a general method right in the
relationship between person and planet
he mentions that the great 19 tables in
novelist we're all about the relations
between individuals in society at the
level of nation or at the level of the
city for example Balzac was all about
Paris Dickens was all about London
Tolstoy was all about Russia but Kim
says that what you get in science
fiction is about a relationship between
person and planet and for instance Jules
Verne was all about travelling around
the world in 80 days HG Welles was all
about traveling to other planets in the
relationship between them so for him
science fiction should be more than the
relationship between individuals or
between individuals and society but with
the relationship with the planet along
the same lines the economist Kate Robert
highlights that economics from ancient
Greek meant the household management and
when Sinha fond
wrote his pamphlet called the economist
he was expanding the meaning to be about
the management of a single state of land
by the end of his life he talked about
the management of the city-state Athens
an economy being the minami the
management of that 2,000 years later
autonomous meet rise to the next level
and said economics should be about
management managing nation-states todate
kata robert says that now is the time
for us to rise to the next level and
from the household to the city to the
nation towards the planetary household
this urgency of thinking redefining in
place in a relation to the planet
upfront is being put forward by these
and other disciplines and here today in
this imposing we would like to
contribute towards this aim from the
perspective of design from the
perspective of landscape architecture
and urbanism and to do so we have
decided to get involved in conversations
with other disciplines so this is not an
inward disciplinary reflection but
rather an ad work cross sectional
conversation that includes political
theorists geographers sociologists
writers urban theorist so we can take a
position and put forward where relation
to the planet is or lies and what the
agency of design means so welcome to the
design agency within earth systems
symposium my name is Alfredo Ramirez I
co-direct a program here called
landscape urbanism and together with
Lindsey Brenner who runs research group
monsoon assemblage in Westminster
University and at wall who is the
academic leader of the department of
landscape in Greenwich we have a
carbonized discipline
an invited participant John participants
but also established ones to look to
these planetary lenses to reflect upon
the complicity of design in the
destruction of the planet to question
the two-dimensional land based policies
by which we order our lives and our
relations to the earth to explore
material dimensions of Earth ground an
ocean and in the intertwine is to the
socio-political and to imagine relations
between the socio-political and earth
systems differently through design so
before we get started what we're gonna
do
myself at and Lindsey we will give you
just short remarks or why we have
decided to organize this impulsive and
so I will give the mic to Lindsey to
give us some words on that okay I'm not
too good with mics I tend to make them
crackle and roars okay developing the
ideas for this symposium with alfredo
and ed has been an opportunity to bring
questions that I have been grappling
with within the framework of a research
project into conversation with there's
the project I'm referring to here is
Monsoon assemblages which is a five-year
long research program funded by the
European Union
that is if breaks it doesn't take it
away from us
that has brought together a wonderful
interdisciplinary group of researchers
and designers to spend five years
thinking about and designing with the
monsoon a vast tropical weather system
that wraps around the planet whose
cycles while never stable are being
further disrupted by climate change and
explosive
growth we live in a world where
political geography science and spatial
practice have created divisions between
land sea and air land is portrayed as
solid divisible and the basis of human
habitation the sea as fluid indivisible
and hostile to human settlement and air
as gaseous invisible and the medium of
human life the extraordinary thing about
the monsoon is it cuts across these
divisions it inundates lived
environments every year
connecting land with sea and sky it is a
spatial practice a designer if you will
that reorganizes air water ground
settlements cities buildings and bodies
through heat wind rain inundation
saturation and flow uniting science with
politics and policy was affect in
engaging with the monsoon we have
embraced the idea that it is not only an
abstract climatic system but what
anthropologist Tim in God calls a
weather world and we've begun to work
with it as a research partner and a
design consultant but given that the
monsoon is a rather mercurial template
for ethnographic and spatial theory
analysis and design this has raised a
number of questions for us about
methodology about cartography
ethnography scale design and agency we
are hoping that these questions will
resonate with some of those that the
group we've assembled today are
addressing and I look forward to
learning from how you are thinking about
them
[Applause]
my research and the work that I do with
students the University of Greenwich
particularly at the Masters level we are
largely interested in our cities
landscapes and territories are made and
remade constantly and how this occurs to
the relationships between people and
places within that larger frame this is
sort of three I say priorities that we
tend to give one is an interest in very
site-specific investigations but
embracing and maybe an expanded notion
of site to understand site as having a
broader geography than that contained by
the brief of a client or us as tutors
and to understand the tensions and the
contest stations that exist between
these different understandings of site
we're also interested in the
relationships of specific sites to
different and larger scales whether
these are the scales of the region as we
understand somewhat Patrick Geddes is
Valley section or the political and
economic structures they come to play in
within our within our sites or the
process that we hear the ecological
processes and systems that Lindsay and
operator have described and how these
different scales interact with each
other and we're also interested in the
relationships with the future how we as
designers have
certain agency through actions of making
drawing modeling and mapping but also
how non designers are able to engage and
their capacity to make change within
their lives and their environments
informing change from a non professional
perspective and how they often work
within more marginalized or can work and
more marginal locations across the three
priorities I'm constantly reminded of
the voice of my PhD supervisor Suzie
Hall who consistently asked me who are
the winners and losers in the places in
which I was studying and I think this is
a large part of my interest in working
with students and and probing the sites
and projects which we developed and how
we understand who gains and who loses
out through our our design interventions
and also the contradictions that exist
within the work of landscape
architecture and urban design the
environmental damage wrought by the
construction industry or the
displacement of populations due to
large-scale developments are important
questions which I think need to be
critically addressed in every project
that we do just to step back a bit from
the work that we do in Greenwich and
let's maybe extend a thanks to Lindsay
and also to Alfredo for greater
organization of this event on the ground
I think it's a great luxury to be called
an organizer but but to turn up and not
about organized very much at all so
Alfredo thank you very much to you and
your colleagues for sex in the deal
and so just just before we start with
the Franciscus I just want to also
commend a few ideas of why we are
interested in this topic at least or the
organization of this important at least
for us in landscape urbanism
I guess this symposium is an opportunity
or space to discuss the ready
Phoenicians of certain terms mentalities
or practices that we often take for
granted and that in fact are narrow
categories to describe planetary
conditions so for example if we talk
about terms can we challenge the use of
climate change as a way to design within
design practices as a way to describe
the unique set of climatic disruptions
happening nowadays and his climatic
breakdown a more precise term to
describe the sectional and origin
conditions of this state rather than
suggesting that climate is changing at
it has always done and climate breakdown
can designate the climatic conditions
such as the one we live in it is
necessary for us to tribe he's being
dismantled or for example what about
mentalities behind term Anthropocene
that describes our relation to the
planet by designating humans as the
major force that modifies it
geologically and it's capitalist in
better position to the Signet is
responsibility knowing the human species
but in the economic system that is
driving the structure destructive
transformation in the form of capitalism
and so it is not all humans but some of
them especially those that are putting
forward capitalism which modifies the
geology of the planet in the set of
socio-political relations by which these
are being produced and design in
landscape urbanism here at the IEA and
we use concepts such as landscape and
territory to describe the field
of our practice where we as landscape
albanist operate but they can to be
inter interrogated not only because the
two terms landscape and territory our
terms that are limited to their history
from where they rise but also because of
the geographies to which they belong in
the Western tradition so perhaps and
hopefully the symposium is the place we
need other terms or other categories to
describe a relationship to the earth and
in this means our capacity to relate or
not to other geographies to other
histories to other cultures that the
planetary scale entails so I guess we
won't be asking questions about how
sustainable or resilient our landscapes
and territorial practices can be in
times of planetary crisis but rather
what are the consequences of these
limited perspectives to these other
geographies to these other cultures and
histories are in this sense the
symposium of all I see it as a critical
device of all those relations that are
implicit in the organization of the
planet and relations are a need to be a
reveal and there are these guys are
embedded in the profession without a
constant constant question issues such
as transnational material transfers with
political consequences rebuilding global
commodity change and the policies that
drives them all around on these you will
see several examples in the
presentations you will see throughout
the day they are all issues that
modifies the space ground water
atmospheres and practices in which
designers are inevitably involved so
just to conclude I like to say that this
planetary or earth
case that we are proposing here is not
in you know and in the technologies that
say behind
in are not new neither we are trying to
rebrand ourselves or our approach but
it's again it's just an opportunity to
shape our understanding in agency within
contemporary conditions with the
awareness that we need to pay attention
to its histories and consequences and if
we want to know where they are coming
from who has designed them and with what
intentions so thank you and let's go
with the first speakers
[Applause]
okay
[Music]
it's a it's a real honor to be chairing
the first conversation which brings
together people I know one person I know
quite well
Marty through his practice and through a
number of conversations we've had over
the last few years and Caroline Knowles
who I know less well but I feel that I
almost know her better through her
writing and my enjoyment of it the way
in which we're going to structure the
first conversation I just said Marty and
Caroline we hadn't talked about how
we're gonna do this but the way if there
were the way in which I think we're
going to do it is Marty and give a
presentation of his practice work and
then Caroline will respond to a Marty's
presentation but also present some of
her work and begin to weave some of the
work and ideas that she's working with
with the ideas and projects that Marty
is working on but to begin with I think
I should do something quite formal and
read out their biographies so bear with
me and I always make many notes
Marty Frank but Laurie is a landscape
architect and horticulturist trained at
the University Greenwich and the at SAP
in Barcelona he's the founding principal
of EMF landscape architecture and
international institutional
interdisciplinary practice of experts in
the field of urban and environmental
design Marty founded EMF in 1999 after
professional and academic training in
London Amsterdam and Berlin and through
his practice Marty explores hybrid
relations between ecological systems and
cultural constructs to inform projects
and build up new realities since 2001
Marty has taught at yetzer in Barcelona
and has been a visiting teacher in
Versailles RMIT in Melbourne kataka de
Santiago de Chile
and spoken at conferences worldwide
currently Martius midway through a
design practice research PhD at RMIT and
Melbourne very busy guy EMFs work has
been internationally published and
awarded with the land zine international
landscape award in 2016 American Society
of landscape architects honor award in
2012 the European landscape biennial
rules the barber Prize in 2012 as well
select a finalists in FA D 2012 rules of
barber Prize 2010 and European prize of
public space in 2012 before you start
applauding I'm also going to choose to
Caroline because I think then we could
just get on with it no but it's
important I didn't to appreciate how
significant the speakers are within the
contest that they work Caroline Knowles
is a professor of sociology Goldsmith's
in London and she writes about migration
and circulation of material objects some
of the social forces constituting
globalisation she's interested in cities
having done research in London Hong Kong
Beijing Fuji had a Sai Baba Kuwait City
in Seoul and she's currently the
director of the British academies cities
and infrastructure program which
compromises a portfolio of 18
multidisciplinary projects delivering
with local partners vital improvements
in infrastructure in cities in the
global south caroline is the author of
many books and papers and she
specializes in visual spatial and
biographical methods often working with
photographers and artists most recently
with Michael tang at the nine yang
Unitec Technological University in
Singapore and Douglas Harper from the to
Quincy University in Pittsburgh Caroline
is the author of flip flop journey
through globalization's backroads I've
got to say this is the book that I've
probably read three times and I every
time I'm sort of enjoy more and more
please check it out published by Pluto
press in 2014
she's the author with Douglas Harper of
Hong Kong migrant lives landscapes and
journeys
published in 2009 by the University of
Chicago Press and Caroline holds a major
live a human research fellow
titled serious money a mobile
investigation of plutocratic London
which I can't wait to hear more about I
think I'll be abandoning all the other
books that I have just to read read
Caroline's work please join me in
welcoming our two speakers and we're
gonna begin with Marty's presenting his
work hello everyone it's an honor to be
here I used to come to the AIA when I
was studying student matter image and I
would never thought that I would ever be
talking to any audience here so it's I'm
a bit shot and I'm very impressed to
have to have a dialogue with Caroline so
I'm going to do my best
I'm a practitioner so I but I'm gonna
try to make the effort to going from
very specific project in very specific
locations to mostly reflection that come
after the work has been done but before
before before I do that I can not stop
saying that
I am Katalin I am from Girona near
Barcelona and the politics are
representing my country part of them are
in exile and others are in prison and
there's a criminal trail that it's gonna
start in a couple of days and they may
be facing 25 years of prison for the
[Music]
accusation of rebellion so if I would
not say that I would kind of say that
this is normal and this is completely
not normal to me so just need my body
needs to say that okay so if I focusing
what's my professional practice
i I guess what what we do through our
projects and it's not all it's not the
mission itself but what we probably are
interested are in these synergies
between ecology culture and production
so trying to - exactly really find
things that that work in a multi-purpose
way and I'm gonna show in a number of
projects organized by four
topics the first topic would be these of
inducing undoing processes or processes
or
of reclaiming reusing and recycling and
then I would say this is a process where
maybe time is reversed and it's put that
works so let me talk about a very
special mission that we once got which
was the deconstruction of a village
whole holiday village in Coptic rebels
Natural Park and the mission was really
to go to Dubai and do so actually to
deconstruct 430 buildings in order to
restore the habitat this is a very as
you can imagine very uncommon project
and the project itself had five lines
were one was the construction the other
one was recycling the materials and
another one was its extracting the
invasive flora which was colonizing a
hyper protected landscape and the final
purpose that we asked to do because it
wasn't there was to make a walk because
the degree of protection of the space
was initially not thought for having the
option to have a visit but as we will
see in our presentations of bodily
engaging with earth and site it's very
relevant to us and this project it's not
about doing a master plan this project
is about doing a process it's it's an
action plan more than a master plan so
this is the diagram where we kind of
explain first how we extracted the
native flora it's an ice plant
Pavarotti's a dual it and then let it
dry and eventually use it as refill
material how we deconstructed the upper
part of the buildings I don't think you
see the mouse
okay so what when we up so we the part
of the material which was no say native
we deconstruct it crush it and manage it
inside but then we had to take it
outside of the natural park and then it
was real it was reused elsewhere has a
sub base and then the native material
was used on site to to to do the
landfill I don't want to go it very much
into the details but I'd like to show
these images of the process you see it
was a was this say small bungalows
location but what was important here was
that the in order to talk about Earth
systems if you want to have a beach it's
rather simple you need a river taking
sediments to the water if there's no
sediments getting to the water there's
no Beach and then by constructing those
paths system that they did this one in
the shape of a dike all the sediments
were trapped so that the beach was
disappearing so for instance part of the
project and this was done obviously with
expertise of scientific people that
advisors was really to bring back the
processes that they were already there
and they were disrupted by the
organization then for instance here we
did a path further up the foothill so
that the water could keep running and I
liked very much this quote by a Catalan
artist that I translated myself into
English I'm not sure it will make sense
but it says something like go and put
the call back into the earth scatter the
bronze in the mountain the marble and
delivery so that they represent what we
like the most the place which they came
from
these artists will come another times in
the lecture is somebody who really has a
very say respectful
relation with nature yes so this is the
after life of projects once we left rain
came and then the sediments went to the
beach and the process the process of of
reconstruction just had been restarted
then another thing that we learn about
this project is is the this idea of the
importance of subtraction and the fact
that when you when you keep removing
things you would never stop almost and
and and what it's laughs it's so
incredibly powerful so what here we just
show that the path that we left at the
foothill actually it was passing on top
of some of the former houses on the
basement of the houses and and this now
takes quite a lot of importance but at
the same times all the skyline all the
the water is and this is how I think how
the landscape expresses that its most
and again a little quote by France for
the but he said something that I truly
truly believe says absence this minish
mediocre patience and increases great
ones has the wind wind of the candles
and light the fire when you are in such
landscapes also sometimes in very urban
conditions you do we live in a deeper
saturated places so sometimes this
action of I'm doing and I'm subtracting
and then finally the absent of the
absence of things give space for many
other things to happen this is a very
different project but where we really
work with the very similar principle it
was a project done when when Barcelona
was going through the
hardest part of the of the economical
crisis and we had a tiny budget to do a
temporary space in the Barcelona grid
Champlin and
[Music]
Erika's Alexandra she might have said
the idea was that what was there it was
our resource and and then we have find
the basements of some building as you
see the the paving remaining some
building and then next to it there was a
place where the district would have
accumulated materials for building the
the sidewalks and so so because we had
extremely low budget that's 25 euros per
square meter if we would have spent this
money to remove the paving the paving we
would have not money to do anything else
so what we decided was to reuse all
these conventional materials that they
are used to build the Street scapes of
Barcelona but to reuse them in an
unconventional way so we use the kerbs
where we're ladies hitting it's the
curved grenade really beautiful grenade
curbs but that they are usually done but
they're it's a sitting place and then we
painted the world.we in a way we kept we
kept the pavings but we threw painting
which is extremely cheap we also invited
people to say look this place in in a
different way yes then the this person
had a second phase which I won't have
time to explain but the the the
appreciation was quite good and then and
then we get this this extra space and so
we we start only with this temporary
space then we got the second temporary
space and then a third space so the and
it becomes a bit like an organic project
where things were where added and then
this is another beautiful code by
Belgium and the artist he says that we
have to cultivate the space he often
talks as if he would be a farmer and we
make space for space
maybe by not doing nothing maybe by
removing things it's like the act of
plugging the earth or even I don't know
the English good work but when you save
the sheet of the pigs and you put it
into the Aaron and you could have a deer
do you make the earth fertile again so
in this project in a way we were I think
trying to generate those new spaces so
first first part which was more about
reversing time and doing by undoing
leads to a second type family of
projects that they have to do a lot with
nature and this notion of nature that
nature has an ally and not has a guest
there's a quote by your French gardener
says Gardens are nature happy guests you
watery did you take care you cut but the
probably in planetary scale we can not
be nature can not be our guess it's our
should be our ally maybe like in the
monsoon research project and then what
we try to do in very small projects and
in a very operational way is to harness
ecological process we got another very
beautiful mission which was to convert
the Eusebius landscape it's in a Delta
this Delta used to be salt marshes and
then it was turned into a fish farm and
then it got an European funding life
project for that biodiversity where we
should make of this
/ - weighted landscape something that
would perform for some animals that win
win and others that would lose that's
precisely what you were saying it but
before we did that we or while we were
doing that we just were so fascinated by
this leak liquid landscape Catalonia
it's a country with a lot of mountains
we hardly have any flat land and this
idea of flat expanses of land and the
water and the reef
action of water and those tiny
differences of centimeters that make
that one place is water or earth that
really fascinated us and then all these
landscape are basically done with sand
and water
maybe with I'm some very few species of
fish
I'm sorry of vegetation and then this
where our official no no official but
the clients we were working for this
were the ones that had to win and there
were other ones but when one win the
other lost and so was a compromise
between the two because the fish like
deeper points and and the Mingo like
swallow ones but all these it was and
I'll show you in the next image it was
about if you want dismantling those
earth dikes and the whole project was
done in for construction details so the
the you may sit here so it was I have no
very good but it was a to see the
relation between the a katana the
relation between water and so if it it
became it was deeper it was good for the
fee fish it if it was half deep was good
for the Flamingo if it was very
superficial and Mady was good for the
waffles so the whole thing was done with
for construction details and with one
single machine and was going backwards
and then it was very very simple project
very cheap as you can see three euros
per square meters I need you have to
imagine like when you have a baguette
and you have you want to put Nutella
food but there was too much Nutella and
then you had to kind of decide where
where you distribute it and then you
would make losers and winners the two
different
some places yeah but it's it's sometimes
it's as simple as that
at the same time obviously we were
advised by scientists that would say
what would make flamingos happy and
diffusion so but so this we did this
model very simple and then we went to a
meeting with with the scientists and we
start finding compromises about how
could we work with it and scientists had
panicked to touch it because they want
to be so certain that what they do it's
just good and sound and risk risk is the
heart it's a hard thing to do so in fact
what I think we probably do is that we
take the knowledge of scientists and we
specially take it into into place and we
are more used maybe to make mistakes
and we like to make them fast so that if
we make them we can correct it later on
so this is the the final appearance of
the project and there's a beautiful
quote by Michelle college Landscape
Architect and he said but when you make
a project but what is it where you you
have to accept that this project won't
be you you are not controlling it there
is the climate the the the the winds
that so you have to really accept that
you are could Co designing these
projects with all these other items and
then you are in a position of more
modesty and also of accepting that you
really don't control the final result
and you have to make a bit of pedagogy
with your client because sometimes they
want like very precise at the same
project it was a part that was to do an
echo museum where people would go and
learn about this larger scale ecological
restoration and we were asked to make a
garden and and and this is maybe not so
since central to to the topic today but
to me it's very
so they say in that central part they
say make a garden and we were said
before we're such in love with this
plane plane ET and the league liquid
landscape and then and and it was salty
a water and said perhaps what we should
do is that the flowers of these gardens
are the crystals of the salt and and
this is a process that belongs to the
place this used to be a salt and so what
we argued it in in a way it is a very
still a very cheap brush again to
construct a sidewalk in Barcelona cost
150 euros minimum so that seven times
less that that any place where you would
step so what we did is that we trigger
ecological process by excavating Sun
this is a sandy landscape is very cheap
to this correct Sun so we created an
airship a level the what what you see in
this first diagram in black is the water
so we created a certain islands and this
island and when you look more to this
one created a path this path was the
part of Pisa this is a museum and like
in many museums you are invited to
follow a certain sequence and then you
buy buy buy activating and creating much
more water and echo tones earth land
were increasing biodiversity but also we
were doing sort of a choreography where
people would move through the site so
this is the site before we intervene and
then this is how it look after and this
was the garden so that the system of
making Sun salt is very easy you put
salty water into the Sun and wait for it
to evaporate then get salt it happens
all the time in the coastline but when
you do it a bit more systematically you
need to make little topography and then
you keep changing the the water in
according to the degree of salinity and
there's a beautiful story and then you
I'm sure you have seen that at certain
degree
of Salima today there is some bacteria
bacteria it's it's written there well
it's an alga algae and algae there's an
algae that it's eaten by microscopic
lobsters that they are red the algae is
read the microscopy lobsters are red and
then who eat them are the flamingos
so almost you could design where you
want the flamingos to it because by that
concentration of salt you are creating
the conditions for the flamingos to eat
so that's just just to to think that at
this time of Anthropocene and there will
be a wiser people that we'll talk about
that if we are aware about certain
projects we can really design in for
that this is just to see that the this
idea is known began this idea of liquid
landscape and daylight and it is
something that it has a very powerful
influence on our bodies so we are as
animal has the Flamingo and the fish and
when we are when we are in this place
that if we can make them a strong
experience I think we are also probably
transmitting certain care and interest
for it very fast it's a very different
client in a very different landscape but
don't be the very very similar means so
this is the in in France and this is a
corn it used to be a cornfield in the
middle of a pine area in la Londe
and north of beer reeds and they had a
pond to to water to water the the pot
the corn so this is the pond yeah and
they were going to make an exclusive
landscape resort and that was the first
concept that had nothing to do with us
and then we say why don't we do again
we play with water we make what are much
bigger we multiplied the literal the the
short the the shore and then we will
create much much much more diversity of
spaces and also because we are digging
we have earth that we don't know what to
do so we can also hide the the building
so all projects can explain this in this
contour map this contour map blue it's
excavation brown it's landfill and then
this is the principle the two colors of
the water shows the variation of water
in winter summer the way we were
imagining how we could organize those
and then the earth modeling in that
project we were doing the earth modeling
and the landscape and Patrick erosion
frenched excellent architect was doing
the architecture so that's the
construction of it and that's a father
of my mother she was there two weeks ago
and she said that in the railing of the
bungalows there was a Kingfisher every
day that when fishing on the on the on
the on the lagoon so I think it's nice
it's a completely artificial thing it's
let the shapes have more to do with the
golf court or the Norwegian fjords than
with the original landscape but still
performs and it has these beautiful
moments where where ecology also plays
with light and that's another project
which is completely different completely
different sight and still done exactly
with the same principles in Italy with
this fan associate each degree yes it's
the half of an era of an airport in
[ __ ] Anza and here again this is a very
rich fertile soil but the water table
it's only 70 centimeters low so the
whole pleasure for us was to see how
could we multiply those eco towns and
we're really almost worth taking more
importance to see what was happening
below the water surface that up the
weather surface and so this is a our
idea of food cope would with this
tribute all kind of spaces big one small
ones next to the water up to the water
so that this would create all these
capable spaces of different scales that
then would be appropriated gradually and
this is how how it's been to this
project should have been halfway but
it's in Italy things happen slowly and
I'm not sure if I will ever see it then
this is completely or probably outside
the main topic of today but I also need
to talk about that is it's it's how we
bodily in experience the earth and this
is a one-to-one experience and it's it's
a need for me what it takes my biggest
pleasure has a resigner is to design a
path there's nothing that I enjoy more
than designing a path because if there's
no but there's no landscape and maybe
maybe I'm wrong but if we are in the
Anthropocene
Nature has nature nature pure nature
that's very little so it's it we screw
it so much it's probably mostly in
landscapes so it's very much about this
relation between us so opening Pat and
I'm taking care of Pat it's it's it's
maybe a metaphor about how we could so
this is the back the same project that I
explained before but here I would like
to focus a bit more about how we deal
with the with with the path system and
there was this entry you see this kind
of orange rocks these rocks are pigment
it's a kind of metamorphic rock and this
is one of the biggest outcrops in the
zone and and then they put this path to
go into the village that that that it
kind of neglected it a bit the place and
we had this area that we really wanted
to subtract everything and just lift the
rock and
and you it's very completely different
but to me it's a bit the same idea when
you go to the Opera House in and in Oslo
you have this piece of white marble that
shines into your eyes and so we wanted
to be completely immersed in this rock
which is and nothing else and you lift
the car up and then you go down and
you're completely sunburned by the
reflection of the rock and and you are
inside already you are immersed on that
side but the problem is that in the 60s
when they built the the pad they use
dynamite that was common at that time so
they couldn't find them my bottom to
redevelop it always cracking so we kind
to sort of fake in a way we did a
concrete that was going similar to the
to the to the materials and and then we
find the scum this compromise that that
in a way now I may be more happy even if
we would have just leave it and just by
the topography because it also proves or
shows a bit distinction between what is
done and not done and and in a way when
you are there you I think that it does
it's a bit of a party it's a bit of a
celebration of that moment in the world
okay then we went with designing the
path system but it's very hard to
designer in this kind of rock it's very
hard to design you're not gonna we
wanted to design a path system with had
no materiality so here is Claudia and
she was on stage in the practice and
they went with Gemma to the river in
Girona and they they cut canes of one
metre and a half and they spend almost
two months thinking about how could we
work people through the most beautiful
places without the need of bringing in
new materiality also that means
maintenance and so on so that's what we
gradually did very hard days as well
and then is that this notion this
beautiful sentence by mid son working
condition inside site and site condition
it working till it's him only the fit
could see I have it more and more often
I mean because I'm discovering the
powerfulness of working and the powerful
man of designing path and and it's
something that has nothing to do with
the screens did you cannot do it
digitally this is a one-to-one thing and
so that's what we credibly did there and
and at the end it was about getting to
that pine and say wow that's beautiful
and it was not about as designers
architects wanting to make a beautiful
logic in that case okay that's another
option notion that is important to us is
the the notion of confetti it it is you
know when when they're forest for
instance just to say barcelona wants the
European Cup and macey puts the cup up
they drop confetti and then you know
after that there is no more expectations
that's it okay confetti confetti it's
paper
it's cheap it's not very expensive so in
our works we also like as if you we
would be working with the person so that
this person has a moment of adrenaline
you know so the idea is that through
this work by playing a lot of attention
to it we we discover places that were
very beautiful so we wanted to celebrate
and share it with people so that place
where we did the project it's the place
where the Lee lived cut a case so the
Lee himself had done paintings inspired
on on rock say this rock here it's it's
the base for this painting but also the
fisherman's culturally would say I would
drop my nest between dog rocks that the
one is an eagle and the other one is a
common so it is all these cultural
relations so we want we we really played
like with Alma Luden's inviting people
to play the game of double perception so
these are the rocks they are it's
beautiful so beautiful this way so up
where are they oh yeah yeah
so we with these are the place and you
are invited to guess and if you want you
you named the animal that's that's it
and then there were some viewpoints the
viewpoints were tiny but also as a way
to say people what stop this is nice
there was a very beautiful building that
was the built building for the doctor
and we restore we almost kept the same
volume but we change the materiality in
order to kind of guarantee the
persistence in time so when you are in
one of those boxes you know how oh where
those those village houses at the same
time and then there is this Windows one
it's really focus at the origin is this
that day it looked like a red cup and
painting really like it's very changing
and then that it's it's it's it's a very
different way it's much more it but I
still think this tension it's it's
powerful and then this is just the
opposite this is where the cars arrive
at the end and they had to make some
money overs and come back and then all
what we did is say perhaps this is too
much let's remove this and then we
created those this is exactly the same
place of maneuver but you seem to fall
into the sea and I find this text by
Richard Sennett that that actually was
quoting Anna arranged that that if we
want to keep certain memory of things we
we have to have some disruptive dramas
which may be another way of seeing the
confetti these moments where where you
you are shaking a bit
this is some some friends of us a day we
went visiting this small guy now he
five years older he was in the flag in
the film Titanic it's a moment of total
this is pajamas so beautiful things
allow me to insist in the side eros in
the worship of the immediate in the
local areas of the body in the world
today we're going to talk about earth
systems but I think this one-to-one
relation with the air system is a very
engaging way to start relations with the
earth then this is the last project I'm
going to talk and it mature how I am of
time this is a bit longer and and this
is a project that at the moment it's the
one I have more attachment with and it's
it's it's a project in my hometown this
project has not been commissioned it has
been a self initiative of the practice
and it was if you want a project about
building a green infrastructure this is
a very well-known thing the challenge
here is that it's very hard to do green
infrastructure for a city when nobody
asks you to do infrastructure for a city
so if there's no political will that's
that's a bit of a challenge and then I'm
going to explain a bit the process that
is a really bottom-up way of doing while
we are gradually getting this to happen
so this is this is the city of my
hometown
you don't know if you go to the to the
touristic and office and you ask they'll
give you a map of this with all the
pictograms of the Cathedral and if you
guys twice they give them up like this
and if you insist and you say I'm local
I want a map of the city finally they
give you this map but I want to talk
about this this is also my city and what
is this and I'm gonna show you it's
beautiful it's so beautiful
this is what's not in the maps and it's
not in the maps it means it's not in the
political conscience and it's not in the
citizens Minds most of the time and it
can be very very it's a very diverse
City in the case of Girona you have from
olive trees this is a Mapple forest a
Mediterranean map of forest and a mosaic
of of landscapes and then there are a
lot of military structures because it's
any strategic path north to south and
there's rivers so it is it is actually
quite impressive and our cities and I
think it's the case in many places have
not the capacity to grow anymore the the
soil of our municipality is over they
can grow next to them so you know in
Barcelona its famous the grid of
Barcelona La Chambre in Catalan in
Spanish champlain means kind of growth
the growth okay
so in the 19th century the growth of our
city was thinking that would grow with
inhabitants and and the current thinking
is that we have to really Abbot ate we
remodel the existing urban fabric but
there's still all these neglected spaces
that to me should be the champlain know
the the the grooming area of the 21st
century and that's a bit my argument to
the measure and and she said she
believed it so this is a very different
I cannot over sugar Papa sorry I cannot
that's it very different we are
multiplying the area's accessible the
green the landscape the nature is there
we are not making new things we are just
management manage them and then invite
invite people to discover in a very
different way and how we do it we had no
money so what we did is we went to the
municipality and we proposed if we do
for one year management plans for free
could we borrow the guys that
we call it bruh gather the the guys the
stuff that adds and makes the regime man
so the this is that we would make design
by the management so with the same
budget of the municipality with the same
human team they would use a different
software we would change the parameters
of action and we would do that according
to very basic ecological principles that
that of succession so if you keep
cutting you get a low prairie and then
high prairie and then strap line and
then forest and within the prairies if
you cut them once a year you can have
lady Birds very happy but if you cut
them too early they won't have families
and it would be a disaster and this idea
of making a coral correlation between
the regimes of care and maintenance and
the very diversity this would be a kind
of ecological approach but at the same
time we wanted to do a public use
approach and we wanted to engage people
to visit it so that's what we did so we
had no master plan for the whole city
that the previous plans have shown they
were in there we just startin by cutting
and what we did is 50% of the area we
did nothing 25% we cut only one year and
then 25% we cut more often before for
fryer prevention and for sanitary things
they would cut maybe twice a year so
that means that in 25% of the area we
were letting things roll more and the
other ones less so it was a kind of a
balance and then the places could be
eventually appropriated with people and
this drawing is the last drawing I've
done on this project I think it shows a
bit this idea of in one hand all these
regimes of care for instance here there
were some oak trees and then we we cut
the low branches so with the
neighborhood could see the prairies and
the other way around and the paths
systems and the small pockets where you
can see it if you like
but also the different species that
would adapt to the different habitats so
it's really a compromise between
appropriation and ecology and and this
it's done by working okay five minutes
okay so this is this is before after
what you see in yellow is is small it's
only the 25% of the zone that is cut
more regularly but it opens up the
landscape okay this is some of the of
the this cost zero euros to the citizens
it's the same people working different
right and and this has this idea that
well tomato say it so nice so I'm just
gonna say the same changing everything
without everything changing that's
that's that's what we do there and this
is sort of last week and this these
places are done has a set by the brigade
and with protocol and recurrence the day
we stop doing that this diversification
of landscape is over right so it belongs
very much about the software and the
human force not the human force the the
human team that works there okay these
are desired the heroes of this of this
landscape okay and then when we went to
the river we work more in transverse
transversal and then eventually these
kids playing in the river would be very
normal in Sweden but in India for 40
years kids whether or not playing in the
river because you couldn't even reach
the river so these little changes are
are working then another thing that is
important to this project is that it's
it's it's not done all at once because
we have no money so it's the the the
engine is a bit like like this you get
when you start the project you get the
basic but then you have to download the
the apps you want to have
top of the on the program so what we do
here is when you start the project you
get the brigade and the brigade they
already know a bit what to do and they
clean up a bit and then if we get a
mission
then we code and we look in a more
precise way in order to to put more
attention to the works and if there's
money then we put some paving and
finally make maybe build some bail
readers and so another thing it's that
that's about interventions but also it's
important is how you invite people to be
there so we started creating or inviting
or trying to invite artists and events
to happen in the landscape so that's
some of the expressions you see there's
a land art festival that took place this
year on that landscape so it's also
about widening out the audience that
that that would normally go to that
place so when this project reached that
point the measure say yes this will be a
project of my next four years okay
she needs to be reelected the way so I'm
not sure about that and then we really
did the project of the of the larger
scale and and that in a way we work a
hell of a lot and and it's done but to
me what probably was interesting was was
this very first moment about proving
that with very little resources we could
already create the tools and then I
would like to share even if we two
minutes more this is this is a series of
10 posters and they are called ten ways
to look at the shore the short project
and it's also again a way to define
hybrid or to look the place in different
regards and to invite more people to to
feel invited to contribute to this
project so that's the first poster which
is talking about the geography in girona
everybody says we have four rivers and
they forgot they have form on things and
it's it's crazy can you for
you have a mundane yes you can its kind
in the in in the mid of the city the
mountains are hardly they're hardly
there okay then with it one that it's in
a way it's known but we put photos to
show all this landscape and nature
diversity okay the one that I already
show what how we can manage that in
order to increase that diversity and the
relation this is about fire and fire and
floating so they are a number of risks
and this is a very powerful political
weapon I can never show this poster at
public audiences in girona it's it's but
fear to risk move money and its needs
it's a reality we have a mountains with
a lot of trees if there's no prevention
on on the ballast here the city may burn
or the forests may burn and if we don't
react to the flooding so this for me are
important in the sense of making very
graphical and very shareable information
that it's it's it's well-known but
sometimes it's not tangible to share
this is well well being and it's it's a
map where it shows how far you are from
nature so it's not based on the center
of the city but it's based on how close
you are to the short of the nature and
it's the opposite say this is a
collaboration I did with Federation I'm
a neighbor as well okay so I play a bit
the role of the double engine and I
engage with the citizens of the city and
we work on a path system the would
connect all the neighborhoods around the
town which is a very distributed way
okay so there's this path that also
connects all the green spaces that that
that would bind together the city and
then we did a big textile map so
everybody could kind of step on it then
we also try to make relation with the
health system
and like works you could do in the day
works you can do once a week or maybe
once a month so in this map we show with
the system of the green how could you do
improve your cardiovascular conditions
and then we try to be like the Michelin
Guide you know one star two stars three
stars so we put stars to the invisible
part of the city so these are stars
you remember that initial plant that was
nothing
so these are the stars there ones are
landscape related and the other ones are
nature related and then we proposed 50
new postcards for the city okay
and actually one of them it's true
already this one post car on the left
it's it's existing and you can buy it
and the one left you're not sure in
England there is the Catalan it's a kind
of a sport supermarket in at home
everybody that we can it's very cheap or
cheap and then you go and and dress up
like a Quechua and you go exploring
nature and that I'm very proud to say
that this photo here which is standing
in in the Catalan your honor it's
exactly in a place we manage so we are
Quechua people already and that's that's
a minute it's edge to everybody that's
that's nature that's we quick a bit
copied from the National Trust it's a 50
things a kid should could should do in
nature and then out of 50 we managed to
do 47 in Girona this is about links to
tourism bicycles blah blah blah
this is the the final slide that all all
I've said is this is in okay what what
sorry what I said here it's only this
part and I'm very much
that's in Catalan I'm very much aware
that this is a very tiny part in the in
the generation of knowledge
communication and about about the earth
systems and it just it's part of it
thank you
[Applause]
thank you very much Marty thank you I've
really enjoyed that
sitting at the front of the room I
didn't realize how many of you there
were until I stood up slightly unnerving
thank you very much for inviting me I
think ed you're my best reader if you've
read that book three times I don't think
I have I just want to begin perhaps by
telling a little bit about where I'm
coming from before I try and make some
points of connection and synergies with
Marty he's just said which I thought was
really beautiful and imaginative and I
suppose one thing to point out is that I
think I rather feel now listening to
Marty that I toil at the bottom of the
Anthropocene with very mundane things
really with bits of landscape that are
already there with materials that I've
found I suppose and is that I am NOT
able to remake place but I study place
so I think that's an important thing to
say I wish I wish I could actually is he
it was such an amazing thing to do um I
suppose my project the project I've been
working on for the last few years now is
bribed as kind of a global extremities
project its global because while I'm
interested like Marty in the extremely
local and small places cities officially
but actually sorts of cities
neighborhood streets and so on but I'm
interested really in the connections
that that that draw them together so
while I'm interested in those places I'm
kind of interested much more in in what
transcends neighborhood and how it does
it and how those things within
neighborhoods when little things travel
so connecting places together so I
suppose okay I'm always looking for the
grid I'm looking for the the connectors
the mesh work but not in an organized
way I think it's I I'm interested in how
things come together and move together
so it's in a quite ad-hoc way not in a
designed way that I approach the global
and the things that I'm looking at for
example the flip-flop tray or I'll just
start with that are always shifting so
what I'm looking for is something that's
constantly reroute it's never somehow
still and therefore trying to chase it
down is always a bit challenging and
trying to represent it on a map kind of
misrepresents it if you like because as
soon as you've got the hang of where
things move they've shifted slightly and
I suppose what what I learned from this
research the globalization from looking
at the flip-flopped Road it's only one
very small strand of globalization it's
not one that people usually study it's
rather in rather I suppose irrelevant in
a way a plastic shoe is not a precious
object it's not it's not something
significant but it taught me that
globalization is far from a neat and
stable process that it's a set of
activities that are always on the move
and they're trying to understand them is
quite difficult that's the global bit of
the project the extremities I'm
interested in both the production of
poverty on a global scale and which is
why I study the the flip-flop trail and
I suppose this float this comes on from
another book that I wrote called bedlam
on the streets which is a study of
homeless schizophrenics in Montreal and
I was interested in how they piece the
city together in their movements around
it so poverty is one end of it but
recently I have a new project which
looks at wealth look
at the moment I'm looking at the way
that the super wealthy in London are
co-creating and curating the city in
some quite interesting ways so that
projects calls serious money which is
also devised as a trail I'm very fond of
walks and trails this is a walk
following money through what is
effectively a vortex of wealth and I'll
say something about this in a minute but
I'm interested in poverty and wealth
because I think they're connected the
the great Dorie Massey says that the
thing about wealth and poverty is that
it's not just that there's a rich and
then there are the poor they're actually
connected by the same logic of
accumulation and so therefore their
fates are sort of tied together and as I
begin to to study the rich in London
I've done quite a lot of interviews now
with them I realized that they are a lot
like the poor in lots of their behavior
there are lots and lots of parallels
which are rather interesting as an urban
sociologist I'm interested in the ways
in which these things the meager
opportunity poverty and the
concentrations of wealth that I see in
London instantiate themselves
escapes and producing sort of
infrastructural assemblages if you like
around consumption and production so the
two things that I'm most interested in
are people and landscapes and the
connections between them how they work
together to co-produce each other it's
not that people produce places or places
produce people but in a sort of dialogue
I guess and how living a landscape
shapes it what kinds of lives can be
lived in a place is something that
interests me I'll just quickly take you
through this flip-flop trail and then
I'll talk about the super-rich and then
I'll make some points of connection with
Marty's work the flip-flop trail is
driven by a production cycle and a
distribution cycle and a kind of
consumption cycle in that plastics all
come from oil and that oil are then oil
is then made into petrochemicals and
then into production as plastic objects
and then to disposal so this trail took
me through the deserts where oil is
produced this is Kuwait and some of
these landscapes and yeah so this is
still Kuwait lots of debt reaches there
and then through to Korea which is a
major site for petrochemical production
and then to China which is still the
place where you know the majority of the
world's flip-flops are made in small
factories that look something like this
this is one of the factories were based
in with Michael Thanh who was the
photographer on this project and so it
produces landscapes and lives that
revolve around this and one of the
things I was interested in whether kind
of everyday choreographies of workers
where they walk where they go what their
long journeys are what their shorter
journeys aren't I'll come back to that
in a minute when I say a bit more about
walking but Chinese flip-flop production
produces landscapes that look like this
with waste plastic
and China interesting is just stopped
recycling as much of our plastic as it
used to which is forcing us to think
about it again as it's become a more
topical issue but this kind of landscape
is not unusual to see pink and blue
mountains of plastic is it's quite
astonishing and then their trail moves
on so it the logic of the book was to
move to where the biggest volumes of
things were going on and the biggest
consumer of cheap Chinese flip-flops and
a billion people still walk barefoot and
flip-flops or the first shoe they can
often afford is Ethiopia Ethiopia has a
high population and a low low incomes
it's a poor country and it's a place
where people live in whatever they can
rig together this is an example I
suppose of corrugated iron and the ways
in which people live so I suppose the
point about not just Ethiopia but large
parts of the global south is that people
rig together what they need for
themselves or they do it collectively
sometimes but that things are not just
there that they have to invent them and
improvise around them and so you know
the flip flop story ends on the garbage
heap at the south to the south end of
Addis Ababa also I thought these are
waste pickers sorry mrs. production I'll
tell you about the garbage heap where I
thought the story ended and of course
people involved themselves in recycling
this is how they make their living so
for other hazardous and marginal form of
living and actually rather dangerous and
then of course you have to end a book
somewhere but as soon as I did that I
realized that it wasn't the end of the
story there's another story about
recycling which goes on and I'm just
hoping to pick that up
next week I'm going to Nairobi and
there's a factory there that picks up
waste flip-flops from the beach and
makes them into children's toys at which
point they have higher value than they
did originally when they produce so this
stuff is is actually quite interesting
so I hope to look into a bit of this so
and then the second project just quickly
I want to take up all the time the
serious money project is a walk from
Mayfair to Virginia water through places
like Chelsea Notting Hill South
Kensington the map you can draw because
this data is collected we know where the
richest people in London live we know
which neighborhoods we know which houses
well anyway you can see them but I
thought that it would be kind of
interesting to walk through this vortex
of wealth following different kinds of
money and different kinds of wealthy
lives and the principle is a little bit
like the flip flop journey is to uncover
what lies inside you know what lies
inside the plastic or what lies inside
these wealthy neighborhoods and they're
often quite privatized and you can't see
and one of the intriguing things is what
is visible and what is invisible what in
a neighborhood can you see what behind
what doors in Mayfair are different
kinds of things going on and as I start
to look you know I discover that Mayfair
has things like hedge fund of offices
private equity offices which you know
run particular forms of capitalism in
which they buy up parts of companies and
then pull out having raised the value
and cashing in shareholder value it's a
kind of vampiric form of capital perhaps
rather than the more generous kind of
long-term investment and also they have
family offices which organized the
affairs of rich people their taxation
systems there's a whole infrastructure
in London which is about maintaining
wealth and increasing it which is rather
fascinating from you know divorce and
prenups right through to offshoring
you're well
to make sure that you don't pay taxes on
it so I was interested in probing some
of these fabrics of the neighborhood and
what kinds of people live there and what
kinds of lives do they live
and those starting off rather slowly
because rich people don't you might be
surprised to hear this they don't want
to speak to sociologists they have much
better things to do and I completely get
that but I have managed to interview
fifty rather rich people some of them
billionaires not many of them some of
them all millionaires and some of those
serving classes because some of their
serving classes are quite wealthy -
architects interior designers luxury
areas of consumption so you know that's
I suppose the idea is to unfold parts of
London through its material surfaces its
money and people kind of landscapes you
know some of you might live in these
areas if you do please contact me often
it's looking for new people to interview
especially if you know anyone who lives
in Virginia water which is proving the
most difficult neighborhood to penetrate
it has security cameras everywhere
electric fences and you can't even hang
out and meet people as you might be able
to in Kensington I find these tableaus
rather intriguing shops anyway that's
that's what I'm about let me try and
make some connections with a very
inspiring work Marty I suppose you know
you work on ecology cultural and culture
and production I suppose I do too
but from a different kind of perspective
and I think I also share with you this
idea of you know making and undoing
though my undoing bits are not as
well-developed as yours but the reusing
and recycling which I see you know in
cities in the global South in which
people make something of whatever's
available nothing is waste you know
everything is used for something it's
turned in
money it's turned into an object you can
use it's turned into shelter this idea
of a kind of ecology of recycling which
is rigged together which is part
production and I hadn't thought about
the undoing aspects which you highlight
so beautifully and demonstrates so
graphically who know the disappearance
of this holiday villagers and the
restoring of the landscape I suppose I
don't think much about what was there
before in in a sense I suppose I work
with what's there and I think listening
to you I would have a much more probing
approach to that I like the idea that
you have an action plan I'm not a master
plan I never have a master plan because
it's impossible if you're really doing
research you don't know what you're
going to find and I think you have to be
prepared to go with it and one of the
things about trails as you're always
trying to piece together where they're
going you don't know you might have an
idea but you know you turn up in
somewhere like I don't know who Joe in
China and you try and find you know
where production centers are and you
just completely lost so a lot of it is
about exploration and following and
seeing where things go and actually
getting it wrong and I think in that
sense giving up the product the
presumption of expertise that academics
often lean on because you can't know all
of these places and you don't know as
much as the local people you never will
and all you can hope to do is to try and
understand small fragments of their
lives it's very unskilled labor unlike
yours which I think Marty is very
skilled labor but walking a mobile
methods are very important to me
I like that Nigerian proverb that we
think through the soles of our feet I
think that very much speaks to the kind
of way that I think about it it's when
you walk that you really begin to feel
the ground beneath your feet and see
because you're moving slowly the the
kinds of activities around and that's
the kind of speed at which you need to
move in order to do serious ethnographic
observation and
and even begin to understand what
people's lives mean to them and how they
live them I likes your term RT as well
the choreography's of space I think
that's one of the things I try and and
unfold to this idea that landscapes are
made by the journeys that pass through
them and to try and understand what
people's journeys are whether their
journeys run a factory floor like the
Chinese workers and occasional journeys
back to their villages when they got a
chance or whether they're you know
global the global travels of the
super-rich who have multiple homes in
different parts of the world that
understanding where people go and why
and how they go seems to me a really
important and really important thing I
liked the idea of your clients being
fish and flamingoes why fantastic idea
and and clients being like parts of the
natural environment which maybe think
about the impetus for making and where
it where it comes from and it reminded
me very much of you know some of the
interviews I've done in wealthy people's
homes where you know they're their
priorities are about creating beautiful
expensive spaces where they're about
their gratification and their lives not
about the community and you know
contrast the public spaces that you're
talking about the privatization and
seclusion of space is very very evident
in plutocratic London especially in the
suburbs and you know talking to
designers who design interiors as I've
done some interviews with people have
designed very very expensive interiors
that that activity is about extraction
that what people want is something
unique they want a 4,000 year old piece
of petrified moss that will never be
replaced the whole thing has to be
unique and about them and even if they
buy a perfectly beautifully designed
house they will redesign it so that it's
more personal it's about them it's the
showpiece of their wealth it's where
they bring
and so on so there's a certain amount of
performance around these elaborate and
beautiful beautiful homes which you know
has perhaps an impoverishing effect on
public space because gardens are you
know closed off those gardens
inexpensive squares in London which you
need a key to access and often where
they're securitized with cameras and so
on offer an interesting contrast I think
to those to those things of course the
the very poor the boundaries between
public and private space for them are
very different they often live in public
space so their private activities are
often conducted in public space and so
that has a kind of different meaning the
way those spaces are configured for them
and much of what they do is visible
whereas much of what the very wealthy do
is invisible from most of us the
conversations that go on in private
members clubs for example but some of
which have far-reaching effects on our
lives where big political decisions are
made that were not even aware of where
unmarked doors contain all sorts of
activities that we don't know about so I
was very much struck by the public
private and the ways in which design
happens for the poor in ad hoc rig
together ways as opposed to more
organized ways and for the rich where
those things are very self-consciously
and expensively taken up and elaborated
material possessions and objects are
very important the wealthiest not new
thing we don't need sociologists to tell
you this but there are cases where you
know the endless inventory of
possessions and the fear that staff
might steal actually creates a kind of
neurosis in the material surfaces of
their lives which is sad in a way
because it you know detracts from the
joy of life whereas for the poor
material surfaces have very different
meaning
and very different articulations and and
so on so I probably run up my time and
I'll stop there I I would like to think
maybe highlights and yesterday I I did
something which I think academics should
do but which we probably don't do often
enough as I stayed at home and I read a
little bit more of Caroline's work and I
and I found some articles that Marty had
written take Clara sort of a journal
article in 2013 which I think five years
five years is a long time in a design
practice and maybe he won't want me to
recite what he said but there was a
number of themes which I think overlap
Caroline Marty that you're both involved
I had one very much is this idea of
journeys and trails then Caroline use of
emphasized in your instruction the
importance of journeys and I think sort
of let's say to also the the association
between journeys and trails and
processes quite often as designers we
pick out individual processes and we
serve we map and when we draw them and
we don't we indulge them to a large
degree and what we see both within your
to work is a maybe a complication in the
intertwined nature of processes then the
difficulty in unpacking and making sense
of individual individual journeys may be
the two you could before I hand over to
the floors could touch on maybe the
difficulty in your work of working with
this degree of complexity and you both
also touch on the in certainties
in Carolina and the lives and places in
which you study Marty also and actually
in the practice work that you do think
in 2013 you described and I won't quote
you actually because I think it's a
really important important Court but you
said that your practice exists or as the
product of I'm quoting you a product of
the environment a consequence of the
milieu in which the practice has had to
survive and it's something while
Caroline mentions the super-rich
architects or the medium retractors I
also appreciate that many practitioners
work modest yeah
listen intertwining of processes maybe
the two if you could touch on
which I usually do is to set myself in a
place that I I find useful and to try
and watch a tiny micro space and see
what crosses it so stopping for a while
and sitting down and just seeing what
passes through and then trying to follow
some of that is the way that I probably
approach it
I'm not I'm not sure how to answer and
the question so I'm gonna talk about
something else now I would like to say
to Karen I think that we we share
something is we in practice with the
project but I think what we do in
practice too is that we try to have an
afterlife of the projects which is not
only because else I wouldn't be here or
I would not be trying to explain things
so and I think that has to do with a way
of having a new eyes for each project
and trying to make an effort to share
this and this is probably a bit of the
challenge but also the joy to me that
the difficulty of my project is when
there's no joy it is if it's no choice
it is super difficult because there's no
energy into it so I know not the big
part but that but an important part of
the project is to sort to create the
conditions for having joy and then
believe it believing in what you do I
know this is very big but I like to read
this piece of text because as a second
I'm based in New Year Barcelona we went
over a very difficult crisis and I'm a
landscape architect graduated here but
in Spain the profession of landscape
architecture doesn't exist so for many
many years I had very strong arts travel
to get any public Commission because
they had to be architects to the ghetto
so my adaptation to a system of projects
which was not waiting for me so to say
was that I specialized in low cost and
low tech and then instead instead of
intensive program in intensive projects
mostly extensive projects
that depends of it and then out of this
it's because it's maybe less common I
think that the the the feel of joy and
discovery it's much wider but at the end
and what I'm realizing lately not when
is that the project have kind of to life
it's what happens in reality and then
the story you make out of it that it's
somewhere near reality and and that's
what we share and then I probably we
share in order to engage ourself and the
others to to keep going
Thank You Marty all right I said it's
interesting to see the massive the care
with with what she both observe the
places in which you're both of you
studying and then Marty intervening in
and I think also while I don't have the
time here I thought so that the these
broader scale relations around
globalization Russell ecological systems
that come into play with with both your
work could I see a hand or to be nice to
please I think we do we have a
microphone
should we have some shouting we have
five microphones
hi um you both mentioned sort of being
wrong and maybe being comfortable with
potentially being wrong no no and I was
I was kind of interested in that and
particularly said scientists a very
uncomfortable with that and I was I was
interested in that's such a key if she
was dealing with climate change or
something like that for example and how
you how you would draw the line with
with that desire to be right about
something and where you say you know
this enough and our knowledge is it may
be enough now and we have to be
propositional because so much of design
is it's done without really much
understanding at all unfortunately and I
can make a reaction now I in I did work
for a couple of cartons with very rich
people and I stopped it and I stopped it
because one of the reasons was that
behind those missions which were in
cartons of natural nature you can really
there were this over idea of complete
control and I think in the School of
Architecture more than the school of
landscape but also there is this
illusion of control and it's completely
I mean let's look at the monsoons I mean
it's completely not true but still the
same scientific method it wants to and I
make sense but it wants to construct
something that is so so solid that can
be blocking so I think we live in risk
management managing risk all the time
and I think there should be common sense
and procedures but the problem about
this is that we can say that in a profit
symposium but it's hard to communicate
that in another levels but I think it's
a challenge it's a challenge and I think
with all this climate change this is
starting to happen and and we talk more
openly about degrees of content of
loosening and I think it's important and
also and say it's so relaxing when you
lose control because no I knew it when
you try I I especially like for instance
in this private gardens like you make an
effort to make something that's were
super but then even in that project
nothing then it's full of frustration so
I think we should find other ways of
coping with things and with more Richard
Sennett talks about more opening
projects to other things to happen so I
always think it's hard to draw a line
and say you know in what I do when is
enough enough because you never know
enough and you always feel there's
something if you carried on a bit you
would know a bit more and you'd come to
a different conclusion so I I do find
that being a little obsessive about that
I always find rather difficult ok a
little bit sleepy so no it's not gonna
get any better today you're gonna get
more tired
okay I'm gonna indulge I I enjoy sense
both presentations we seem partly due to
the the optimism with with which she
bought the presents your work I think in
the context of some of Marty's work we
see quite ecologically denuded
landscapes which you embrace with with
the care but also not that you say
without trying to control and a Caroline
I'm gonna read a little quote from your
book where you're talking about your
your method but I felt that in the
context that you recognize that many of
the people with alone flipfold trail are
exploited in in some way you also
highlight by noting you underline or
emphasize that these people that you
meet and talk to are also active agents
making intelligent decisions about their
lives in particular circumstances that
was a quote as one of you if you want to
speak a bit about your optimism and also
moments where she you really struggle
with that yeah it's very I was gonna say
that working with the rich is very
difficult of course
social distance between you and many of
those people are are exploited but what
came across and this kind of fits I
suppose with the way I see people anyway
is the kind of vitality of lives that
you think are rather wretched you know
even the garbage picker on the heap that
I showed you I was talking you know is
saving up to get a visa to go and be a
maid somewhere she's remaking her life
in another place you know she's not the
kind of hat to hapless victim of
globalization
she's taking part in it and she's trying
to see what she can wring out of it so
you know I find those things rather
uplifting that people in such difficult
it's not I don't mean it's a patronizing
way but that people in such difficult
circumstances see meaning and joy and
prospects and futures and managed to
make their lives in circumstances that
we could not imagine
[Music]
no no I haven't no one to say and I just
try to have fun is the joy at working
yes there's quite a lot of innovation to
be done in that and that's not that's
the difficult part related to have more
spaces or more extensive everything
related to risk prevention it has to do
like river flooding and all these things
have to do with other mindset yeah it
makes you think we should my other job
which is looking after cities in the
global South that low tech and low cost
are often the solution and keeping the
you know the people out we're offering
bricks and I went to Nepal after the
earthquake and they quickly cleared away
all the rubble and we're busily making
new bricks you could easily have cleaned
them and and that's what you know the
restorative people were saying why don't
we clean up the rubble and reuse it
no no it's sorry because the there are
huge vested interests it's selling
something something else in spending a
lot of money and not being loaded but I
think you make a really good point
Tim Waterman welcome you can project the
way it strikes me that one of the things
that really binds the work of both of
you together is that is the idea of the
narrative and that the narrative somehow
weaving a path through a very
complicated story or a very complicated
landscape is a way of empowering either
empowering that you know the fish and
the flamingo's or in empowering the the
people along the flip-flop trail that
somehow or it's not just information
itself that's important it's the
narrative it's the way that story is
told and I'm not quite sure how to frame
that into a question but maybe just you
know how important is the framing of
narratives to you and everything that
you do so some of them are in intuitions
during the process but some of them are
really done after I was doing it or in
between the doing doing and the
narrative it's being built so that's
where I so I think the facts are very
much related and then I can show photos
or not then I can not imagine there's
this kind of balance
i I think what Carolyn is really like
obviously always really dates it in it
in there but but I I think that
narrative are so powerful that sometimes
I'm even afraid and I perceived that at
competition stages
where there's sort of you could promise
whatever I mean we can see it in elected
in electoral periods and a narrative are
extremely powerful and yes they are very
empowering to me there's the other part
is the honesty of documenting and and
that this narrative ARF are or or coming
from or being documented systematically
and I think I didn't say that for
instance for the Club Med project we did
15,000 photos of the process not to say
the drawings with it after and the one
project in Girona I think we should be
about 8000 at the moment photos I'm
almost week every week there's something
and collecting and so there is but but
because narrative get powerful as well
according to that link with evidence I'm
always intrigued by the narratives that
people tell you about their lives and
their neighbors and their neighborhoods
and also the narratives that they walk
that they don't tell you but they kind
of act out so trying to collect up those
things and then of course you know you
have you know narrative the narrative is
both there and you bring it so you know
that's that how you balance that because
you bring in your theoretical frame be
in your head and so on you have a sense
of how things work but it's also there
in sort of somehow making those two ends
meet seems to be the difficult one and
also the different narratives of
different scale because you know you've
got individual stories neighbourhood
stories regional and national
good question I can't help but think
adoring Massey when yeah United stories
um we're gonna finish thank you very
much
Caroline extraordinary Marty amazing
let's take a little break and we'll
rejoin thank you hello okay um let's
continue before I continue I just want
to thanks a a public program a manager
and Katherine who helped us to organize
this event it was a great relief that we
have their support so we're gonna
continue with a panel of five people
will presented five projects we did a
call for projects packed in summer and
we received quite a lot of submissions
and it was a hard time to select some of
the most interesting work so here you
have we will be dividing them in two
panels so this is the first one and what
we have or the way we have organized it
is that each of them will have ten
minutes to present and after those five
presentations we will try to get a
composite conversation ongoing so before
I hand the microphone to each of them I
just wanna mention quickly who they are
and where they coming from
so first we'll have a meet - Dixey is
associate professor from Syracuse
University we also have Namek magic I
did my best and he is a graduate from
Harbor
school of design and also we have a
tempo lock in Oscar McDonald from
Westminster University also a Julia
Stefan is also from Westminster
University and finally Nico's gutsy kiss
as well from a graduate from Harvard
School so thank you very much everyone
for being here and I guess nitesh sta-1
marketing is very important just get
very close to the microphones if you had
your voice to be loved here if I get too
close let me know yeah I can be loud
well thank you everyone thank you
Alfredo Lindsey and Edie for organizing
this incredible organization and really
it's great to be here
it's really an impressive group of
people so thank you very much um I want
to show today a project we began in 2013
at that time it wasn't so topical so it
was kind of an unfortunate incident that
it became topical but most of our
projects begin our research projects
begin as a collaboration between sort of
my studio and whoever teaching at the
time and that time actually james
Wescott who happens to be here by pure
coincidence him and I were doing the
studio together between my office and
tell you delved and it began with this
sort of let's say this non scientific
approach to be any research and that
tebah return from Freud about an elegant
suspicion we didn't want to propose a
hypotheses but maybe he's a sort of a an
idea that we had and so I happened to
meet Ted Cruz and Michael dear who were
like the two of definitive voices on the
border condition and at the time we were
finishing this sort of larger three-year
research project on the mannequin
Midwest and they're like you should you
know because you know join forces you
know comrade come to us and so I'm like
okay so we went through their work and
said how can we help you how can we
assist you and we didn't want to begin
something new but we wanted to sort of
enable this larger idea because we're
not nearly as intelligent as them
and they like help visualize what we're
writing about and that's kinda how it
began and so this research project
always begins without an agenda or a
point but it did begin with this when
obviously we all know Chomsky but he
hasn't really written in that much about
architecture but he did this one time
through an interview and he described
the us-mexican border
like most borders was established by
violence and its architecture its
architectural violence in a way of much
architecture as violence anytime you
sort of change the built environment
particularly for one particular benefit
or goal like the winner loser scenario
this is what you get so this project
what I want to show today is more about
the methodology the research and not
necessarily the conclusion of the design
is westcott when I were talking this
morning design is about prescription and
so narrative is about these sort of
these potential for fiction so while
it's a fictional project it's based in
the realities that exist so borders the
architecture violence and so just a
quick understanding of how this notion
of American New Mexico Mexico doesn't
really exist
this is the this is really the land
territory of Mexico between this time
and of course this is a time of American
sort of as if it was just then
entitlement and that is simply a land
grab there was no really bigger reason
of simply taking land from Mexico and
this essentially this Analia bull right
it's ours to take and this is
essentially the final border condition
but if you look at the territory how
it's actually being occupied you see
that Mexico goes deep in the United
States that there is no really border
condition especially along say the so
called border this is why in lots of
these areas I mean I'm from Chicago
originally on the west side 90% of my
high school was Puerto Rican I had more
friends that were either Latino or at
that time Yugoslavian that actually did
have say American it's a really
polarizing condition obviously the
border and it's the only condition I can
find where there's two men with the
exact same name with radically different
positions you know so Teddy Cruz and Ted
Cruz one's actually a great human being
the other one might be the devil uh-huh
and then one so one of the benefits
about doing research with non c'è
American students in this time it was
Delft students which are some of the
most incredible students in the world
precisely because the education is a
four
and it brings we're all forced to use
our second or third language and this
inability to sort of function your
mother tongue forces a sort of a clarity
at which I think is really important
which misses from American universities
but the perception was the first thing
we dealt with what is the perception of
the border and it's always these
warnings danger et cetera et cetera so
what we're trying to do this is we've
got this work from Teddy Cruz obviously
the walled water the functioning core
the non integrating gap so we did a lot
of research and we reached out to people
like how should we begin how can we
begin and unfortunately everything was
sort of driven by these sort of
ideological networks to borrow from
Foucault like given them the NAFTA the
border attracts the function core and
then that this in the beginning we
actually found this sort of this
ecological regions and it was really
important for us because we did this in
the Midwest when you sort of delaminate
a few of these sort of prescribed
territories through sur ideology or
geopolitics they kind of freeze or
they're not really responsive but this
ecological sort of corridor was our
ability to simply eliminate the border
and begin a more sort of really I think
a more as much as possible an objective
sort of territorial examination of this
region and not simply fetishized this
border condition this was really great
and so the way we did the research with
between the office and the students was
develop these sort of just really just
take these ecological corridors and try
to study them to give you sort of
perspective the smallest court and the
smallest corridor was four times bigger
than the Netherlands right I think it's
a I think it's really important to do
projects that are simply unimaginable in
terms of scale because then you succumb
to it like you succumb to the territory
you succumb to the geography you and
it's important that we don't do things
we sort of just kind of that's why I
love so much the previous presentations
like we we have just give up and just
allow ourselves to be guided by these
sort of material conditions so again to
give you just that a better sense of the
methodology was sort of beginning to
sort of create this atlas so we'd like
to I personally like to create an atlas
write this sort of mapping hard data
before the actual fieldwork because in a
way it then really debunks a lot of the
certainty you get from say GIS data
from territorial exertion so we made
this out listen I'll go quicker which
was you know it was very useful as uh as
a tool as you're traveling to sort of
critique so we looked at the regional
scale different types of territorial
issues ecology infrastructure obviously
demographics we actually then worked it
down to the actual city scales of those
twin cities and down to the actual
neighborhood scale and we did this with
a combination of again this took about
three or four months so we did all this
say before we engage the students so
there's a tremendous amount of work so
students simply have to be given and say
a platform or a structure is then we can
sort of investigate within so then the
next thing after this atlas was this
really this almost month-long road trip
or be sort of negotiated the entire
length of the border physically driving
in and out going between the borders and
I've got a lot of friends in Chicago
that know people that distribute let's
say illegal pharmaceuticals and so we
were able to like really kind of go on
both sides and sort of interview and
talk about how this especially the naps
at corridors conduit out of this conduit
of sort of a supply so this is just some
quick images I took we took from the
from the trip you know this is the
literal edge condition between the two
sides this one's amazing and it kind of
remind me it's amazing the two most
accurate books written about America by
Frenchman Tocqueville and boatyard and
his sort of book
astral America and he was describing
when he was driving for the same region
that he said there can be no silence in
the mountains cuz they're very contours
sore and the only way to sort of achieve
silence is through a sort of
horizontality a line and so this
landscape is like moving through
geological strata it's incredibly
gorgeous and then you have these really
these man-made infrastructural lines
that sort of attempt to silence an area
that screams so we began in this sort of
on the other side of McAllen in
Brownsville and was most interesting
fact is that the European students
because of the lack of say media
conditioning felt far more comfortable
on the Mexican side say than the United
States side because there was a scale
there was an urban
there was a grid there was a there was a
human-scale while the American side was
this industrialized border or 30 miles
from any sort of urbanization there's a
good story Rea sawaki this Japanese who
didn't have two minutes oh okay I'm
gonna go faster geez okay so this is the
Fiat with its great Wow look at views
amazing border um the wall is simply
impossible this then we got to the end
twin city condition we have a third
nation condition the perception versus
reality though America is using the the
border condition as a regional back a
house so okay so what we so from all
those Maps only for them were useful
routes with resources divided education
level so the combination of the tripping
doubtless we came to conclusion of this
cross-border inequality mobility
infrastructure violence donation mega
disaster okay so we looked at this other
atlas this is actually really
interesting so America sort of
exploiting the Mexico for labor these
new macula Dora's they go deep deep in
New Mexico and what they are these sort
of like find sort of these special
financial zones where product comes in
from the United States gets manufactured
in Mexico goes back to the United States
for distribution so the border is
actually functioning more like a
legalized sweatshop malodorous etc so
the political sort of say ruse is saying
that borders a violent area allows
American to sort of create these sort of
these monstrous sort of sweatshops
exploiting human labor without setting
really letting the public know about it
again the NAFTA roots etc etc but then
the significant regions with resources
and the border free trades and
checkpoints and you view much more a lot
much more likely to get stopped 20 miles
from the border than say at the border
itself so we went through all the
mapping the geopolitical sort of zones
and this was actually and this is we got
worked with Michael dear on there was
actually a third nation that exists
between the United States and Mexico and
both the United States and Mexico are
exploiting this region and that it
actually functions quite well that was
simply allowed to function so using the
existing existing sort of policy and
sort of financial sort of agreements
that exist we wanted to create a third
nation sort of through fiction but based
on the real sort of say policy that
exists so right now there is no
organization that represents the border
such a single-issue interests that are
trying to sort of benefit from it so we
created a united transporter Federation
and then we use this existing quarter
okay yes we made it borders are I ran
for it I didn't get it um we actually
created it sort of a policy based on say
a constitutional monarchy to the Twin
Cities we have two senators in a mayor
and then each district we have a
representative based on a population of
100,000 this leads the new border region
and then within it we made a regional
plan through infrastructure mobility and
a key was making an east-west connection
a horizontal bus because right now the
Natchez just moved north and south so
those are purely sort of these
exploitative corridors but somehow we
could sort of connect through
infrastructure energy and sort of
mobility the region can begin to
function as a zone the Twin City
phenomenon I'll go quickly now
these are just some of the projects that
came out of it unfortunately all they
they all though try to attend the border
they all have this long wall like
condition these are sort of different
types of architectural topologies some
an agricultural food hub and now pas so
this would be a bullfighting arena so
the architecture I think projects didn't
say they still kind of crippled from the
notion of architecture and that they
were trying to become these sort of
static symbols of buildings and so as
much as we tried to eliminate that we
couldn't but I'll end with this sort of
quote at which we use I think I try to
do I think with the goal of any
educational process is sort of changing
the notion of reality and this is from
the crime thing this sort of anarchist
group but to extract I think the essence
of this in terms of academic
professional research work is that we
make our freedoms by cutting holes in
the fabric of this reality by forging
new realities which will in turn fashion
us I think this is essential and that
you don't have these massive Moomins but
these tiny little moments you cut a hole
in a fabric reality and thus changing
reality and this is so sorry okay thank
you
[Applause]
so I guess I'll just jump into the next
one so to just make a quick connection I
guess what unites our presentations of
what might be a bridge between them is
this idea of structural violence or
infrastructure violence and cutting
holes or other opening holes why is this
not oh so I have to say that I'm here on
behalf of a two-man Research Unit the
other half pedra aparicio is in Bogota
currently in Colombia Pacific coast as
thrilled as I am to be here and he sends
his regards
so this representation is really about
reconceptualizing ground it is about
uncovering alternative machines of
urbanization by engaging with the deep
history city of the ground
I remember when I was small when the
cement some jellyfish the jellyfish were
trustless and with no heart spleen liver
nor intestines there was only water
water and water filling their phone I
thought how beautiful it will be if my
physic would be like that
how beautifully if I could put all the
fish in the sea into myself also the
coral and algae at 9 I won't sign a
flashlight on my body so you read this
poem on a journey to the highlands of
East Java on the trail of an alternative
entry to the present-day Jakarta the
sinking s4i metropolis that is
struggling to contain the compromised
dynamics of its own ground such as with
the vast retention lake that you just
saw it in Oh Jakarta with giant sea
wolves river normalization projects and
violent expulsion
that they justify we thought the poets
longing to merge with landscape reads is
both sensible and urgent it is a vision
of an architecture that gathers a
dynamic form from the material and the
spatial logics of the media in which it
is embedded
now if specificity of landscape lies
precisely in the potential of four
particular technologies to emerge then
what we call the volcanic marks one
territorial entry into this capacity in
Java geophysical systems themselves
provide generative scripts for habitat
for mation in which human agency has
been enlisted and unfolded over time
developing resilient practices and weak
physical forms forms of adaptation to
geophysical volatility that elsewhere
and increasingly also in Java have been
subject to removal by design now
environmental volatility seems to be
caught up in the Western tradition in an
apocalyptic imaginary or interface with
it as society is reduced and insulated
relegated to the technocratic class as
French theorists you've ever damaged put
it architecture could only find its
place after the flood or rather in its
stead these images from at analysis kill
 a 17th century Jesuit polymath who
in his rendering of the story of Noah
kind of puts the colonial history or the
epitome of the colonial project on
display there is an entire taxon of your
species known to him at that time inside
a rectilinear grid each animal we scaled
to fit the uniform cells and the floor
layer itself it references the ships of
the Age of Discovery the tools of
colonial town making the typological
arrangement of the ark strikingly
projects into the future linking the
colonial fixation on immunized and
secluded space to one of its modern
conclusions social engineering through
standardized dwelling and that ocean
liner inspired fallacy in missoula
attune machine a BT we know by now the
price of architectures divorced from the
ground its subordination to industrial
systems and this might be the essence of
the Technium protect a managerial
paradigm of the urban an expanded
mandate to contain environmental
contingency reconceptualized
as risk a decade before our Kanoa
in
to subterraneous kid she launches a
different vision that contradicts both
the entrepot centrism and the
apocalypticism of the environmental
narrative in Noah's story fiery flows
burrow through the planetary body
depositing quote/unquote metallic and
mineral juices Keisha maintains fire
rules the distribution of life and heat
it is integral to what he calls Earth's
internal economy he uses architectural
terms to describe this world forge in
fire recognize it in recognizing in it a
scattered collection of historical
relations it is I quote a well framed
house with distinct rooms cellars and
storehouses by great art and wisdom
fitted together now viewed against this
backdrop of this planetary architecture
the condition and scope of human agency
becomes ambiguous in this other later
work the Ark of Noah is shaped like a
shipping container without bow or stern
the trajectory of its passage is for the
waves to steer human figures laboring
the service of a regime that substitutes
schematized inventory for G or
ecological continuum in other words a
zoo for Zoe we can extrapolate to
Genesis from Keisha's work or two
distinct ontology zuv techniques as
eminent in so called inanimate matter
one foreshadows a 20th century
theorizing of technology is an
autonomous integrative system of
functional substitutions for natural
phenomenon the other points to a
pre-existing interlaced substrate of
geophysical agents harboring an imminent
imminent techni city of its own now from
industrialization and on designers have
called on and on for a regrouting of
architecture in landscape from Geddes
and Lloyd Wright's McKay and McHarg but
a radical understanding of ground is a
generative system of systems for us
began through an engagement with the
with the thought of a philosopher of
Technology she's basing on Don the
philosopher who famously proposed that
technology generates a ground of reality
of its own and the technical objects are
really units of becoming a techno
Genesis in which human beings are
enlisted
mashed bananas Sigler another French
philosopher sums it up in the Industrial
Age the human is not the intentional
origin of separate technical individuals
qua machines it rather executes a quasi
intentionality of which the technical
object itself is the carrier same along
goes even further back to the dawn of
man to locate the origin of technics in
a rupture within what he calls a
primitive magical unity between the
early man and universe he rises within
the totality constituted by man in the
world a network of privileged points
actualizing the insertion of human
effort appears as an initial structure
through which the exchanges between man
and the world take place these places
and these moments keep hold of
concentrate and express the forces
contained in the ground of reality that
supports them and he goes on a
privileged place a place that has a
power is one that drains from within
itself all the force and the efficacy of
the domain domain into limits it
summarizes and contains the four of a
compact mass of reality it governs it as
a Highland governs and dominates a
lowland the elevated peak is the Lord of
the mountain and here a footnote
interjects not metaphorically but really
it is towards it that the geological
folding Orient's itself and the push
that is edified the entire high plateau
these privileged points are of course
geologic phenomena into landscape
techniques appears when figuring ground
attached themselves from one another
when the schematic figures of schematism
zuv these privileged points become
mobilized attached and translated into
the first primitive technical objects
and it means that the schema tourism of
these of this phenomenon become the
primitive technical objects is thus
locates a crucial link between geo genic
and anthropogenic formations of matter
but he assumes the techniques originates
in world where the world the human is
already existing and we asked what if
there is a domain of techne City prior
to the face in which the humans humans
appear what if the key cities integral
to the coming into being of the world
and a human this is the Great Rift
Valley in present-day Tanzania where 1.8
million years ago two thousand two
hundred thousand year long lava flow
provided very specific adaptive
pressures and opportunities to very
small isolated groups of hominins
geographer Michael meddler has argued
that this has enabled a fire specific
adaptation in human that really created
more contemporary humans in other words
before we learn to control fire fire
made us human if local geomorphic
specifically volcanic phenomena have
provided such the size of adapted
thresholds that set early hominins and
their evolutionary journey and the
active geophysical substrate as a whole
and its myriad regional particularities
constitute one continuous mesh of
capacities to spawn alternative
technique genesis so this is the example
of the Roman marine concrete without
which probably their infrastructural
superiority would not have been what it
was Romans learned how to tap into what
we call a geotechnical java belongs to
those regions of the earth where
geologic time is accelerated to an
observable emergence volcanic activity
through mountain building in or orogeny
has not only built the landmass of the
island with lava flow Silla hearts it's
air and water burn tephra have also
spawned the densest rural populations
and some of the most resilient human
cultures on the planet investigating and
imaging this active ground in relation
to the indo-australian monsoon its
surface topography
accumulated continuous event produce
affinities of pattern in the material
behavior across different systems we
have come to view yeah Java's volcanic
slopes is an urban president having
fostered the logic of practices that are
attuned to islands morphological flow
terrorists and tessellated patterns of
land cultivation maximally unfold the
biochemical performance of ejecta tephra
in these shapes and patterns of habitat
habitat formation regional vectors of
chickeny techni city are actualized and
socialized across the material practices
of everyday life tectonic details of
domestic and symbolic architecture
absorbed the scheme it is in the Sutra
of geologic geologic app folding in
structures like these shrines at
theologia logic domestic materializes
these are both seismographs interspecies
kind of meeting points and also cultural
and territorial markers within this
paradigm of inhabitation knowledge is
built and recalibrated to the processes
and continue
of the volcanic ground economies and
cultural rich rituals of migration that
rely on weak fluid spatial forms produce
elastic patterns across regions
volcanoes become urban centers acting
his spinal cords of material and socio
spatial organization their singular
objects at the same time manifestations
of a larger dynamic multi-dimensional
multi-dimensional environment suffused
with a particular design potential a
ground of imminence in terms of design
what kind of monitoring recording design
intelligence would enable us to access
and register these vectors or these
linkages for us a shift in understanding
happened when we overlaid a tectonic
section of the Java of the Sunda trench
subduction zone and Java Island where
the plan of a caldera and inhabited
color the white settlers that you see
there where the center is the crater
itself and exactly one kilometer from it
there is a Buddhist temple marking the
first boundary and this whole field is
kind of like this reticulated world that
Simon Dolan is speaking about so just to
finalize we do not inhabit just a
surface sorry but are immersed in the
feedbacks of this vast machine the
example of the volcanic sensitizes us to
the long-standing dynamic for the
durations of human and non-human
producers of space as volatility itself
migrates through climate change and it's
eased by capital as a new avenue of
accumulation to the concept of risk it
obliges us to imagine what design it
pursues such production entanglements
might be equally embedded in local
practice and in the planetary household
thank you hi everyone thanks for we're
gonna be telling you about our thoughts
on design under uncertain conditions and
exploring this through the lens of our
project in the Moody's called for the
island this looks at architecture and
urban design strategies to address
climate change and is in some ways a
critique of multinational design
techniques based on fixing
variables to explain why dealing with
uncertainty is important to us we
against had run you through some of the
particulars of the design problem that
the Maldives poses as a country and what
we think may be some some ways to
approach these so as a country the
Maldives is 99.99% ocean managing and is
incredible incredible spatially to get
there from any direction you have to
travel over hundreds of miles of Indian
Ocean to the eventually you start see
something like this below you only then
does the land of the Maldives come into
focus it is immediately immediately
obvious and how tenuous and unlikely the
country's existence is so to run you
through a key a few key aspects of the
country it's low it's one of the lowest
lying countries in the world averaging
about 1.2 meters above sea level with
the highest natural point being about
2.5 meters above sea level so this
obviously makes sea level rise a huge
threat to the country it's fluid as you
do we'll be exploring more through her
fortune in a second the country's land
is typically composed of a series of
constantly shifting sand banks and small
islands which are byproducts of the
structures of coral reef and their
processes and as an archipelago there's
about two thousand islands distributed
over 26 battles on which proximately
400,000 people live and on a total land
area of only 300 square kilometers so to
put this into a bit of context it's sort
of an average density of 1,300 people
per square kilometer and that's all
ranks in the top 5 to 10 countries
globally in terms of density and a land
area of about five times the size of
Manhattan Island so you know there's
this growing crop there's a growing
population rapid urbanization and
political struggle which add the
complexities of human inhabitation and
so as an extremely complex spatial
condition yeah so all these factors make
it
very hard to know sort of a what the
situation is at present and and be what
it'll be like in the future given given
that we think the first step of any
design process obviously is to try and
understand what you're dealing with this
raises the question of how to begin
thinking about propositional design when
this much is unknown so what was clear
about the situation was clear is that
the country's physical existence is is
under very real threat from sea level
rise to even relatively conservative
estimates sea level rise could see the
country becoming had uninhabitable by
the end of the century with huge
problems obviously in the years leading
up to this so the country exists in a
fine state of equilibrium and with the
stress of climate change the position of
the equal of this equilibrium is rapidly
shifting towards environmental and
geophysical collapse so despite the
enormity of the task in understanding
and then designing in the country we
were encouraged by the fact that
although it's a very complex situation
the problem facing the Maldives is at a
basic level a spatial problem that gives
us an anchor point in more normal
architectural processes for us to base
our thoughts around most architecture
problems are typically presenters being
within fixed parameters and therefore
drive fixed solutions so since you're
one of our first realizations was that
if we want to address problem that is
fluid we need a solution that is fluid
so we speculate is what may be helpful
would be a systems-based approach design
one that allows both macro micro scale
so you updated as and where knowledge
changes and we also thought that
adaptability and feedback loop should be
present in both the design itself sort
of as a as a blueprint per se but also
in was designed in for instance building
so upon further exploration it came to
our attention that this could
potentially be of assistance to local
designers by helping to map and
pick what is happening and was it likely
to happen and by supporting local
expertise and knowledge we envision the
community could then further develop
interventions that are both sensitive
and appropriate the project is still in
its early stages but we'd like to walk
you through the three main components we
are developing and what we've learned so
far from it okay so the first first
component is the the platform and the
idea for the platform sends us on the
idea and the sort of necessity to to
visualize the problem the idea was taken
directly from elements for two thesis
projects so been created a system for
collecting quantitative and qualitative
data from a highly connected population
through social media and smartphone
based citizens mapping and I created a
system for interpreting and
consolidating data into kind of usable
interpreted figures that are notes a sea
level rise risk for any particular point
on a map as we've touched on
understanding and engaging with
complexity is vital to be had solve
complex problems complexity and
granularity always struggle for
attention when competing against simple
ideas which are more vivid and easier to
understand so we feel embracing
complexity and attempting to make it to
a beautiful and legible if possible is
central to addressing this our ideas for
a web-based platform with which layers
open source data citizens mapping and
data from social media the attend in
intention then is to develop the
platform in in collaboration with the
Moody's National University to allow for
both input and output of information
from early discussions and
experimentation we've already seen how
overlaying different data types can
reveal the hidden patterns and generate
new design ideas and topics for
discussion so the second component we're
going to talk about is the ways of
developing and working on his toolkit so
this is pictures so a series of ideas
and parametric designs that are informed
and affected by the data on the platform
so this not only demonstrates how to use
data in a design positive way
also provides a practical response that
we were able to tailor to cite specific
information and conditions so it's and
the examples of this that we're looking
at the moment is building propositions
for flood wall when tsunami resilient
buildings topologies and strategies that
support drinking water and food
resilience foods food Ross resource
resilience as well as strategies for
gradually raising of the round key
regulation so I guess this is kind of
more akin to what Marty was talking
about earlier is as an action plan
rather than say a master plan and so on
screen is our aspiration or maybe
ambitious scale of this and you know
maybe this is a that's trying to show
represent that we have some sort of idea
of control but ultimately at the scale
of this could be is down to a as small
as a bench so of low tech low cost and
high impacts so if successful you know
we'd like to see local designers and the
wider community community taking
ownership of the projects and if we're
still relevant in us we see our main
input being in consultation and helping
local experts devise these new
relationships between data and
contextually appropriate proposition or
design so this brings us onto the sort
of last aspect of our project so this is
potentially the most important part of
the project in a way which is something
we're appreciating more and more as the
project goes on so it's it's both
impossible then not desirable to address
the problems remotely the best thing we
could ultimately do is help set up
frameworks for ideas and education as
well as encouraging so demonstrating
listening and learning new perspectives
to local design as a result of this
we've been undertaking a number of
initiatives to engage with the design
community in wider public we had a trip
in August in which we were teaching
students and staff grasshopper and the
recently formed school of architecture
that we also spend a large amount of
time engaging in discussions with the
local design community
from these we're building up
relationships with the newly formed
architecture Association for example as
well as them local architectural firms
[Music]
idea from the project notions of
complexity and uncertainty and knowledge
and design we think that this could be
summarized by the slightly simplistic
profile mention every complex problem
there is an answer those clear simple
and wrong with the current face of
climate change the Moody's might not
have the luxury of being manifestly
wrong too many times incremental
improvements and propositions that are
positive in multiple known and unknown
scenarios are critical to sustainable
and adaptable development so therefore
we have the opinion that we must you
know you start to think differently
about uncertainty in design to assist us
in addressing these huge questions and
potential threats positively hello thank
you for having me here I'm going to talk
about sand and a little bit about my
project I'm actually been a colleague of
Benin Oscar so my project also started
in the Maldives
sand sand is the second most used
resource of the water and it is
currently being mine at twice as natural
renewal rate this makes humankind a
largest transforming agent in
relationship to world will aggravate
material sand is defined and classified
by its size so every single grain of
sand is unique and by looking at any of
them closely like like in a microscope
you will be able to to see by its
texture its shape its material where
where exactly in the world it came for
from and for how long we traveled most
of the sand were you
today's for construction developments
was a concrete and massive land
reclamation projects I'm sure you
recognize some of those on the right
my research tracks key actors in the
sand exchange globally starting with
mapping natural flows that begin in the
world rivers that form and bring sand
into the sea from her deep ocean
currents naturally move sand around the
world well human driven flows start from
mining river deltas which is often
illegally and in contrast to natural
routes
they move sand around by ships along
trade routes both shaping the world of
sand assisted a mapping sand flows at a
global scale reveal the ocean as being a
stage where both natural and human-made
flows and exchanges of sand unfold this
particular projection is used to show
the ocean as a whole and the cuts into
the land I meant to help create the
least amount of distortion when
unfolding and were a globe
sandé has the power to create land and
it became a political trade of small
countries looking to expand with more
and more countries blocking sand exports
as a political move black sand market
groves along with demand that's getting
higher and higher every year the
Maldives are actually among the top 10
sand in 14 countries in the world and
their location is right in the middle of
the Indian Ocean and taps onto trade
routes to Singapore and Hong Kong which
are currently the top consumer of sand
for land reclamation projects amounting
to 60% of the total sand imports in the
world my while researching how Sun is
produced naturally in the Maldives one
particular interests arose from the
geomorphology of the islands and how
sand is being managed by the reefs and
then exchanged within an atoll from one
island to another
my design process involved a series of
simulations achieved by building
multi-dimensional computational model
where I could test the different all the
different properties of sands and
identify patterns of its natural dynamic
behavior this video shows just some some
of my tests and particle simulations out
of all the granular materials sand is
the most mobile mud and silt will stick
while stones are too heavy to move but
San sand is really the traveler it rides
with the winds and waves when soon's
currents and waves within the lagoons
are being responsible for the formation
of new islands as well as the erosion of
others and they are creating this
ever-changing landscape particularly
difficult to map by traditional means
the purpose of the research is also to
understand how to intercept all of these
material flows for a design intervention
the site is located in the northernmost
atoll in the Maldives along the main
Indian Ocean trade routes the Sam Bank
proposal is essentially a transhuman
port that aims to tap into the
international input export flows of fans
and the global sand black-market sand
laundering stock prices and lack of
international regulation on material
extraction create a demand for a
temporary storage space the proposal
also comes is the reaction to existing
government agendas of mass land
reclamation projects population
displacement and all under special
economic zone act for this entire a
tallit region unlike traditional banking
storage facilities
here the vault is where the sand where
the scientists saw is the lagoon itself
the proposal takes advantage of the
particular geology of the earth of
formation the material properties of
sand and creates a low-cost safe storage
space underwater with minimal built
interventions the sand bank is managed
through the manipulation of local
dynamic flows of sand by the use of
local knowledge and the proposed series
of facilities and infrastructures they
allow for the atoll to be one step ahead
of the sea level rise by gaining access
to the most important resources for the
maldives sand lands and money so do it
works is large ships bring sand and
transfer it across the border reef
through the use of proposed installation
and series of choices onto smaller
barges these are run locally and are
able to travel on the shallow waters and
deposit or withdrawal sand from
strategical points within the [ __ ]
the master plan is designed with
materials that have a life of their own
so the vault is managed using dynamic
phenomena of water sand salt
monsoons waves but also money land trade
politics and material exploitation in
the end the sand Bank it becomes a
manufactured underwater landscape shaped
by the demands of mass consumerism and
the use of sand in the global
construction industry
okay so my my presentation is not about
the project is about a proposition
mostly it's an invitation reflecting a
bit about upon what Alfredo mention in
the bay in his opening remarks they need
for inventing special concepts to
understand the production of space
across scales and my my proposal is this
is imitation is that to reconsider the
nature they mentioned the configuration
and the conceptualization of the urban
fabric the fabric of urbanization around
the world so normally when we talk about
the urban fabric especially in ninety
nine schools everyone thinks something
like Manhattan you know or a dense City
you know a densely built-up space and
even as these configurations become more
and more extended more and more
complicated more and more and expansive
polycentric we still you know talk about
the same thing
right it's basically the fabric of of
cities the the fabric of tensile
concentrated areas the problem is if you
take all these things together all over
the world their area is quite
insignificant so it's around I think two
or three million square kilometers and
so not more than three percent of the
total land area and this is quite
intriguing especially if you compare it
with the overall amount of land that we
are using so everyone is kind of agrees
that urbanization is saving the planet
but we are stick stuck in this and
contradiction between you know the urban
fabric as the fabric of cities and
everything else that is produced around
them right this is like a quote that I
like that grasps that very well it's
like oh the UN habitat 2016 it still
frames the whole understanding of what
urbanization is doing as something that
is centered in cities where all
population is concentrated where all
economic growth is actually happening
and then there are all these side
effects of urbanization that is being ex
load it around the world right so we
know that the urban ization has an
impact on shaping the Anthropocene or
capitalist scene or Arab Anthropocene or
whatever you want to call it but a
systematic investigation of this
physical configuration of the fabric of
organization is lighting a bit and
obviously this is not unrelated to our
conventional understanding of how value
is produced this is again building upon
this quote this is a typical and spiky
world idea of little fraud visualized
here where you can see all social value
if we actually agree that social values
GDP that is a very questionable remark
and actually we translate it to the
distribution of its production around
the world and not actually to States but
in a more detailed level we again have
this image of the cities being the
center of economic productivity and you
can see all these areas around them that
appear to be contributing nothing right
in the world economy but on the contrary
if you actually start looking
investigating ecological value as for
example biomass produced it is exactly
the reverse image so now the spikes are
in the more productive areas of
Agriculture of forestry and not so much
in cities where this surplus is consumed
and the may be at the root of the
problem is this understanding of
urbanization as something that has to do
with the concentration of population in
in certain areas and the expansion of
this areas and this is indeed like it's
a valid point it is indeed a process
that is happening but I like more a
diagram like that that actually shows
the trend of densification like that and
I don't really like this typical diagram
of the different cares that so you know
the relation of population to evermore
population for example because the point
is that indeed population concentration
ISM is important the population is
densifying
faster
than it's growing right because you
could say Oh density obviously
population is growing land is a fixed
you know area overall density is growing
but the density there eight of density
densification is actually faster than
the rate of population growth and if you
can actually ignore where the cities are
and you just look at the overall
distribution population you indeed see a
process of densification the problem is
that out of this process you just also
isolate the particular areas of the
world that are these orange spots of the
planet so the proposition here is that
indeed concentration is important but
it's not the essence of urbanization the
proposition is that the essence of
urbanization is a condition of
interdependence a that is happening
because of the concentration of
population and there is an
interdependence see within these areas
of concentration and there is an
interdependence II also with all sorts
of other landscapes that constitute this
dark mass that you can see here and
obviously this this concept is a
building directly upon the agenda of
planetary urbanization and I try to
summarize it here in this diagram but
I'm pretty sure no brainer we'll be
talking about more in detail lately and
roughly this agenda tries to help us
understand urbanization beyond
agglomeration not ignoring it
understanding it is important but also
understanding that it's only one
instance of the variegated processes of
an urbanization so you can steal a
understand cities as part of them of the
concentration of concentrated
urbanization process but you should need
to envision all these metabolic
interdependencies that could be
conceptualized as a form of extended
urbanization and obviously this
condition is not static is always
mutating it's always being transformed
through process of creative destruction
so if we forget about urbanization
something that is only happening in
cities but as a process that is
restoring the planet then the question
is let's sift from this idea of the
urban fabric of the fabric of cities to
the idea of the urbanization fabric with
the urbanization all these
landscapes that are being produced so
not limited to the agglomeration zones
not limited to the settlement areas but
also including all these other areas
that I showed before and if we actually
take a microscopic view of the world to
unpack a bit what this black mass that I
showed on the map is you can see that a
very significant amount is actually
built surfaces constructed surfaces most
of it is areas of primary production so
areas where we put nature at work right
so cropland 43 areas grazing areas for
cattle breeding and things like that and
if we just map the distribution of the
surfaces around the world so this is
just again building upon this diagram
the constructed surface of the world the
farming areas the grazing areas the
forestry areas also adding to that the
infrastructure networks you know the
Marine corridors the aviation systems
then we have a better idea of what this
black mass is and actually we can get
rid of this you know do all dualistic
lets it be hot on me between these
orange parts and the rest and if we
start plotting like doing simple
exercises in overlaying things we can
start seeing the variegated nature of
the fabric of urbanization and obviously
the variegated nature of the
urbanization fabric is just seen here in
things that you can map and describe
easily but obviously it's differentiated
because of cultural political social
issues but even in this map you can
start seeing how things play out very
differently you can relate areas with
higher population density without a lot
of infrastructural equipment we had a
lot of fixed capital on the ground areas
with high productivity in agriculture
without any population for example
around it and you can start having an
idea about the different areas that
constitute the urbanization fabric very
roughly we can just simplify it and say
if only one side you have a densely
built area like you know the downtown of
a city that we all know how it looks
on the other hand you can have a
completely unpopulated area with very
high primary productivity for example
and proposition is that we can start
investigating the composition of the
urbanization fabric through the
interplay of agglomeration landscapes or
landscapes of concentrated urbanization
and operational landscapes all these
landscapes of interdependence we have by
geographical entry dependency that make
up the world now the problem is that
typically you would think that these
landscapes are somehow linearly linked
like like a city is linked to its
hinterland for example and it's taking
its energy in its water from somewhere
but what is happening under
globalization is that this relationship
is becoming extremely dispersed and
these landscapes are becoming globalized
specialized very directly interlinked
not only with agglomeration landscapes
but also with each other and in a way
they constitute in the same way for
example that global cities constitute
you know the global command extent
there's for certain sectors of the
economy also you have certain areas in
the world that are very specialized and
where you have all the concentrated
production primary production in certain
commodities happening so again they have
a commanding position let's say in the
trade of these commodities globally and
you can sit for different things in the
world all again related to the
globalization of the primary sectors of
the economy which has remained actually
a bit unseen and the second is that not
it's not necessary that these landscapes
are linked to agglomerations that are
feeding particular cities they are often
interlinked with each other the good
example is actually looking at
agglomeration area and at sorry at
agricultural areas that are not being
used to feed any city they are actually
used to produce a cattle feed so these
are all cropland areas that are not
being used to produce food right and you
can compare them with other areas for
example that are used to produce food
and you can understand that this
landscape is actually feeding this
landscape so
you know corn growing area is actually a
the metabolic hinterland for example of
a cattle growing field and I will just
stop here thank you very much thank you
very much for these very
thought-provoking presentations I was
introducing this morning I think the
same proposition about looking at these
systems is as relevant as one could say
problematic and I'd like to open the
questions to the audience start hi
thanks for your presentations I mean
this is absolutely exciting beautiful
stuff but I was just interested in this
room in this clear absence of a citation
practice in the images that are being
displaced the image as the work itself
and in a way of looking into all of
these beautiful images and we don't
really know what it means and I was just
interested if you if you could speak to
that aspect of the image on a citation
practice is there maybe one person in
particular or like which one maybe I
don't know I mean I think it's it's I
mean I it somehow emerges in all of the
works I mean it's all stunning stuff but
it looks like there's a deep web of
interconnections with other works that
somehow aren't really represented in
what those lines mean and what those
dots mean in what those borders mean and
I'm just wondering therefore what the
image is in absence for and I mean but
that was my question maybe yeah I can
try to answer from my own at least is
that um all the information for us is
data right and so every image I showed I
think most of us showed we've created I
think to visualize data to
to make things clear maybe it's just
also the nature of ten minutes not to
criticize anybody but for the sake of
brevity and the sake of trying to show
this presentation which i think is more
about enticing or as sort of like a
preview of what just imagine is much
more dense work than we could see so I'm
perhaps the citations for lot of them
probably because most of us have made
the images were showing and perhaps what
we could do next time is offer like a
citation page on each chair that would
show the data sources for that because I
don't think would be responsible in a
way to sort of overly go into it as an
academic citation presentation in ten
minutes because it would miss be simply
impossible so don't do it at all you
know but maybe there's a recklessness to
that as well
so it's a fair criticism I think it
slightly touches on what we briefly
mentioned in the presentation about so
this how appealing simplicity is kind of
something broken porous that complexity
is valuable and you do just have to look
into these things and you can't do that
in ten minutes that's kind of
fundamental really sorry that's kind of
yeah that's something that I thought
interesting about the question in terms
of the production of images as in
cartography and perhaps because is is an
extreme example because unlike the other
presentations who showed some field trip
images maybe you didn't there's this
production of of world vision that is
created through data and there's
particular data that is highlighted that
is selected that is cropped that is
projected and I would like to ask all of
you what do you think is
your agency as designers with regards to
data not only selecting it but also
representing it and more in particular
I'd like to ask both of you
yulia nikos because this is a question
that I had prepared in advanced the
material that Nikko submitted used a the
maximum projection and you also had used
the dimension projection in working on a
publication that includes an essay by
marked a field that asks the question
about whether the earth is curved or
flat and he criticizes the he makes this
very interesting critique about the
dimension projection and their
relationship with cybernetics is
thinking and it's very interest in the
fact that it was published in Life
Magazine in 1943 making this argument
about the necessity or the need for the
US president to be able to visualize the
whole world without any distortions and
this is where the the maximum projection
comes in very handy because it also
reflects various strategies because
depending on the way you rearrange it
you can see as you said like the
continues mine I continued my system so
I'd like to ask you where you think your
agent is in relationship to data
management how we represent it in there
and how intend produces our own patient
of the world I think is four or five
questions together but probably
yeah I think in in all of our projects
so critical and instrumental heart
ography was something we made a lot use
of you know not only to do represent our
findings but more to to understand them
to understand data to make sense of it
probably because we have an architecture
background it's it's often easier for us
to visualize things but I think it's
aimed the way we chose different like
the way I chose different projections to
to show different moments it is also
because you end up trying to represent
your own vision but based on on based on
a lot of different data sets and based
on a lot of choices in order to be able
to follow a particular point so there
was following sand starting off from the
moldings afterwards I I found that the
best way to represented is through
freezing the ocean as a whole well
normal photography's would not allow you
to do that I think is similar to the way
we're discussing earlier with the
flip-flops trail and I think every
single idea will have a very different
use of
yes so I think it indeed is a long
discussion and it's always an
interesting discussion we have I think
there are several issues in your
equation and maybe I try to break it
down a bit in different parts so first
of all I mean they're about the
microscopic view because maybe some of
the issues come from there
there is always this challenge but I
mean it's always better to have you know
experience aside be there have the
feeling of the place you know grasp
understand what the process are on the
ground
however there is a limitation to the
extent to which you can do it if you
know all these processes are exceeding
you know your your your capacity the
capacity of your senses and way to
experience things and to register things
and obviously then even there there is a
moment of translation but this is not my
point here my point here is that if you
are interested in grasping the
complexity in the scales of certain
phenomena that exceed your immediate
environment and what you can grasp you
are dependent upon certain processes of
abstraction that create all you know
this maps and they are basically
reproducing already pre-existing
concepts of what you're trying to to map
right and in this case and for example
my point was not so much invest on
comparing you know if this data is
mapping you know population right or if
this dataset is mapping population and
you know sorry agriculture and where it
came from
because the purpose of this presentation
was mostly to use these visualizations
as a basis for custom conceptual and
exploration so it was not actually
saying okay this is where agriculture is
literally and which has to be extremely
precise that's why I agree we I was also
a bit sloppy with the cetaceans and but
in fact this project of investigating
the sources how this data
are constructed and not only the
representation but which is what I'm
going to come on next is a project that
has been at the center of my research
also with a with Neil and we have an
upcoming publication exactly on that on
the on the social construction let's say
of geospatial data a project I think
it's quite timely because you have
always believed proliferation of
information it is actually produced
within disciplines that actually
sometimes they are quite a critical
about what they are doing so there is an
internal debate in the discipline that
creates this map however when this data
set is finalized and it's communicated
outside these disciplines these debates
that actually make you see it as part of
a scientific paradigm that might change
for example it's like a debatable
project right it comes out as a truth as
a scientific truth so all these
discussions that might be interment we
know environmental studies or you know
demographic and investigations or you
know agricultural geography actually are
part of the construction of these
disciplines and at some point they
agreed and they said oh yes album
population should be 50% maybe there was
a debate on that right but this debate
is obscured from the moment that this
data set is actually communicated as a
fixed data set everyone sees that as as
a population map and all these debates
that were there and they were part of
the scientific discourse and actually so
how science is basically a dialogue
right it's not you know the truth it's
not there anymore and we you know do you
take that and while you would say
agriculture in the world according to
that according to this guy you just say
oh agriculture in the world right so
there is this part of social
construction and obviously then there is
a matter of representation and a
presentation is again mish of scale
because there is there is this over
emphasis in detail in constructing the
data but detail doesn't necessarily go
hand-in-hand with the representation
practice so if you had this map in an
extremely detailed version that had a
resolution of one meter by one meter and
you try to represent it it would be less
clear what you try to represent vanna
map which whose resolution is downscaled
for example again so as a data
construction practice and a resolution
is one thing and the construction of the
map is one thing and then there is
another part of of social construction
of the map as a communication practice
so what it is how big it is who is the
audience that's going to see right in
the full map is always interesting it's
funny to notice to to note always that
you cannot really use the fuller
projection without paying for it
so it's copyrighted material every every
time you want to to publish something
you need to pay the know 50 $50 but in
this case I would say my only concern
was the format of the presentation it's
not really challenging that you know the
presentation sorry then the projection
process
well ever every every map is problematic
I mean it's not the sphere III had
actually a video of this presentation
and when you have it on a globe the only
problem when you have a globe is you can
always sew one side of the globe so you
need to have it rotating so people
cannot really see things for a very long
time because they need slaves on the
other side I think it's important to
discuss it acknowledging you
Thanks Thanks I have two questions I'll
try to ask quickly now Mike you made an
astonishing statement I either didn't
hear or didn't understand as well if you
could clarify repeat or unpack it you
said fire made us human before we could
use fire yeah but it's it's not my
statement it's a sir
let's get the fire out of the way it's
it's a geographer who is Michel Midler
who has been refuting or rather
critiquing the theory of another Harvard
anthropologist around the fire adaptive
kind of processes that led to the
creation of the human species that
transition evolution from the hominins
and they're kind of ape-like features to
what enabled the rise of the human race
including the size of the brain and the
kind of anatomic anatomical things so so
what it really meant is that there was a
theory in which humans learned how to
use fire hence they decided to cook and
the cooking of the food increased its
caloric potential which then made it
possible for the brain to grow etc where
hate Flint claims instead that the
presence of lava flows will made it
possible for humans not only to learn
how to use fire but actually to benefit
from the effect of its technology before
they were before you could classify them
as human while they were still Apes to
kind of say it amateurishly
and now this is not my field so I cannot
go much deeper into that but it's an
interesting you know it's an interesting
kind of flip of agency yes can I ask for
a clarification so I get the point about
the lack of enough of let's say a
critical attitude but is it a critical
attitude towards the use of data or
dinner
well again the point is that this was
like just a short presentation to just
make a point for the need to
reconceptualize what the fabric of
urbanization you know is and how we
conceived it that science and obviously
then if you want to go more into detail
into this discussion at the point of
reconceptualizing the fabric of
urbanization is understanding how it's
part of process of and even develop and
a gross scale right but I mean obviously
this is let's say the foundation of a
developing any critical condition I mean
if I had more time I would unpack a bit
more elements of this conception of the
urbanization fabric so it's central idea
of the urbanization fabric is that okay
it's basically produced and reproduced
read through this interdependences of
urbanization but and the capital it's
under this particular form of capitalist
urbanization the interdependence is the
logic of interdependence is actually
profit-seeking so basically the fabric
of urbanization is a profit landscape
for extracting value out of different
combinations of you know some of these
elements that are there and some of
these elements of it cannot be shown on
this mountain right so obviously this is
just you know a mine or starting point
of a critical perspective of
understanding they're all that the
implosion an explosion of this fabric of
urbanization and lays in reshaping
patterns of uneven development around
the world but in very particular ways so
the value that can be extracted in
cities the combination of elements for
example that you can find in this
agglomeration landscapes it's very
different than the value that can be
extracted for example in the operational
lands gives in areas of crime Airport
and one of the one of the directions
that I wanted to go with that was to
link it with discussions on world
ecology so understanding the production
of value beyond the economy so also you
know nature is actually Bigfoot at work
and this is exactly why I think this
investigation of the operational
landscape is so important because
everyone thinks that okay value is
basically producing cities it's just an
exploitation of work basically but in
the operational landscape you also have
the appropriation of unpaid work being
contributed by nature for example it's
direct agriculture right agriculture if
you go to a very fertile area and you
start appropriating the land it's this
fertility of the soil is something that
is contributed for free the more you
cultivate it and the more this condition
intensifies and the more population is
actually adding more pressure on the
land the more the less the capacity of
this landscape to contribute its
fertility right so you have to
complement with fertility by adding
inputs like fertilizers or energy inputs
right so there is a surplus that you are
able to extract is gradually being
raised through the intensification of
these processes never create this
operational landscape so there are
several moments there but obviously it
was a bit hard to unpack all these
things in men in ten minutes
I mean maybe one thing to keep out of
all this discussion is the first two
maps that I saw the extruded value maps
the one showing cities as the economic
engines and we are showing the capacity
of all these other operational
landscapes to contribute value this is
the central point of Rhian visioning the
fabric of urbanization is something that
includes all of these landscapes
ah yes this is actually interesting
point so this this green mob with a
green extraction you mean this is the
sowing the biomass that is produced in
the world and harvested so it's not you
know biomass in forests that you don't
use its biomass in forests that you log
right so it's not let's say vegetation
growing that you are not farming it is
only with the Dacian growing that you
take out of the land okay so you're
taking the let's say capitalistic
approach of the value of the landscape
so how much you can extract I mean in
this particular case and for the cities
is GDP yeah
let's say this is DDP and you have
similar approaches of calculating how
much biomass for example is consumed in
cities by dating all agricultural
products and all you know forestry
projects that are being consumed there
in the same ways that you can do that
for them you know
fossil fuels and things like that okay
thank you I'm taking the micro so thanks
all of you for the presentation the
projects were really interesting and I
would like to us about the mexico-us
border because I really like the
approach and I'm really interested in
how boundaries and you know borders
between the different countries how they
relate to natural landscape and what you
were trying to do is the these
ecosystems but I would also like to ask
how were you establishing this you know
ecologic oh let's say districts or I
don't know areas geological corridors it
was from the geographical surveys by the
USGA you know United States do garage
geographical organization so we were
trying to look for a non partisan
organization that was simply concerned
with geography and ecological corridors
so for us and I've done other works of
similar scale before and now we're doing
other projects out using that we found
we're always looking for is a non
ideological sort of edge condition
because you know like by the work come
the monsoons and the previous work was
presented is that you know there's a
material reality that we simply have to
accept in a positive way and also the
notion of a border wall and how absurd
it is so the photography I couldn't
really discuss was that there's so many
geological conditions to that border
where there's a the big Gulch and
there's a water and it's simply
impossible exactly and what we didn't
get a chance to because of I'd spent too
much time at the beginning sorry that
this this border is actually a magnet
it's bringing people together it's
creating a third sort of culture that
actually is really doing well there's a
21 mile radius that allows for free
movement along the border so there's
people going so typically Mexican
children I'm going to night say it's for
school Americans are going into Mexico
for healthcare because obviously we have
the worst health care system in the
world so it's actually functioning and
so in the the moments of these twin city
phenomenon that happens or these five
twin cities are really based on a jug
off their geographical condition that
allows them to connect so it's something
where again is I think the more you sort
of sort of remove yourself from the
process
you don't impose an ideology or a
proposition but just something study it
so I hope that answered your question
maybe yeah yeah which was how this
established new nation that you they're
proposing how this relates to these
natural ecosystems that you were well it
doesn't it doesn't like the twin cities
do and the Luther Nations more of a sort
of policy zone for sort of the
exploitation of Labor based on one the
twenty one twenty one mile radius that
operates on the border condition and
then sort of how these sort of Macanudo
rows are a lot of function because the
goal now is to move macular Dora's
within that region so you can so far
Kahn wants a manufacturing facility
that's literally transcends the border
so they can cut down on the distribution
of product so the product comes in the
American side gets on a conveyor belt it
gets made there it gets sent back and
gets sent to China or India or something
like that so at 21 miles border the 21
that new third nation is more result of
say an ideological condition based on
the exploitation of labour in that
particular region so if you could sort
of then flip it and use it and so it is
actually legally possible to do it but
there's very few probably you couldn't
run on that platform the United States
you know for Congress but yeah so it's
combination of both but primarily though
is geopolitical condition it's again
with the Mexican you as further you
began your presentation with this lying
about the purveyors and how these were
entitled to be violent situations and it
is it was very visible to see that when
you see this built barrier but these
these border it's of course very
complicated and you you don't even have
like physical barriers when you have the
desert where you have the rivers so how
can you conceive these parts of nature
like this large desert in the middle or
these large rivers according to your
proposal and to how these spaces that
Arnold will become political and between
become violent right so I mean the point
is ours is instead of one border we have
to yeah I by the way I'm from mixing
okay all right so which part of Mexico
are you from I'm terrified now
well the point was that if you this
system this area that we try to divide
simply can't be divided because of these
natural geological conditions right and
if you actually mapped the precise
points where illegal crossing happens
right most illegal crossings actually
not by Mexicans it's by people seeking
asylum or refugees seeking asylum which
is a huge misconception so we were
saying we can't we can't use that we're
trying to precisely the opposite it was
like how do you actually create a region
that can protect this other sort of
really functioning area these twin
cities are quite beautiful in the way
they operate and they sort of share a
culture and language and they share sort
of um daily activity so the we use the
geological conditions and the natural
conditions to reinforce the notion that
there can be a border right and it's
simply physically possible they did
something in San Diego where they
there's a hole underneath fence
somewhere and they tried to move a bunch
of dirt there right and like oh we're
gonna fill this hole very American right
we're gonna get a bulldozer move earth
and within the process of six months all
the land went back to where it came from
because it was a reason it wasn't there
was through wind patterns or through
sort of just natural sort of systems so
the hubris of thinking that you could
create anything to do by this area so
it's just absurd you know and so the
work we're trying to do to me is like a
public service announcement for
Americans yeah it's like going to like
so I give this for a presentation to
like in Pinellas County Florida right
where it's extremely trumpian so the
point of this work is to go to those
areas and sort of expose the false logic
and the false belief in our in our own
country so I think part of that to
answer your questions SART again is that
you just embrace it and you use it to
reinforce the notion that a border is
simply impossible I like nature in that
situation function ask a border itself
right I mean there's rivers you can't
move across there's deserts you can't
move across etcetera unfortunately
that's where people if illegal crossing
does happen is these areas where they're
not patrolled because they don't they're
almost physically impossible to patrol
therefore there's a tremendous amount of
casualties
area unfortunately right because they're
physically impossible to cross so there
is a sort of diversity to that as well
just one maybe maybe for everyone but
for anomic yeah there is
well I see something that's a continuous
across the propositions for the projects
that you presented is this idea I guess
of overcoming mentalities know certain
mentalities that dominates the way we
practice our profession so I don't know
in the case of naming to mention this
geotech nice it a and how to overcome if
I understand correctly a kind of
unrepresented view of you know
controlling nature no and that perhaps
there's others forces that one can need
to take in into account in inner work no
perhaps you can elaborate a little bit
about what do you mean by that no and I
also perhaps each of you can wrap up and
say what are the mentalities that you
want to what you think you're trying to
overcome by the production of your
projects or your propositions no I mean
for example in the case of Niko's I
funded very directly like basically this
idea well we think about cities with
narrower or visions to those urban
concentrations where really they depend
so much on other landscapes and that's
very difficult to overcome because you
know we live in in a profession where we
are asked to produce sustainable cities
we are asked to produce resilient cities
we are asking to produce smart cities
now which are completely separate in
that but just want to touch on if each
of you can you know explore a little bit
on the mentalities that you want to work
on yeah I guess it's it's an attempt to
try to draw a different
draw attention to a different kind of
set of lines that connect us to the to
the environment environment or to the
ground or to the planet because all the
frameworks that we have for thinking and
imagining space are not only
two-dimensional but they are they have
come to cover
I mean amicus analysis is kind of to the
point in the sense that it is inaccurate
in a way description of what both
technology and economy and etc have done
with our imaginations of space and by
employing this you know admittedly
provocative maybe concept of
geotechnical setting the Geo physical
systems as a form of Technology at least
in its in its in its capacity to produce
forms of or techniques that are very
specific to regions it's it's it's an
attempt to try to create some units that
it's at the same time global and it's or
planetary in its scope but also has
extremely different regional opens up
for regional trajectories of development
so it's an invitation to reimagine
radically what the urban could mean in
every different place it's something
that can that should be perhaps
different in every different place that
building a city in London or in the
territory or in the landscape that is
London is today it's completely a
different story from building something
here let's say five thousand years ago
the conditions have changed and I guess
that makes it also a little bit may be
futile to think in this state in this
way because so much of the fabric has
been urbanized right of the planet but
but it's an invitation to try to somehow
reboot our imagination and think that
there there are technologies in which we
can put ourselves that's rather that we
need to kind of take a conscious stance
towards what kind of machine that we are
aligning ourselves with and I guess the
tools speaking to the person who asked
about cartography is in the end and the
referencing practice I think that's also
one way of opening up the discussion of
what are we really
and what are the concepts of space of
spatiality that I did we are kind of
mindlessly reproducing when talking
about phenomena that are that maybe
transcend the digital realm in terms of
what is representable what is what is
there so you want us to wrap up maybe
like a little send-off okay well I guess
three things we take away from our work
is one is the the absence of scale we
can't operate at a scale and I think
architecture particularly in the United
States suffers from this I teach you to
be arc program so is very focused and
it's driven by requirements of what that
needs to be and I think it's
fundamentally holding back architecture
of our chicken in America so I look at
the the program here the landscape
urbanism program completely envious and
jealous one that I didn't study here in
- that I teach here and so I think this
being part of this today is really uh
one it's really sort of inspiring and
sort of deflating simultaneously at the
same time it's like confirmation is that
going to a rehab group and seeing you
know yeah there's other people with the
same sort of problem the second is the I
think both in the two first
presentations a which were just really
really tremendous where the importance
of stopping you know architecture tends
use production as a way of avoiding a
problem and the having a critical
distance and stopping and and that kind
of comes back then the critique of self
critique of the map you're using
critique of the data you're using
critique of everything you hold to be
sort of true and I think all these
projects sort of have our that but you
in order to sort of get that point you
have to produce you know so at least for
me that project was the beginning of a
new way of working and then I went back
and I critique those very things what
data were using what map are we using
and I think if you do that after a
project I think it's very effective so I
think that's I'd seen it work today I
also see that as well
you know that this is just the beginning
for a lot of these projects I think
that's very important so thank you maybe
just to wrap up and based on what Alfred
had to say it
the whole sustainability question I
think it's an I mean my presentation is
maybe just a good anchor point to think
that you cannot really discuss an
ability in cities and sustainable cities
without sustainable you know hinterlands
or whatever you want to call with
landscapes and I think it's it's
interesting to also think at the beach
behind PPP on the ecological dimension
so sustainability doesn't only mean you
know ecologically you know efficient or
you know it's also about social
sustainability and it's I think it's
very useful to always think if you're
trying to make San Francisco more
sustainable you're probably putting a
lot of pressure in a series of other
landscapes around the world right and I
don't think that discussions like oh you
know a sustainable hinterland is
basically just like a local one so
localized protection have urban
agriculture and this may be one more
thing that you can get out of this
presentation if you if you look at the
macro scopic you know view of things you
understand that all these discussions
about oh let's plant all the roofs and
you know let's put all the agriculture
in our region if you look at the actual
you know distribution of things and the
ratios the sizes of of things and all
these operations and how much land they
occupy all these questions are a bit
then you know I don't know em to me they
they don't really make a lot of sense
and I mean just one final thing to to
wrap it up since you will discuss it
with discipline
I always find it amusing in for example
in the UK it's it's often you have these
schools of the build environments
architecture is part of these but a very
simple thing to notice again by looking
at the big picture and the distribution
of all these surfaces around the world
most of the build environment is not in
cities actually more than 50% of it is
basically infrastructural again
transportation corridors dams
stuff like that so not even the build
environment is in cities I mean
obviously the densest one is in cities
but the majority of it is beyond that
exactly because you know it's it's a
huge areas of these landscapes that we
are using its enormous presentations
really deal with this issue of control
in in design and I think mostly for me
with the takeaways to to start thinking
more of the materials we use and the
system in which we designs is as being
alive and and dynamic and having a life
of their own and sort of accepting that
he can still intercept all of these
flows within a design proposition
without having complete control without
completely drawing lines or borders or
or any is a very definitive and static
physical thing but everything can quite
fluid and designed at the same time very
interesting remark because I had another
question which is shown in your face as
well and the issues of that limb she was
mentioning this morning the distinction
between what how those post challenge to
control an agency and these was a
position for the three of you but I'll
keep it for this I think you know data
itself doesn't necessarily tell the
narrative picking up from what Marty was
saying this morning knows
we like narratives that particular box
if and they can make ideas really
powerful so that's probably a very
simplistic term maybe as designers and
storytellers you know we can take
narratives and explanations and scale
and systems you know and we even walk
together into these things you know the
mapping data without a key on it can
sometimes render it completely or no
it's completely abstract so maybe that's
kind of us we're kind of I mean that's
kind of central to what we're trying to
do really is interpret data really for
the designers in the morning so that so
we've talked quite a lot about how you
how you are transparent about that
because you do have to become being
quite the interesting really theta if
it's misinterpreted or it's wrong
you've been worse to say I mean that's
something we're trying to you know
they're just thinking about controllers
is this yearly was saying just to wrap
up our faces in the Maldives they're
that they're now developing this kind of
system of bringing the system of
ownership into the country for the first
time basically and traditionally
ownership didn't really exist because
it's such a fluid situation that
naturally it doesn't really lend itself
to to ownership and static sort of forms
of inhabitation and and that is now
creeping in at just the wrong time so
[Laughter]
controlling an understanding a situation
you think
okay yeah thank you thank you very much
you interesting very interesting
presentations and comments we're gonna
have a break for 30 minutes we'll be
back
[Applause]
