welcome back I'm gonna keep it as short
as I can today yeah it's it's both the
promise in a threat my name is John
Palmas II know and this is the last of
the open seminar series plan the planet
which is inspired by and the uneasy work
of juggling turret and this evening and
we're gonna do two different things
whether on one side do a recapitulation
of the argumentation for this inversion
of planning when the Earth's rise makes
the earth into an object of planning and
mobilizes Planet and the complicated
conditions we are facing today this
evening is a very cold evening and I
would like truly to spend time trying to
warm our hearts there's a little bit of
hope about what we can do the
argumentation is really one and it has
been from the outset one of a transient
condition from the cold war to the warm
wall at the moment when the Berlin Wall
came down and with it all the regime of
the east of Europe everybody thought
really that that was either the end of
history or it was the moment when war as
a condition of territorial condition
just would fizzle out we all know that
we are in a forever war and we would
like to articulate the arguments how to
move away from the Cold War into the
warmer in order to do that I'd like
three to bring you back to a few of the
elements that we've been discussing this
is a series that was prong into being by
a intimation where the students to
rethink how we deal with
climate in a architectural school how we
deal with the relationship and the
uneasy relationship to the atmosphere to
the sky and to the landforms that we
inhabit and the multiplicity of life
that we are threatening in both in the
oceans and on land and the birds insects
bacteria we are in a climate crisis in
more so now that we can calculate
exactly what that means after the
amazing
article that Tim Lenten published last
Friday
I hope you've seen it all together with
John shell Hoover will staff and this
amazing article in nature recalling why
the notion of tipping points is not just
some scientific proof arrow condition
and that but how we can start thinking
the relationship towards risk and the
threat and an emergency in more clear
weight if you remember those of you who
had the opportunity to read this amazing
article we are in a climate emergency we
ran a climate emergency because the time
that our actions might take form and
start influencing the Earth's system
coincides with the time that remains for
us to reach unreserve and reversible
tipping point of the earth system so
this is the calculation the mathematical
calculation there's no conditions more
clear than that no the time that will
take our actions to influence the earth
system if we start yesterday and the
time that remains so to say coincide
this of course the condition that we
described during the series
the rise of the Technosphere the
Technosphere is a very young concept
it's a concept that somehow was thought
of more than hundred years ago and by
then masking the vladimir vysotsky
was a Russian and then Soviet geologists
who devised the beautiful word biosphere
and in his conception there was a clear
teleological movement from rocks to the
emergence of life through the emergence
of the biosphere that is a complete
different or reorganization of the
planet to what he hoped would be a new
condition of knowledge the no sphere in
that very difficult concept that is
really highly problematic on many levels
in particular the unification of the
biosphere and the fact that in spite of
all his efforts
Vernadsky just treats life almost as a
abiotic condition a self-organizing
system but there's no real conditions of
life in his description in that concept
Peter have one of the members of the
Anthropocene working group we met a few
of them over the series in particular we
met the answer assay which the convener
of the working group we met our Vedas
and Peter have a combined paleontologist
so that the Technosphere might be
conceived as a spin-off of the biosphere
the Technosphere is technically a very
simple concept is everything that
sustains human life so all our bodies
plus the food we eat the domesticated
animals and plants plus the energy
systems that sustain us and the
information structures that sustain us
the Technosphere has reached in its
material structures the equivalent of
any other paradigm of the earth like the
Liz
the biosphere so everything that we
think we've produced ourselves like
cities farmlands plantations transport
structures organization of information
the internet summed up our consuming as
much energy as other forms of the earth
at the paradigms of the earth and this
brings us to think that it is a
self-organizing system that we are
endeavouring to maintain rather than the
other way around so we are caught in
this problematic of the Technosphere and
this is a concept that I would like you
to maybe put a little footnote to
because some it's crucial for the
argument that we are trying to imply
late this evening the argument towards
climate peace from within we think we
are in charge of everything we design we
can make the decision and we had an
emergency we could take action we got 30
years if everything goes according to
plan
to decarbonize our economies and in the
meantime we think that everything is
designed everything is pertaining the
relationship between decision making and
material forms interaction between
people and things from within it all
looks feasible the Technosphere has this
difficult added element to it that is
not recycling every other paradigm of
Gaia every other component every other
structure the cim configures Gaia
constantly recycles actually Gaia is
better understood as a very complex
series of asynchronous cycles that are
recycling back energy and matter the two
main scientific paradigm paradigms that
exit the Cold War are tectonic plate
movements and greenhouse gas effects if
an understanding that the earth is
dynamic it's completely open
the Technosphere doesn't recycle
anything on the contrary we are
producing a huge pile of refuse and that
we don't manage in any way to recycle
the major part of this is the part of
the Technosphere that is in the sky the
greenhouse gas is that we've put in the
sky that is nothing else than a refuse
rubbish so to say that we don't manage
to bring back into the different cycles
of Gaia Tim Linton has in his beautiful
book revolutions that changed that made
me well this beautiful little diagram a
it's really difficult to find it soon
it's almost at the end of the book among
many other passages and probably
graphically more beautiful charts but
basically this is the problem of the
Technosphere as we see it today and
remember that tim wrote this book modern
twelve years ago the atmosphere the land
and the water of the oceans are in
dynamic system it's highly unstable the
chemistry of the atmosphere is unstable
it is formed by gases that technically
shouldn't be together and the
interaction with the land and with the
oceans are more or less understood in
what we understand we call the carbon
cycle the nitrogen cycle the phosphorous
cycle and so on on the side there is a
leftover of fossils and fossils are the
beginning of geology fossils are mass
Nelson the carbon that is contained in
life in the bio technical parts of Gaia
being fossilized being
transformed into very compact compound
that has no oxygen in it so instead of
decomposing and being recycled into the
land and into that Macias somehow stays
there and although that is small as fine
we understand it the moment we start
taking out the carbon fossils for our
energy system the James Watt was
mentioned last week my both Allen
pottage and double villas has a very
complex moment of the making of the
relationship between the law and the
Anthropocene the moment at that energy
contained in the carbon is released by
our technological invention something
really strange happens and that is the
beginning of the rise of the
Technosphere we augment our capacity to
sustain ourselves we all meant our
capacity to have food to have transports
to have farms and until then no the
farms were basically run by the work of
the animals and we were feeding the
animals some grass there was maybe a
little bit of wind here and there to
help us with the pumping stations in
order to give water to our fellow humans
and our other animals but that was it
the moment that we start and we move
from one form of fire just burning wood
into carbon and then from carbon into
gas oil and from there onwards with all
the different forms of contemporary
extraction of carbon fossil the
relationship between the atmosphere the
land and the ocean change
and what happens is really the rise of
the Technosphere this layer the covers
earth what happens is that half of the
carbon is used in form of energy and
remains in the atman once uses in the
form of energy remains in the atmosphere
it doesn't come down it doesn't dissolve
into the ocean oh it's not captured by
back by plants it just stays there and
contributes to the documentation in the
greenhouse gases the other half is
divided more or less than 25% goes into
land and 35% goes into the ocean when it
goes into the ocean it acidifies the
ocean it changes the life structures of
the most important of our environments
and when it is on land it's not we're
not quick enough to have more and more
plants capture it so what happens is
that we have a huge pile of rubble only
of carbon plus everything that we're
moving in order with the energy that we
are deriving from carbon and let's
remind ourselves that after the 567
exajoules that humans use and this is a
figure of already 6 years ago we've
moved up only a fraction less than 1% is
renewable energy all the rest is carbon
we move all of this stuff and that's the
rise of the Technosphere I mentioned
often that we have this little hobby of
measuring how heavy it is so this is the
rough calculation that we've published a
few years back so if you imagine that
one Terra tom is 10 to the 12
metric tons and so we are using a ton in
terms of the metric tonne what we did
was a very simple calculation of that
thin layer
we're not calculating the carbon in the
atmosphere
which you could imagine up to the year
2000 was something like 282 gigatons we
made a sum of all of these elements now
we can go from the urban areas rural
housing pasture land cropland trolled
sea floor land-use eroded soils all the
way to how heavy railways are in the
world and we come and we look at the
density it you can see it's a rough
estimate it's more or less it's more
less than more in this situation is a
conservative estimate and we reach 30
point to 11
tera tons of stuff designed by
architects by engineers by in the Civic
enthusiasm of the 20th century you could
focus a little bit know urban areas are
of course they're the heaviest and
because of the accumulation of mass in
cities much heavier than the thin layer
over farmland or the troll seafloor
there's not one square kilometer of the
continental shelves that is not been
trolled and - just so that we understand
what we mean trolling is a gigantic
metal cage sometimes tens of meters
large that is thrown on the bottom of
the sea and then dragged
just dragged she remember the equivalent
that was discussed is that it is similar
to have farming as if we will have
gigantic machines cutting down all the
trees up here a huge upheaval of all
land and destroying all the farms in
order to find a few cows this is
something that was told to us on Friday
by an amazing practitioner who's
endeavoring to preserve marine areas you
will destroy half of Britain only to
find a few cows actually we have
destroyed more than half of Britain who
have destroyed an area that is the
equivalent of continental Africa to find
a few fish and we destroy all the
habitats and a few fish so that's the
level that were discussing the problem
is that seen in this proposition of ours
to move from a negotiation on climate
like the one that is occurring today in
Kop to a negotiation on peace lies all
in the fact that the Technosphere seen
from without so from its outset is a
self-organizing system so until now all
our negotiations are occurring as if we
would be able to design our actions and
in the relationship to the planet our
proposition is to move away from that
and seriously consider what it means to
inhabit a world where at least one third
of the carbon is trapped by
the Technosphere and we are
self-organizing and we are not really in
control of this we cannot stop it we
cannot augmented we cannot reduce it
it's not recycling the carbon that we
have put into the atmosphere is not
recycling back it's not like in a forest
where we are recycling back the organic
compounds in very complex cycles now the
Technosphere just puts one more layer of
rubble one more layer of rubber so the
question for the negotiation on peace is
really how to understand the cycles of
the Technosphere and make them somehow
faster when they need to be faster
slower and they need to be slower and
this is one of the key elements of the
proposition you know one of the
difficulties is that when we start
thinking of a different meter of
articulation of say our architectures
our built environment so to say and we
still think it as a given yeah the built
environment is what surrounds us we're
not thinking it in terms of energy and
material fluxes we're not in really
imagining how the recycling of it or
have the relationship between the
material structures of cities and what
used to be called the countryside and
interact with the rest of the earth
system so fossil fuels land ocean
atmosphere proposition number one for a
climate piece is to consider the
Technosphere in terms of its material
energy and information cycles and to
start thinking it if you are serious
about engaging with the contemporary
climate emergency we need to formalize
negotiations about these cycles and how
we inhabit these cycles and this now
I'll take a little time to explain how
we can do this
and I'm gonna show you an example we
shall need to keep oil in the ground
the Museum of oil this is the project
that you might have heard bits and
pieces from Charlie chronic from
Greenpeace when he was here on this very
strange session where we when we were
asking when are we
what is our time when are we and the
Museum of oil is for us a first step
towards say an articulation what we mean
by climate peace it is primarily an
understanding that if we don't have an
energy transition it's not an energy
crisis an energy crash hmm it's not an
environmental crisis or a ecological
crisis its extinction so we need to keep
oil in the ground but we can't otherwise
my computer doesn't work my microphone
doesn't work
I cannot have water I cannot travel here
my house is cold the entire hospital
system collapses the police cannot
control what we do we cannot find food
most of our food comes from oil most of
our food comes from oil directly from
oil we use most of these
most of our oil is used in refineries to
transform it into fertilizers and to
transform it into weed killers and that
sustains life for almost 6 billion
people of us it comes also indirectly
from oil because we use a lot of oil in
farming and most of farming today
completely automatize and so on but we
also use oil in order to go and control
and catch the fish in the high seas
without oil no food so we cannot keep
all in the ground unless by a magic
solution tomorrow some young kid invents
a new form of energy so we are stuck we
should need to keep oil in the ground
and we can't that's the proposition of a
negotiation in order to keep oil in the
ground and we should keep all in the
ground we need to completely revise our
energies our lifestyles our economies
our institutions or in other words we
shall need to revise territorial forms
we shall need to revise the relationship
between how we organize ourselves in
relationship in connection to material
flows to energy flows through biotic and
abiotic flows to information flow and
this is where the proposition becomes
not one of activism so to say of
fighting in the streets but one of
design the proposition of a climate
peace is one way we whereby we need to
negotiate or we would need to negotiate
a new relationship literally a new
relationship to the ground but a ground
that is no longer the one that we have
discovered so far but it's one of murky
oil it's one where it's almost
impossible to distinguish what is
keeping us alive and what kills us
where the invisibility of this oil
violence needs to be made explicit needs
to be made not a ghost
needs to be brought at the table of
negotiation and so what we need to do is
to clearly delineate territories that
are been shaped directly by all and
clearly delineate how we can extract
ourselves from them all so it's a both a
situation of ground it's a situation of
soil it's a situation of enriching the
biosphere and reaching possibilities of
recycling of using more energy from the
planet without us putting the refuse of
carbon having well in mind that what
we're living in is a gigantic ruin
because the carbon that is in the
atmosphere is gonna be there for at
least 300,000 years the structures that
we built in the on land and the vessels
that we pushed at sea
have established themselves as a
gigantic ruin these structures that are
somehow still cycling in and out of the
earth are damaging so much life in the
form of pollution acidification
[Music]
reduction of ecosystems reduction of
conditions of possibility of expansion
of many of the livelihoods and as we do
this delineation we need to negotiate
this territories not only as we discuss
with blue ship is reduced with humans
but with human non-human posthuman
entities we need to renegotiate our
position among this territory and
hopefully we can use what is left of
architecture after we go through all of
this process of sorting out what we
should actually teach in a school sort
of mass destruction of the planet or hmm
what what is left of architecture is a
capacity of being convivial of
hospitable been carrying of potala tea I
think that is really if there is one
element that we should carry on of this
amazing thing we call architecture is
that capacity of thinking that actually
hmm we can form homes not houses homes
we can create conditions where existence
it would be acceptable this is a version
of the Museum of world that was
displayed in the town of cars row in
Germany and the point is that as you set
out to do this negotiation they have to
be in public it has to be a public
formal negotiation otherwise the energy
transitions won't occur
since I checked the other day since we
started the Museum of oil we've put more
carbon in the atmosphere than we did in
the ten years before there's all these
talks about energy transitions
renewables and in particular how cities
are at the forefront of the political
capacity of driving the energy
transition hmm it would be nice it would
be really nice but not really it's not
happening so the question is why is it
not happening what is it that holds us
back is that we don't know since we know
about climate change we've more than
doubled emissions so we do know but we
don't do anything why and this is the
question that is puzzling and it's
really for us an important one because
we really think that the difficulty is
that we still inhabit what Charlie was
discussing as the deficit condition of
activism there's a deficit in your
knowledge if only you would know and
feel what I feel you will be good that's
why we're not acting because we think
that we're in a deficit we don't think
that we are actually in a situation
where we do know what's going on and
this is the difficult part knowledge the
difficult part has to do with the fact
that we still rely on the fact that
either we have full knowledge in order
to actor we and wouldn't act that we are
not ready to act without full approved
and certified knowledge of the
consequences of our actions so we need
the input of science but science is only
slightly mmm sure of what they're saying
about our earth hence is not
we'll wait this is a very strange
deferral to an ocean of knowledge of
action we need to act only when we will
know not understanding that architecture
for instance doesn't act when you know
on the contrary we imagine things and
and we operate through imagination not
by knowledge I know that this will do
that mm-hmm
so there's a very strange phenomenon
that we are encountering in the
contemporary negotiation on climate
change and that more and more solutions
are visible but they are not sustained
by politics there's no political backing
for them because their politics are
still waiting for the facts and of
course they're not gonna be told to
change their lives by people who have no
understanding of what they're doing
until it's certain and certified and
then because it is certified by whom by
some Chinese Hawks you start seeing that
the problem of knowledge and action is
really crucial so the proposition of
climate peace is that we don't need
knowledge to act what we need is to act
for peace in order not to kill each
other exactly like in the sixteenth
century in Britain the separation of
science and politics was established in
order to have peace on one side it would
be clear facts on the other side there
will be the body politic that will act
on facts and one is experimental the
other one is completely organized
through pure mathematical logics of the
Hobbesian polity that distinction is
today again for peaceful reasons need
needing to be recomposed that
distinction of the body politic from the
science needs to be reshuffled politics
how the
world ought to be or should be and
science how the world is need to be
completely remixed we have to start
understanding the political dimension of
science making we have to understand the
scientific dimension of political
conditions and those distinctions should
be surpassed very quickly in order to do
this we proposed the negotiation on
peace and rather than on climate would
in particular if it will be formalized
would quickly allow us to debate
something like this very complex
numerical models of pathways to energy
transitions our thirty years how do we
even start thinking that by 2030
we'll have 1/5 of our energy only coming
from oil how do we do that how do we
organize the political will how do we
organize that solution or set of
solution that we have with a set of
imaginations from architecture that
could somehow bring us there and it's
the moment where we really think that
the difficulty that we are facing is
somehow to be articulated
so if we take one of those scenarios on
how we could transition from current
situation of overexposure to oil we are
like addicts oil addicts
how and if it will continue with
existing structures the existing and new
fields that we already have you start
seeing that will be around 40 billion
barrels of oil by 2050 what we have
already committed ourselves financially
is bringing us to a condition that is
untenable in the near and the
medium-term future because if we are to
reach the different agreements of 1.5 or
2% and two degrees centigrade we have to
do that rapid curve down so the question
is how do we do that
how do we go down hill when we have
already committed all our finances to
exploit the oil you see that there is a
problem here that is war if we are
serious about an energy transition we
have to be serious about understanding
the conditions for which oil and
carbon-based fuels and gender war they
engender war through the formation of
specific territories on the ground that
secure the supply chain from in all its
aspects both you radically with the
entire paratus that we've described with
our Vedas tea and exclusive economic
zones on the continental shelf all the
way to conditions of securitization and
militarization of chokepoints and the
imagination of the inhabited spaces
around the oil reserve reserves has been
extremely dangerous so that we need to
make them go in and secure them you need
to first imagine that a city like Lagos
is extremely dangerous in order to then
simplify it
it's too dangerous because it's too
complicated though you go and you
simplify it and how do you simplify it
you simplify through contemporary
architecture through compounds to
separation of people the same thing
happens in the wonderful cities that
shape the beginning of the alla scene in
the Fertile Crescent suddenly Baghdad is
no longer the Baghdad with penned and
Gardens is the Baghdad that needs to be
bombed because it's insecure so there's
a not architecture of simplification
that is occurring around all that they
is impeding us from understanding how to
get out of that again a question so the
proposition is really to think of
territories to think of the geo semantic
condition that allow us to warn others
from entering and impounding on what
keeps us alive and to outline these
territories and they're no longer the
territories of the 20th century in the
19th century extended formation of the
nation States but there are cyclic basis
they are gaya territories where our
territories related to the stratosphere
to the cirrus clouds in the stratosphere
that maintain and regulate the Omo
status of the planet their territories
that relate to the washing off of the
water from the shelves of the continent
into the abyss we are relating to the
phosphorus cycles of food and so on and
nitrogen it's better that we don't start
thinking of NO x
when we imagine an energy transition
what many people start thinking is
self-sufficiency will be self-sufficient
will be completely independent
energetically and you start thinking of
the dream of a condition where you're
not going to be relating to other
conditioner you'll be completely
self-organized almost in a revival of
the 1920s and 30s where the fascist
states will imagine that they will be
completely organizing in autonomy the
United States had that thought around 15
years ago with them what came to be
known as the shale boom the shale gas
and the fracking boom became nothing
else than the materialization of this
dream of Independence
if only the Americans would be able to
extract from the shale rocks the gas and
the oil that is making the United States
so rich they will no longer depend on
the middle-east on
Nigerian Brazil and Venezuela on Canada
on Russia to be the most powerful nation
on the planet it's a very simple
calculation if only you will be able to
have all of the oil you can be drawn the
interesting thing is that once you start
analyzing the territory of that shale
boom you start understanding that the
price of course starts dropping but the
actual condition of the say break-even
prices of the shale starts showing that
the very minut operations of the
fracking and we're not even talking
about how it destroys the livelihoods by
poor
the groundwater but you can imagine that
each one of those white dots is an
independent fracking station no it just
pops up and it takes out the gas and
then goes away mm-hmm moves on and all
the noise it's nothing it's 200 meters
by 200 meters every single one of them
is related in the imaginary to
self-sufficiency in reality it's related
to a very complex set of geopolitical
operations that span the entire surface
of the planet in relationship to the
price of oil and to in particular to the
break-even price of oil so suddenly you
start seeing that first of all the shale
gas never brings the energy that's
promised but what it does is that it
generates a transition to low prices of
oil that then make a lot of the fields
completely untenable a lot of the
economies that were previously based on
oil become more unstable so what you
thought the dream of independence
creates more and more instability and
that is a energy independence that is
based on oil if you're thinking of an
energy independence based on renewables
how are we gonna organize the break-even
price we haven't even started thinking
of the break-even price of our energy
transitions we start maybe seeing how we
need to reactivate these territories we
need to reactivate territories you know
that sustain our livelihood our capacity
of living together and in peaceful way
out of the warm warm away from the
pre-established notions of locality and
we can start looking at the Arctic
Russia with a huge problem of a
collapsing infrastructure that was set
up by the Soviet and now it's spilling
and more oil in the
rivers of the Arctic many things
actually managing to carry to the
urbanized areas we can look at West
Africa with 380 billion dollars lost
from the extraction and Nigeria could be
the richest country in the world richer
than the Saudis it's not where where's
the money the money went into mobilizing
that architecture of simplification you
needed that money to simplify the
architecture of Nigeria it's too
complicated
look it's chaotic we need to go in and
secure it all of the money goes straight
to the military system and the rapid
urbanization to the coast driven by the
prospect of wealth and prosperity
because of oil is stranded in this very
complicated relationship of no 380
billion where are they
many people call it corruption another
dream of energy sufficiency Canada the
peaceful Canada it was peaceful plan
place on earth Canada it gives more
passports to than anybody else in the
world it's there for everybody who's
wishing to move away from a crisis give
you gives you refuge and so the boreal
forests of Canada is completely
destroyed in the quest of trying to
extract this tar from its surface tar
actually tar sands oil sands sin
oil that is mixed with sand and you
scrape it in order to then try to clean
it up and in the process use more energy
than you
actually I need recuperate from the
final product and you think that this of
course is a climate crime and I agree
with our friends with Greenpeace that is
a climate crime but the difficult part
is really
Athabasca tar sands and here's a one of
our analysis on the multi-year
development and you see the explosion
everything that is blue was not there
five years before I was poof that's good
but the problem is that the tar sands
that single largest operation on the
planet a single largest industrial
operation on the planet it's just a
fraction of what's going on that little
gray speck 2/3 of the image up a little
bit to the right of the center are the
tar sands everything that is in the
boreal forest is destroyed by the
prospecting of oil of the tar sands the
cuts through the forests in order to
drive Jeeps to sound the ground in order
to understand where to extract
I've cut so many trees so many elements
across the bottle for us that everything
is destroyed these lines just to give
you an example
the width of that central line is 20
meters
butterflies don't migrate trees don't
move foxes and wolves predators can roam
those alleys in the forest the entire
ecology of Canada has been mutated by
oil
so the distance between those two pads
is more or less a kilometer than half
and the thing goes on and on and on and
on and on and on and on and on
everywhere what I just showed you on the
initial panel on that panel it's just
one of those lines there's hundreds of
thousands of them in the quiet of their
course in order to get images like this
let the geologists will interpret in
order to understand the depth at which
we can extract it the oil all the Gulf
of Mexico of course with a beautiful and
flourishing and Delta of the Mississippi
the one of the largest Delta's in the
world that is at the same time the area
that is the disappearing is vanishing
faster than anywhere else in the pattern
on the planet it's vanishing so fast the
Delta is sinking but is one of the most
beautiful places on earth and of course
the Deepwater Horizon oil spill of
course the entire system of destruction
related to the oil in the Delta but
mainly in the dead zone in the Gulf of
Mexico this gigantic atrophic area that
the Delta somehow flushes into the Gulf
of Mexico waters from the basin of the
Mississippi in order to maintain and
sustain the great plains of agriculture
in particular corner agriculture of the
United States you need to push more and
more fertilizers more and more
fertilizers that then wash straight into
the river system without soil retaining
structures farmlands goes from rotation
of crops to unified crops the structure
of soil
then immediately pushed into the waters
of the Mississippi canal which drains
all of this into the very complex and
beautiful areas of the Delta and once it
reaches there there's too many nutrients
and when there's too many nutrients in
the water the water flourishes with
vegetation but vegetation is seasonal
and when vegetation dies at the end of
the season it goes on the bottom of the
sea and when it rots it sucks away all
the oxygen from water and kills
everything so you see the paradox we're
putting too much food into the water
hence life in water dies that's all oh
we could start looking at the more urban
structures how to imagine Chicago saying
this to our friends at indeed form how
do you imagine every bit of that
beautiful architectural city not built
one bit after the other out of oil
without having in mind the refineries
without having in mind the movement of
ground and movement of structures love
that make a city but Chicago today is
the seat of operations of the largest BP
refinery in the world that refines the
heavy oil from the tar forest
you need to build pipelines of course to
bring oil from Canada to Chicago and the
pipelines go across indigenous lands and
the spilled oil when they're built after
the lack of negotiation way to build
them they spilled oil actually spill oil
also without a pipeline because in
America we've noticed very clearly a
majority of oil and gas is transported
on railway so the question that we are
trying to pose today as we close the
season and plan the planet is one of
negotiations it's a very difficult set
of negotiations that we need to have if
we are to have a climate peace it's a
negotiation that needs to have in mind
that the territory is going to be open
on all sides we're gonna have intrusions
from all sides the intrusion is a key
element that territorial structure needs
to be negotiated in terms of cycles not
of space it needs to be negotiated and a
negotiation is nothing else than the
reconfiguration of a polity of the
reconfiguration of a material set of
relations between people institutions
plants animals processes of erosion
cycles of the atmosphere we need to
renegotiate our forms or politics our
structures of navigation and a
difficulty added to this is that peace
can no longer be thought as the pacifier
as the place of stability peace is not
the peace on earth
that of marxism of the environmental
movement is not this idea of a goodwill
that will enable a good spirited mind to
prosper but peace is a condition of
complete disengagement from that idea of
being good it's a climate peace is
condition where the distinction between
the world of necessity and the world of
freedom needs to be completely reshaped
and reshuffled so it's a piece of
uncertainty
the uncertainties also to be so to say
rediscovered they're not the
uncertainties of the stock market
they're not the uncertainties that have
been transformed by people like Milton
Friedman from the unknowable market of
Hayek into the knowable idea of
calculation of the uncertain condition
of the market is not what drives the
riveters it's a condition of deep
uncertainty whether there is a future
there's an uncertainty that is not about
what we know or what we don't know
it's whether in spite of what we know
and what we don't know whether there is
a future at home so caution a
precautionary
system is to be reinvented just a few
notes to conclude the series I'm saying
all of this has been thought from the
sea
apparently the sea is the area of the
planet that is the most removed from
architecture it's the air of the planet
that somehow we can only imagine as the
source of life primordial life the
beautiful coral reefs but if you are
serious about a renegotiation of the
conditions of navigation we really think
as theater agents that we need to start
from the sea we need to start thinking
that the conditions of separation
between land and sea whereby you still
in imagine us has been a terrestrial
form everything needs to be reorganized
around our standing up need to be undone
now we need to start thinking the
dismissal of contemporary forms of
capitalism and this missile of
contemporary forms of sovereignty the
dismissal of contemporary forms of the
enrichment and even of contemporary
forms of negotiation as if they would be
stable on a stable ground we need to be
at sea where there's no possibility of
stability there's no possibility of
imagining a fixed point we need to
constantly engage with looking out for
the others looking out for the waves for
the depth for the animals for other
humans for other vessels for we need to
be alert in thinking climate peace and
this way it becomes really interesting
because you think that the sea is just
this other space yeah it is dynamic
there are a lot of waves and so on but
the interesting element about the rise
of the
Technosphere is that even the sea even
the sea level rise is undergoing a
transformation the level of the sea
could very easily in if you're not
careful change by seven meters in 30
years one of the tipping points of our
planet is the Greenlandic I self it
could surpass the tipping point within
30 years and if that happens you can add
seven meters to the forecast of the IPCC
you can add maybe another three meters
to the forecast of the IPCC a little bit
further down the line if the Antarctic
in West Antarctic and East Antarctic
salt catastrophic meltdown it has
happened before the proposition of a
climate peace negotiation is to start
from the sea to start thinking
renegotiations
on unstable ground across territories of
navigation and in order to arrive to a
climate peace not the perpetual peace of
count thank you we have time for coming
at the table and asking questions
comments and feedback please
hi very fascinating I found the last
part especially fascinating so I have
two questions actually the first part
regarding the one that it talks about
the definition of peace and how you
mentioned I didn't catch the phrase I
just wish if you can elaborate a bit
more about how it's a complete
disengagement and also how it's relating
to the notion of uncertainty on that
aspect on many levels the the 20th
century is really the century where we
change instead of peace we have security
and peace has been sort of expelled from
our public thoughts no accept no like we
said last week every Miss Universe wants
to have peace on earth mm-hmm it's that
level of wishful think you know that
everybody looks down a little bit ah no
it's me you're not really you cannot
seriously think that no it cannot be
someone smart if you want peace on earth
if you would like security that would be
great
that's the usual kind of discussion no
the people but the point is that a peace
negotiation happens usually at the end
of a conflict all it happens to prevent
a conflict so what we are describing
here is a formalized negotiation of
peace so in a peace negotiation you need
to make sure that everyone will be at
peace so it's not a condition where the
person who wins the war and the person
who lost the war somehow negotiate
repairman's but they have to negotiate
how not to have war and that makes until
now the negotiation one of fix it
you will have to do this I will have to
do this now you distribute rolls and you
distribute rolls in the hope that the
rolls will be so clearly defined as
power equity that it will be impossible
to think of war so you want to avoid a
Disick wallah T in power that's the
current situation so you want clarity
now you want to be clear that no side
will be more powerful than the other in
a peace negotiation of course this is
the difficult part because of course you
have the people who won the war or if
you are still at war you have those who
think that they can win the war so you
have to negotiate completely out of that
structure but the uncertainty that we
are proposing is the fact that we cannot
seriously say you stay there and you
stay there and that's your land and
that's your land and your divided and
you're not gonna fight because the land
where you're gonna be reallocated is
unstable it's probably not only unstable
but it's acting more fast than what any
one of us connect the earth is unstable
so the proposition is to then think of
this most untenable of conditions that
of being neutral as the proposition of
maintenance of a climate peace this is
almost like getting rid of the thought
of like land ownership or something has
been established forever no no no we
have to have land ownership we cannot
give up land ownership that will not be
peaceful so you think that something
related to the basis of peace but I
would like to distinguish ownership from
use yeah I'd like to make a clear-cut
distinction between
also different forms of use as multiple
forms of used as exclude all the way
from exclusive use to destructors or
even just roaming and at the moment we
don't have institutions that think of
sovereignty beyond the notion of
complete ownership exclusive ownership
so the proposition of going from a
spatial organization to a cyclic or one
I think will allow us to open up that
aspect does make sense yeah it's like
lastly near but more focus on the cyclic
chorus but with a clear goal piece in 30
years
can I ask yeah I just wonder um like cuz
for the the notion how like how we see
um ocean or sea is clearly tied up with
the land and as something that can be
controlled is that something like pretty
reason as you mentioned like something
that comes up as the 20th century notion
or I just wonder like in your honors
anyone does this kind of like human can
control the ocean like this kind of
ideas that first emerges out of the
outside a collective consciousness of
the mankind's like the first appearance
in history where we can control the
ocean it goes back long time but there's
a particular case I think it was
mentioned those last week my the
International Court of Justice which is
one of the bodies of the United Nations
where a case between in Germany and
Denmark was about who is entitled to
extraction of gas from the sea what we
call the North Sea it used to be called
the German seemeth that's another story
and whether who's entitled to that and
the problem of the sentence of the
International Court of Justice is the
describe a condition it's a factor of
availability of the resources to
the coastal state that means that
there's no other legal or ethical or
institutional political provision that
needs or even technical provision that
needs to be put in place for the
cultural say to exert exclusive rights
on the sea that's what I understand
controlling the sea but we know that we
cannot control the sea you cannot
control its ways we cannot control its
swelling its melting and that forget
about but we are can many levels were
influencing it but it's out of our
control
that's two crescents let's talk to you
oh okay I'd like to make a point about
soil and food production it's obviously
incredibly interesting subject and I'd
like to make one of two very simple
points before the Agricultural
Revolution farming did not rely on the
oil industry it was perfectly efficient
at using a recycle system animal dung
was or is all animal but dung was
extremely valuable plowing was really
introduced relatively recently before
that the plow didn't basically rip at
the surface of the earth the
significance of that is that the worms
and the microbiotic life which is in
that top surface was incredibly valuable
to the production of foods then with the
industrial pollution so that was
eclipsed with the Agricultural
Revolution
what is really interesting is that if
you look at a slide of microbiotic slide
of amoeba micros Eyre and fungi you can
see all these tiny creatures being
extremely active in the soil and there's
any two laboratories in Europe which
they've got a laboratory like this and I
went to one to be skipped and what it
made me realize in a sort of zen-like
way that we have lost completely one's
understanding of the soul and the
significance or both of the soil because
the the petro chemical agrochemical
industry are basically financed
universities
and and students and the research is
done not in to free free amoeba the
research is done in - how can you
produce more crops as heterosexual
fertilizers and one is really
fascinating is that if you read about
work which was done in the 50s and 60s
by using the natural Oh
old-fashioned systems that in Australia
which is now devastated by drives by
using sort of medieval systems of
fertilizers etcetera you in Australia
you can grow crops it takes about two
years or three years
you can go grow crops under conditions
which the transitory should have a crop
there and then abnormal crop when sorry
when there's a drought or when there's
insects the as where the modern
technology suffers far more than the
traditional system and basically what it
is true that crops grown under the
traditional system using micro not the
microbiological world crops a producer
tomorrow which was produced in 1950 in
the UK is ten times as nutritious as a
tomato which is grown under contemporary
under modern fertilizers etc so and
essentially to divorce agriculture from
the petrochemical industry it's
relatively straightforward if people if
we all understood the relevance of this
bikerider world and it was instantly a
nada da Vinci in when every billionaire
and she was writing he said we know more
about the celestial sphere
than the ground underneath us absolute
thank you very much I got here some
notes and in 1825 at the beginning of
the Industrial Revolution we were 1
billion in 1927 it took us 100 years to
become 2 in then we doubled in 75 years
and then we added another 2 billion in
20 years so from 1 to 2 to 4 to 6
billion it's a price curve it's not a
linear equation is really a rapid
acceleration and that has to do with the
fact that we calculations are correct
more or less 10x jobs have been added to
the agricultural produce by oil and
you're right
there are ways to which we could grow
forests mm-hmm without a single moment
of fertilizing by understanding the
relationship between soil and the plants
and the organization of their cycles and
understanding and the entire structure
of the canopy what goes above what goes
beneath and we could have amazing
forestry reconstruction and there are
plenty of examples I can afterwards
maybe point you to some of the work of a
Swiss farmer operating in the Amazon and
a good friend of the artist at Nesta
NATO and how the forestry
has been completely transformed by many
of these practices and I think that
you're equally writing indicating that
the 20th century is really the epoch of
an intrusion of the oil industry into
our knowledge system into the structure
of the farms into the structure of the
agrarian and universities and faculties
all the way into architecture now I
really would like to find one department
of architecture that can explain
insulation without reverting to
oil-based materials just one indicator a
few the pyramids but I also think that
they're there and you're writing
indicating that there's a possibility
through agriculture innovation or better
old agriculture the old knowledge of the
artisan yeah I think you're right in
indicating that there is a real chance
to maintain the level of nutrition both
in terms of the vegetables but also
proteins for our current population and
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
two prices has been established it's one
of those histories though that we
somehow would prefer to either remember
those names aw
carrying capacity we use a term in a
Gaia sense is how we measure it
systemically and how caring capacity
becomes a fundamental coordinate with
which we navigate this climate piece
here the question is exactly that we
know the solution we don't need to
reinvent anything we know this but
there's no solution until there is a
polity behind that solution it just
otherwise just I wish there's not a
solution it's a wish at the moment we
have a lot of wishes and that's why we
really think that the the idea of a
series of formalized negotiation will
then bring up the dark histories of for
instance of the a complete eradication
from Europe of peasantry what used to be
the rural culture of Europe God nobody
is a peasant in Europe what happened to
that culture what happened to that
civilization for instance what happened
to the long-established conditions of
inhabitation of the land now when we
talk about the Technosphere being 30
trillion tons of one of the elements
that is astonishing is that if you would
be serious about being an archaeologist
of mmm the 21st century is that you're
looking at basically always the same
structures no matter where you are you
can be in California in Chile in Europe
in north of Europe south of Europe Asia
Africa no matter where you are
the contemporary production is always
the same our buildings look the same
everywhere
but they used to be so different because
they used to be such a clarity in the
way through which humans interacted with
available means around them but we're
not advocating to return to that because
there's something that has happened in
between and that is really the intrusion
of Gaia no matter how fascinated we are
from early societies they had no
experience on how to deal with a
planetary scale phenomena like the one
we're in so we have to at the same time
acknowledge their capacity acknowledge
their long suffering the long term
violence the silent violence of these
processes and understand that they are
not the solution so I do agree with a
pushing further capacity of fostering
the ground and the soil and its
relationship but not by returning to
that condition I think this is the real
difficulty no the negotiation has to
happen so quick and we have to invent
everything anew so quick and it's
gigantic project for architecture but it
cannot be thought in extension like
we've been thinking so far all through
the gridded separation of Agriculture
and the city like we've been thinking
through the explosion of our favorite
material and barbed wire but in terms of
the soil for example if you have the
power of the agrochemical company is
still there they will I would assume
block any exploration of doing reverting
back to understanding them the
microbiotic um world
because yes again saying and their
financial interest
I mean look that's what happens in the
past and I go there's a particular group
of geoscientist that are extremely
interesting that this is really not my
work our that they're only slightly
connected to this the entire
establishment of the network of the
critical zone observatories where the
soil as you say becomes the central part
not only of agrarian practices but it
opens up all kinds of questions about
Gaia all kinds of question about the
relationship between formation of soil
and transformation of the lithosphere
and transformation of the atmosphere all
that is a new science but that has to do
really with all the elements that this
micro biotic condition and at the same
time thinking of the entire planet that
is an area that is of enormous potential
and with the help of some of our friends
you start seeing how it has also an
enormous political potential in this
entering politics in real or
establishing relationships and maybe the
petrochemical industry no it's far more
fragile than we think it has spread so
far and it it is an untenable industry
untenable it is a zombie so we should
stop it
there was another question behind you
that I think and so I come from a more
human geography anthropology background
so I apologize to the rest of the room
if this may be a bit self-evidence
and so my question is a bit more applied
and my question is more about how so how
do arts architects and urban planners
how can they and how do they engage
dynamically in these negotiations around
climate peace whether that's in
partnerships or in specific projects or
research yeah that's my question
mm-hmm but it would be nice if they
would it's I think that from an
anthropological point of view there are
two things to keep in mind the way in
which architecture over the last 40
years has engaged itself in thinking
communities and at the same time
minimizing their role if you could find
that in a lot of anthropological
fieldwork on looking at the architects
and when we conduct community
initiatives basically what happens is
that an architect goes into a meeting
puts up some post-it notes asked the
community to engage with them and
doesn't care really about the quiet
people at the end of the room because
those are not gonna be influenced in the
planning process then collects all of
these post-its makes a little resume
puts it into the planning notes and
moves on that's the level of the paucity
of thinking society that architectures
engage with at the moment no it's a
scandal
but there are another I think more
interesting condition of about
anthropology in architecture and that is
that for some bizarre reason which are
impossible I really cannot understand
any one reason why architects give up
the anthropological power if you speak
to many of the architects especially the
young ones they will say I'm powerless
there's no agency there's nothing we can
do someone who's actually I'm not gonna
know I'm I'm not gonna mention anything
about our colleagues but the power of
people sitting around the table
concocting the plan I think is really to
be upheld architects still have a lot of
anthropological power when a group of
architects arrive in a place with a plan
hey something is happening and we
simultaneously don't recognize the
violence that many of our colleagues are
doing and don't recognize the power that
we carry so maybe that's not the field
of fieldwork that already exist but the
fieldwork that I would like to see is
what happens then if there is that power
you know and I don't know many of the
projects that have been looking at this
of course yeah but yeah but with the
entire rhetorics that has come attached
with architects you know this lady that
we always show at the end of our semanas
jacqueline turret invented then tidy of
feedback you know it actually invented
the entire notion of feedback and the
idea was really to build communities and
and so on and actually when you're
serious about architecture you know very
well that you cannot design in a
committee it doesn't work if you look at
other attempts through which there's I
think that what you're describing is an
idea that architects put forward plans
or constructions that are too rigid to
be then adapted and modified by tough
feedback from on their function actually
the entire notion of feedback in that
case was developed in conjunction by
architects sociologists anthropologists
and so I'm not so sure that we are
lacking in the feedback mechanism even
in development projects actually I think
that the and entire structures built in
from the beginning in order to have it
only under certain circumstances if you
look at the work of Margaret Mead in
relationship to Jacquelyn turret you
will discover all kinds of very strange
relationship about the entire idea of
embedded intelligence very strange
situation
should ask one more Josh go ahead okay I
really enjoy when you were talking about
the reintegration of politics and
science as the sort of main challenge of
let's say negotiating with the
Technosphere and I thought I had read
before that James Lovelock proposed
nuclear power as the solution to to the
energy transition and it seemed like
this sort of low-hanging fruit in his
mind somebody who obviously understood
the planetary entanglement entanglements
of you know our kind of current
situation so how do you how do you bring
somebody like Lovelock or how do you
bring a community of scientists into a
space and negotiation when the sort of
technological fixes is so is so before
us you know if even if you look at how
the market reacts to to climate change
you know like we have the some of the
largest most you know powerful stocks
this year are related to let's say
meatless protein or electric cars and
you know we see this momentum but in do
you think that negotiation should be
weighted more than technology and
negotiation is not what happens like
this country thinks beef as a business
negotiation it's not in that kind of
negotiation that I'm in discuss yep
science is already negotiation the
article of Tim and Tim was here a few
weeks ago in the in nature is written
with John Shan Hoover and I don't know
any scientists more powerful than
Johnson who brno it defines what climate
negotiations are is the most powerful
scientist well it's also written in in
collaboration with
rocks room from the Stockholm brazilian
center again directly a scientist
shaping politics so that is already
happening the point is that is the way
through which we organize the
collaboration between science and
politics that is not happening it's not
that science and it's not informing
politics so ready beam but it's the
relationship between a fact
and then decisions on the fact that
needs to be completely reshaped we need
to understand it exactly the same way as
facts in science are built through a
very complex set of negotiation
institutional relation and exactly
because of that they are resilient they
have a strength because they're built
with such difficulty if only we'll have
the similar structures in political
fields then will be I think a little bit
of better the question then of
technology I think that is included in
that and the question of Lovelock right
it's very interesting because the
technological means are in relationship
to the Technosphere very strange because
we cannot be serious about starting the
recycling of the Technosphere if we
think that we simply add technology if
the solution to climate change is to add
more technology we are missing the point
so the question is not to add technology
that is green and beautiful Tesla cyber
truck and so on but it's quite cool
actually
the
but the question is how do you recycle
how do you recycle at the level of the
Technosphere not how do you add more
technology because seen from overall
perspective no it's just taken away
resources from one part of the earth
system and putting them in the other so
if you are serious about transformation
in the earth system through technology I
think that we should start thinking of
complete cycles not in the sense of the
very quick closing the circles of the of
the circular economy when you recycle
the capital and you recycle the
materials at the same time and at the
same speed but understanding that cycles
are operating as completely incoherent
levels of temporality I think that's the
most difficult part in terms of the
scientific relationship at the moment I
recently read a theory by a philosopher
and he was talking about he was
basically talking about a sensorial
notion and what senses mean to human so
he was asked why don't people go
meatless he was just asked a question
why don't people go meatless and - he's
- that he said that because the vegan
industry does not really appeal sense
orally to people who have been consuming
meat for years and years and years and
there was the second idea that we all
know about that the 1% the top 1% only
tried to or act or do something or
invest in climate climate peace when it
affects them directly so I questioned
this sort of dry and individualistic
materialism that we humans not maybe
right well most humans possess and how
do we question that and how we get away
from that but their 1% wants to go to
Mars yeah
they don't want climate peace they want
to go to Mars the same guy is the cyber
truck wants to go to Mars and so I don't
think that there's any interesting level
in thinking that the billionaire is
paying for preservation of the ocean or
reinstatement of the forest it's quite
interesting what's going on in with the
entire diatribe around the reforestation
of the Amazon I don't know if you're
following that relationship but you know
this is the beginning of the beautiful
treatise on perpetual peace by Immanuel
Kant the paragraph after this
it's about practical people particularly
practical politicians looking down at
those who come up with ideas you know
the philosophy
yeah yeah you're talking but actually
there's a practice there that needs to
be imposed and the entire treatise the
entire little beautiful essay is trying
to mock that distinction right no it's
game against those who think of practice
and go to theory and trying to reach
angle them so there's still something
interesting in this proposition maybe
not because of the notion of hospitality
that he proposes of global citizenship
but in the treatise I think that there
is a particular set of passages around
the role of secrecy around the role of
public speech and the role in particular
of people who have access to knowledge
that might be worth revisiting and we're
not of course in the field of limited
hospitality that Kant was indicating and
we know very well that the problem with
country is the entire separation between
agents and the inert structures now I
think that but I really don't think that
we have to inspire people to eat vegan
food I don't think that it's about
inspiring people like that I think if we
could only deal with politics without
inspiration it would be much better know
when you are a young architect then will
someone who aspires to become an
architect you have that moment when you
say yeah I'm good at maths I'm good at
this but look I got imagination and that
no flips you to architecture because
you've got imagination and all the
others look back down at you average is
full of imagination not real but that is
exactly what we need imagination modern
inspiration I think for me that's really
the little power that architecture and
the arts still carry and they managed
through imagination inspiration to
gather particular groups of people and
have particular discussions something
that the art world has managed much
better than the architectural world to
do is to maintain the public level of
discussion we closed off very quickly
and talked to ourselves
I just wanted to thank you both and the
students for your hospitality and your
conviviality because there's a strange
sense of loss as we approach you I guess
the next stage and phase of what I hope
will be a continuation of these Monday
gatherings because it's exactly that
leap of imagination and I guess the
proliferation of ideas that you've all
managed to bring around the table for me
has been incredibly powerful in terms of
understanding that for instance when
we're asked the question and where are
we to land and you tell us we land in
the sea and if we land in the sea then
what do we see I'm not speaking in
riddles there's actually a point to this
I think because what was quite
intriguing in you setting up the series
as you know climate war now we have you
know from war and peace to then one of
the images of the tar sands you know we
have crime okay and again not to be too
silly about pushing it into punishment
but perhaps understanding how it is that
we might use law as leverage if we are
to be practical and imaginative with the
tools we already have amongst us then
how is it that we enable these
negotiations to happen in a way that
brings people to the various tables you
see floating so one of those and again
it's an it's an open question I wish we
had the legal scholars amongst us this
evening was to see how we might use
something which I've just discovered
recently because clearly law is not my
field but I'm beginning to understand
that it is a point of leverage which we
can start to apply pressure in very real
ways which mean financial way so the law
of tort might be one which we need to
consider as a tactical
and very practical codified set of moves
to bring various people around these you
know platforms so I'd you know I'd like
to know how you take these conversations
forward in terms of now moving into
these various rounds of negotiation
wherever they might be on whichever one
of these seas and to ensure that at this
table these various tables that we
enable we have these more imaginative
conversations with the legal scholars
with you know all of these other and
even people that aren't even present so
the anthropologists you know the
feminist international security study
scholars which are out there which are
actually putting together quite
fundamental shift in terms of how the
international securities framework is
put together so I think there are even
more avenues which open up from these
very very intimate discussions we have
and you know just by way of thanks it
would you know well done that's great
and and I hope we can control in this
enjoy conviviality there's food in
grapes
[Applause]
