I'm not quite certain whether this is a
direct is
this is something that addresses that
kind of casual comment quite precisely
and what he said I want to just take you
through three kind of concepts in
Chinese painting if you take up
traditional Chinese painting the first
is called tonfa which is really a
texturing method that's almost like a
function of the brush you know you
actually create a different kind of
texture to indicate different kinds of
physical realities one particular thing
that's quite extraordinary is that if
you wanted to become a painter
traditionally he did not paint from the
real scene no you don't he actually
didn't paint still life or a figure but
it you learn it from a text so this is
this text for the most prominent of
these kind of texts is called menu of
the master seed garden everyone you know
who's in that kind of training would
know it and she being said died he went
through this of course and this is I
learned that term fire is a kind of
writing the second notion is the idea of
Shoshone which is writing an image
writing a scene it's really literally
writing this is kind of a random Chinese
painting that code and it doesn't really
matter that this has to be this
particular painting but it really shows
that if you pick up the texturing method
that's kind of embodied in the function
of the brush and you begin to paint
something like this this is really kind
of a writing a scenery
the third one is a very very important
notion of muha like painting
so when typically you know like if you
in China you look at a natural landscape
and they said this looks exactly like a
painting it is really a reflection of a
long and very deep rooted tradition of
looking at some kind of scenery as
writing so that this particular case is
a construct of in a garden that it's
kind of designed and constructed to
appear to be a painting but with
physical objects just kind of following
this kind of three concepts and when you
look at a painting like that and you
begin to think that is this a painting
or is is a writing or you think about it
is this a garden or this is a writing so
I just show you were kind of quickly a
couple more images they're not
particularly and some of them are quite
historical like these are the images
form one of the most cherished cultural
landscapes in China called Hangzhou West
Lake and those of you have been there
you'd understand how much of the history
that's attached to that constructed
landscape in this form or in this form
this is a bit of a jump so if this is
the case how do we actually look at an
experience like this and some of you may
recognize this is actually Shanghai
planning Museum where you actually have
a 360-degree kind of live show of a
constructed reconstructed Shanghai and
which was experienced as some kind of
past come now come future experience you
know timeless but it's presented as
somehow to me as a kind of enhanced
image of Shanghai what does this mean so
are we actually looking at something
that is really started with writing and
then kind of kind of move to painting
move the construction of scenery or move
to actual construction so this is really
the kind of question that I would like
to begin with that that a Chinese it is
written and do they write their cities I
will take this and I have you know three
sections apologize for being so kind of
rigid with dividing the lectures but I
think it helps me to kind of articulate
the idea and the first one is really
taking a step back and think about
writing and the idea that it has been
long long you know like dating back to
prehistory historical periods a great
divide between seeing language has sound
and same language as image this
typically today in the discourse of
structuralism you see propositions like
this I took this particular page from
socio or not because of the text but
because of the diagram I had to work of
course the diagram was drawn by the
editors of this book and not by himself
but it really is very
that actually reflecting on so sewers
great emphasis on language being
exclusively a topic of speech rather
than writing it is dismissed writing and
really said that the Chinese writing
with something else and not going to
deal with it and and study the study of
language is the study of sound speech no
hands I want to take this moment also to
reflect a little bit more on something
that's much much larger which is
generally in leasing historical
linguistics is described as an
indo-european tradition which has in
many ways a great emphasis on the
advantage of speech over writing and
this is in Rigveda
it was amazing to read that you know for
someone who does not have a depth in of
knowledge in that subject and when
you're reading and you realize how much
of it is dedicated to the glorification
of breath you know the its cosmic it's
divine it's really about that kind of
ability to breathe and by implication
ability to think through speech without
ever touch touching writing and this is
quite
also quite clear if you read this little
story that's I guess brought to
prominence by people like Derrida
recently in Plato inside Jews when he
related the story that that that the
invention of writing is actually an
invention to somehow discover a method
of reminding so writing kind of created
this kind of disembodied experience and
externalized wisdom and knowledge so
that someone else students can then so
to speak fake it through reading and in
they were entered into the body so it's
really very much in speech the real
knowledge resides the form of writing
that I believe I think it's associated
with that particular intellectual
tradition of course is the alphabet in
the alphabet is not an image a way of
recording sound and it's kind of by
nature a very abstract it's a great
successful story and it's a
she look at the this is really taken
from a diagram from this incredible
historical linguist David Anthony and
talking about how describing the spread
of the indo-european languages basically
from the Baltic to southern European and
she Iran and India and - all the way to
the edge of China integrating Basin with
the tellurian variety or daughter
language of the mother tongue of what
kind of described and reconstructed as
the proto indo-european you could
actually reconstruct I think the 400
words or like quite a number of words
that I have been reconstructed and you
can actually tell a story with the
proto-indo-european but nobody actually
is certain that this language existed in
that particular form so this is how
fascinating it really shows that that
this map that shows how widely
indo-european languages have spread
across the world and the power of the
alphabet and the fact that I'm here
speaking English but having a background
in in exclusively in speaking and using
Chinese and it's it's a condition that
that in a way that kind of comes with my
background and it's interesting you
think about it the question here is is
the alphabet inevitable if you go
through Western history of Western
philosophy it is clear that the
mainstream great thinkers say that it is
inevitable
if you have it in Francis Bacon who jaws
is parallel between hieroglyphics and
letters and parables and arguments so
that in a way kind of hieroglyphics and
parables that were kind of early a more
primitive stages of human thinking and
you have to move to letters and to your
argument Hegel here stated quite clearly
that the Chinese language is not made
for science because this is really a
lack said and precision and so on so
forth we can read that statement who's
quite amazing the German really goes on
until today really you know the last
quotations are from very recent scholars
water on the renowned German theorists
who actually stated in his or allottee
and literacy quite clearly that that the
Chinese characters will be replaced by
Roman alphabet and as a matter of time
it will be a huge lost literature but it
will be done and this is actually also
the opinion of William hannah's and in
this very interesting book in and a few
couple other books and talking about
asia's of a graphic dilemma in the sense
that it has entered into this kind of a
cumbersome way of structuring cumbersome
language and that created a lot of
burden and limited the ability to become
creative and its
incredible argument to say that with for
example the Chinese language and it's
really using the Chinese language as
preeminent example of Asian languages
and saying that the Chinese language is
nothing but a flawed phonetic system and
they will be changed will be fantasized
and to stay with this system of language
is the reason for autocratic politics
and it's the reason for the Asians
lacking creativity so these are kind of
extraordinary claims of the
inevitability of the alphabet you know
it's really so are we looking at
something that approaches to some kind
of speech bias and this is of course
quite clearly one of the central themes
of Derrida if you kind of go through
cram attala G was precisely talking
about that that that there is a phono
centrism and it's really creating a
whole series of philosophical moral
aesthetic judgments that's based on
language as speech sound not as writing
and he wanted to say you know of course
in support of his deconstruction that
speech is just as problematic as writing
and but but I think the interest in
deconstruction really didn't take this
kind of thesis further enough and this
is really what I'm quite struck by
that that that the existence or the
tradition of fun eccentric philosophy
parades not only just a language a kind
of philosophy a form of philosophy but
it's to me as a distinctive intellectual
path it really is this I mean this is a
bit of a scary slide and I don't know
how to go really go through it without
having a whole semester it was time to
unpack it but I want to make a claim
here first that it is really a
distinctive intellectual path that leads
you first to renunciation then it comes
with you know ascetism and sacred space
and practices of sainthood and order and
second in the act of reduction from
polytheism to monotheism to monastic
practices and and to monasteries third
to imprint which is really utopia so
it's there's a very quick of the process
of reduction and imprint that that's
taking place I'll come back to it later
but I want to say that what were the
choices at a time when there was a great
divide between sound and image and this
is really interesting that you look at I
mean there's no doubt that indo-european
languages that the dominant language
family in the world it's 4570 0.72% the
sino-tibetan language family is not
doing too badly
it's got like 1/4 1/5 of the world
population speaking and if you count
Chinese actually man during is the
biggest language the largest language in
the world but if we count the language
families I would say that the
indo-european languages are very very
very successful so what are we looking
at here
that if you look further back enough to
you know 4,000 to 1000 BCE realized they
were actually two very distinct
directions of language making sound an
image here represented by hieroglyphics
of the Han Italian variety of the
Egyptian variety and the Mayan variety
of course is the Chinese language
so in this hieroglyphics tradition the
language is image tradition you have a
certain kind of features as the language
being presented not as pure sound
but as object images as this is obvious
it's a visual depiction it's always a
combination of phonetic and phonetic
symbols and object images so it's it's
interesting that Western archaeologists
and linguists always value very highly
that moment of cracking the phonetic
cold you know this is really in the
store if you look at read the story
about jean-francois Champollion or David
Stewart then the you know did
Champollion decoded the Egyptian
hieroglyphics and David Stewart is
famously and the decoder of Mayan
screened and these were depicted as the
ultimate moment of master in that
language but I want to argue that this
were a product of faunal centric
aesthetic emphasis that that that far
from understanding the language you've
only made one important step towards
understanding that language the second
point in relation to hieroglyphics is
that there's a script hierarchy I was
quite struck by this because we look at
Anatolian hieroglyphics sort of 500 of
them you realized that they actually
mostly used the monumental buildings and
situations and carved on mountains and
so on this is I don't want just kind of
labor too much on this point but just
show you one example of Kings seal which
is made of two forms of script one is
the Canadian form which is relate the
ring the outer ring and the second is
actually the central hieroglyphics of
the King
so they actually description Kanaya form
was created because it was easy to write
he knows this can you use this stylus
and making triangular wedged impressions
on wet clay that gives you a very rapid
way of writing so is recreated as a
convenience to if you like but in this
particular case the centrality of the
object image and its association with
the authority of the King remained as a
very good indication of the script
hierarchy you know what's important
what's not and it's similarly in
Egyptian hieroglyphics and you see that
there are other forms making writing
easier hi
and demotic forms writing but to me in
my mind essentially no doubt that
hieroglyphics were the most important
object images come language she looked
at the inscriptions and you know book up
the dead or in our tombs and whatever
and the King's names are presented
particularly framed as Confucius and and
and and what's really contained in these
writings is phonetic yes you know other
we are not exactly sure how to pronounce
it and you know you think we think it's
pronounced as ramiz's but maybe not so
but I think the image of the things is
contained in hieroglyphics it's very
very important I think that's something
that that needs a much greater study the
third point about hieroglyphics is is
that the Chinese writing has the
advantage of hieroglyphics and Cannell
form in a way it is kind of a reformed
adapted Canadian form that's that's kind
of integrated or incorporated into a
method of writing which is the use of
the brush there's some statistics about
you know how many Chinese characters and
somebody that could be very much the
reason why the Chinese language actually
the Chinese writing system had such a
long history and
the sustained use maybe there are the
factors of you know geographical
isolation and so on but this is an
interesting to think about that they
really survived with the this script the
the script hierarchy although Chinese
does not really have sub scripting is
just one but it actually has a kind of
greater prestige
if you think about it you know if you
think about a situation like this that
enrollment building the words would have
being combined with the architecture you
know it's really inset into the stone
but here it is separated you know it's
as if like it has a different order it
has really a separate layer and it is
everywhere you know it's um like
carvings like this of course not seeing
as graffiti is you know they are
actually quite important to the cultural
landscape of so many places when you
visit China forms of amusement I'm sure
you've seen this if you visit any parks
in China that this man with a very good
skill just uses water in a bucket and
the sponge brush to write characters on
the pavement and just quite interesting
thing to watch so this kind of almost
like this is like the Picasso moment you
know did you know when
yes is looking at this is to to me this
is really like painting is writing this
is something that has I cannot emphasize
this more enormous call to investment
I think in some way William Harris was
right that the Chinese has invested so
much culturally into the script that
that you have to take it very very
seriously I want to show you and just
take a look at this calligraphy which is
just about the most famous piece of
calligraphy if you learn to do
calligraphy in Chinese characters it's a
fourth century calligraphy which is used
as the consummate example the Chinese
artist chose to share decided that he
wanted to copy you actually you know
it's like learning how to paint you
actually copied from a book if you want
to learn calligraphy you copy from an
example like this so sir he did this
performance piece over many years to
copy this piece of calligraphy a
thousand times literally a thousand
times on the same piece of paper each
time he shifts the script a little bit
so that by 50 times 50th time you
basically have a black sheet of paper so
you just went on and on and on I thought
it was quite a provocative piece in this
sense that you actually not only kind of
displaying that kind of hardship and in
cultural investment in this in the skill
of calligraphy but you also kind of end
up with a black piece of you know who
knows what you know it's like that's the
black at the end after a thousand times
this is an even more intriguing piece
that tackles the heavy cultural
investment in the Chinese culture it's
it's a piece by a Chinese artist who
being
and whose work I showed you earlier I
could book from the sky and I think this
is really the best work that he's
produced the he actually spent four
years creating a set of fake Chinese
characters but he did it with such naked
dedication that these characters look so
real not only that he actually made
books out of them so he made volumes of
literature volumes of Medicine book and
you know it's just he mimicked that form
of those publications but not a single
word can be read so it's like a ghost of
the Chinese writing system which
produced a great shock to the cultural
establishment and he actually had to
leave China because of this is at work
and because it was struck so deeply in
the the whole cultural edifice of the
writing system he had a lot of criticism
but but it's it's quite a brilliant
dedication he was saying that I was
seriously labored a very seriously labor
for years and something that says
nothing just quickly show you and the
phonetic kind of equivalent of a Dada
poem that's kind of plays with the idea
of having sound but then no meaning the
second part of what I want to talk about
is not just the Chinese language but its
subsystems so once you use I mean for
lack of a better word the word
figuration to talk about that and it's
really how the same instinct same kind
of power that created the Chinese
characters begins to create not only
option images but also to modify our
things you know that's that's that's the
Empire to figure that that I want to
talk about some silly diagrams and you
know I think if if I could actually kind
of you know visually present the
difference between phonograms and
logograms phonograms being you know the
indo-european languages using sound as a
way of capturing language and objects in
the world but figuration logograms is a
different way of using object images to
capture the physical world and it seems
to be two different processes one
described as my masses and just very you
know you can relate that to the
Renaissance of following Western
tradition art and in science but the the
kind of the Chinese process is what I
would like to call figuration it really
is a understanding that's filtered
through a whole set of modified object
things object images and Chinese
characters and so on so forth
yeah so how does you know seems to me
that this modification is quite
important and so how does it happen I I
think maybe the key is to look at the
literati gardens that that still exist
and you can visit in Sutro and so on
they're really beautiful places and
absolutely fantastic as
environment that created by literati
traditional at I think what really is
amazing here is that each piece doesn't
matter whether it's flowing its water
larkey Pavilion is created as some kind
of curated objects of value you know
they are selected because they look the
present certain object images that that
are closer to writing even if it goes
back to my point earlier about writing
being behind the object creation so you
have that it's it's really you know this
you can put this in the context of
cabinet of curiosities in the Western
tradition in which objects are collected
either because of their use value or
because of the potential to create
knowledge but there's nothing like that
here this is actually there these
objects are here because they look like
the thing that they are supposed to
represent and it's a form of writing so
coming back to this image and you look
at this constructed corner of a garden
they're modified pieces I mean I you
know this quite common so the
modification does not come easy and it
is really if you compare this to the
topiary is in the in the western
gardening tradition you see that the the
modification here is a very slow it's
almost like two two years copying of
Lantern shield
for you know four thousand times a
thousand times this is really a slow I
mean I would like to call it the slow
violence and the quick violence would be
what you find in in the topiaries in in
western gardens so again this is a bit
of a jump but if you look at something
like this you know this is actually a
central business district in Hangzhou
what do we see they could be something
you know some of these done by Western
architects and most of my Chinese
architects that actually figure ated
forms you know if you think that the
force of figuration is kind of creating
modification to object things it is then
in some ways embodied in this design and
construction process that these are
created as object images as well as
buildings and object images then begins
to speak certain semantic content and it
is really this semantic content that
demands its own distribution and this is
quite interesting again going back to
the literati gardens you of course you
know typically you go through Chinese
literary literati gardens you can
experience them as just Gardens
you know like water plants and so on but
they actually have a lot of text in them
you know
really it's endless endless readings if
you don't really have access to this
text you don't really get it you know
there's a lot of kind of literary device
that literary devices that are embedded
in this goddamn making tradition you
know they can be anecdotes me you know
if you don't read this yet no idea and
actually space-time dislocation you know
this of course takes time to unpack but
it's possibly do this study and also
metaphors and so on so forth a lot of
that and in some ways and I'll show you
some images of how much writing plays a
role and if you think about the rest
that's kind of derivatives of writing
you really think that these are kind of
as much written objects as they are
Gardens I'm showing you three ways of
representing the garden the sixteenth
century traditional way was of this
essentially joins at the same garden
16th century you look at something like
a poem a kind of a poetic capturing of
the spirit of that garden of certain
parts of that garden the garden is
called tottering and by by the way and
it's interesting that with the influence
of Western drawing method in the 20th
century you can see that that China has
been producing
drawings very much like the center one
which is really based on offer graphic
projection which I thought is a very
difficult way to capture
the Chinese garden because it it it's
taken the texts out of the hole it's
taken writing out of the whole picture
so the third one is actually what I
tried to somewhat inventin to combine
that there's some kind of precision but
also Tim remain committed to the role of
writing in Chinese gardens perhaps you
know their ways of trying you know ways
of even in the representation of this
Chinese gardens and one could capture
the importance of text so outside the
literati tradition if we look at the
commercial culture you find a version
which is fundamentally connected to the
same tradition but then it is Canada has
a popular mandamus manifestation of
pasting endlessly writing on buildings
you know what is important architecture
or writing so in a way I think because
of this permanence of writing in not
only in garden
you know on buildings and in in Chinese
cities I would like to talk about a
third aspect of the Chinese writing I
have time okay
which is the what I would like to call
the power function because writings and
not just writings and when they are used
in a particular way they're actually
very there are anchors of power so if
you think about the Forbidden City the
most important building which is the
hall of the supreme harmony and you know
you look at it and it's a building but
then you look at it is actually a piece
of writing the building is almost like
just the backdrop of that three
characters that you see so prominently
you can see that in 20th century Chinese
Revolution when you know writing are
displayed so prominently in tenement
Square for whatever purposes is really
the writing that really does the job and
thinking about how Mouse calligraphy
throughout 20th century became such a
powerful symbol of his status and this
is a Nima's calligraphy you know it is
really so so writing calligraphy
acquires not just the symbolic power of
an office but the the power of the
object of of writing as calligraphy this
is kind of amusing to me and I was
traveling around in China and then ran
into a small city which wanted to kind
of present itself as a grand important
cities have built itself a huge City
Hall and then put on all these writings
you know to indicate that you know they
have important institutions inside and
so on it's actually this is quite quite
common in in China I just find this
particularly interesting as an example
so if you look at the Forbidden City
perhaps you can begin to be imagine that
it is not just architecture but the
system of object things and object
images writing that that begins to shape
that power and stepping back and look at
you know even 20th century construction
look at Shanghai maybe these things are
also object things you know they really
they have a particular significance in
terms of who designed it how it is and
you know what shape it is and so on in
that writing system so it has a very
different way of creating value to these
objects very quickly I want to mention
the last feature of the Chinese writing
system or the figuration in relation to
the Chinese writing system with regard
to heritage and the Chinese heritage is
particularly building heritage in cities
is always a subject when I talk to
people about Chinese it is they never
keep anything you know they're always
demolish everything and so on what I
want to argue here is that there's
actually different memories strategy
because of this writing system that's
really focused on text writing that the
memory is in writing rather than in
things other than in Gaelic so if I
could describe what happens in the West
which is really keeping everything you
know the water
that Venice charter promotes as a kind
of pilgrimage like kind of citation that
relic that that you really keep it and
that the things I actually what holds
memory maybe in the Chinese contexts and
memory is not necessarily always in
things but they also in text so so I
want to show an example of a xi that's a
12 century text that was discovered in
early 20th century and this is actually
a very kind of stable Chinese tradition
and called cow dung is it's like kind of
making the right text so it was this
text is it the the 12th century text was
lost but one fine day one politician is
really interested in architecture by the
name of to teach and he found a 16th
century copy of that text she's really
excited you know that's published and so
and he realized they all know this text
was really bad quality what do we do so
he then found so you've noticed that the
16th century
he found the 12th century this in just
one single page one page in a kind of
fragment you know in in the library so
this is that gave him the idea of
recreating the whole text from the copy
of the 16th century back to the 12th
century original which then he published
in 1925 last one on the far right on the
screen so you see that that really the
2025 was at least seen at the time to be
the authentic original of the 12th
century text
it's a fascinating story of how the 16th
century text and then was kind of
refined and improved you see the
difference in drawing style through
copying and made into a new addition not
only that and he had it you know new
pages and new diagrams and he pine you
know the book was found in traditional
form and it's great it's actually a
beautiful beautiful publication except
that it is a fake original in the
Western sense so in some ways at least
in his mind that this wasn't regional
because the texts are correct it's a new
edition you know it is with its it was
really a labor of love on on his part to
create this new over original so what
does that mean if you look at some
buildings in the intensive kind of
keeping tradition and heritage
preservation and this is really
interesting days and there was a tower
along the Yangtze River called yellow
crane tower it kind of was built in the
3rd century as a legend and the last
surviving example was the one in the
middle there were some painting
representations of that pavillion in the
past but in LA surviving one was the one
in the middle which is a
nineteenth-century
a recreation of an old legend
and it was destroyed by fire I mean 1985
a new one came up it was really kind of
similar looking but not quite the same
and the version I had three floors now
this has five you know I have this
timber construction this is concrete it
has air conditioning has left you know
like really I you know if I just look at
people who visited this place it's not
troubling it's as it's it's a it's a
it's a memory that's as stable as
anything else so where does the
stability of the memory come from I
really think that it's the poems that
have been written around that pavilion
that gave it credibility you know it's
it's I mean there are many of them this
is a Mao and Levi and it's quite a
cultural icon but the cultural the
iconicity then is not rested or rooted
in the materiality of the building were
more like in the writing which often
escaped the scholars from the West
because automatically one would look at
and disturbed by the nature of its
thickness and perhaps is not exactly how
it works in this particular context you
find that a lot you know I mean I worked
in Hong Kong for a long time and this is
just one particular example of central
Central Pier in Hong Kong which used to
be you know Edwardian building in 1912
and then it was changed to modernist
building and then in 2006 it was really
recreation of that Edwardian building
not with again with very loose
connection with the original is really
more like improvisation of of the idea
of Edwardian building and it was also
moved 350 metres away from the original
site
so if you see further jotted out in peer
is recreated improvised Edwardian
building but the original site was is is
here as you can see in that nineteen
fifties modernist building and it had to
be done like this because there's a
highway construction running through the
site so so it's very interesting so if
you look at you know Hong Kong over say
you know like eighty years time
that's the at least very similar view of
Central from and the peak they look very
different but in some ways there's a
different kind of memory that's you know
if you just think about the the examples
they showed you with details in this
different kind of memory that's embodied
in orders although the building forms
are so dramatically different the last
point which is really what I want to
take from everything I'd just described
and what does all this mean I would like
to maybe proposed the idea of materiel
orders material orders not so much
remember we talked about the kind of
quick movement of the
intellectualization from object things
to what I would like to call here as
final orders which is you can describe
them as utopias that really kind of
short circuiting of things and utopia
and perhaps should be really mediated
with something that's intermediate that
that web resembles an Indian
intermediate order the intermediate
orders between the first and the final
order whatever the final order is it
could be signs it could be God and it
could be truth and justice and so on and
that intermediate order in my mind could
be connected to what we're talking about
today which is really about the role of
the object image and character and that
intermediate order therefore has a
better chance to match planetary ecology
if you like you know this is probably
our current crisis that were would build
too many utopias and they don't really
match what's going on in the world we
want to improve the world which is
really probably a bit bit of a hubris to
think in that way so I want to call or
describe what we talked about this proto
material orders and really having
another chance you know after Hegel
after in Francis Bacon to to think about
the act of naming thinking and speaking
and and really as a real concrete
counterproposal to follow centrism there
are some really brilliant people who
work in psychology
or used to work in muscle grenade who
worked in 1930s didn't talk about me my
take on their work in relation to
intermediate orders massacre a very it's
very interesting psychologist French
technologist who actually talked about
the idea of imminence in Chinese thought
in the sense that that that
justification is not kind of derived
from the final order but rather from the
Indian intermediate order like when you
want to convince someone you would say
water flows from a location to the Lord
with location there is it's it's
imminence
you know it's the ideas in the body of
things and which was really something
that the haigo attacked payment Li that
this is really an immature form of
thinking so so I want to have a chance
to rethink that and also massive Rene
who probably hated Catholicism really
was fascinated by the idea of having
neither God nor law and God law of
course they're kind of symbolic of the
final order that we just talked about
but more like and seeking morality and
truth in the Confucian philosophy and
very interesting but there was a half a
century ago and from France was Julian's
currently working and one of the
brilliant one of the most interesting
sinologists going much further with
ideas of propensity you know what what
are the orders how does the orders how
did the orders work and he was using
ideas of propensity detour and axes and
the idea of efficacy rather than cause
and effect is really
it's a different way of looking at how
things function with within with a
different set of ideas there of course I
mean this is just the kind of catch off
slide and in the difficult of course all
kinds of critiques of the euros and main
like fun eccentric in the European
tradition of the intellectual path and
going back to John Wetteland
you know beside being the son-in-law of
Inigo Jones and then an architect of
certain buildings and yet today we're
using dissertation on the Chinese
language being the original language of
of Noah and it's it's a it's a kind of
psychological novelty and this is quite
interesting to read but I think Leibniz
was more serious about really looking
for a two-character although he said the
district Angus may not be that true
character but he was really looking for
it and Chinese may be a way of getting
there you know that's really getting to
the point where you have a closer
relationship between character and thing
rather than having a sign and idea and
the thing you know like having three
steps rather than two which is embedded
in the phonetic languages
I want to also quickly mention the
Robert Hooke was a particularly
interesting character when I was looking
at the Royal Society in 17th century and
I realized that there was a huge feud
between hawk and Newton and it was
really very important for hook to regard
empirical evidence as in a way the
intermediate intermediate cause of
things rather than quickly going from
the first cause which denote how things
work to the final cause which is really
scientific propositions Universal and
this is really what Newton was precisely
was very interested in and jumping too
quickly so so there was empiricism not
science that was at work and so I
thought that was really a very important
critique of the indo-european
intellectual path and there's in Freud
and I can lock on in this very important
sentence against very well known losses
lay their own contribution being
structured like language but my kind of
suggestion of speculation is that that
language is not phonetic and it is
perhaps way too for us to understand
that it was a purge of the figure in
formal centrism it's really kind of it's
really exactly like what you see in in
hey going and water on in in William
Hanna's that that kind of dismissal of
the figure in speech and that comes back
has a language of the unconscious that
works very differently
the Heidegger and tradition of looking
at objects things you know Heidegger if
you believe in that and was influenced
deeply by Eastern philosophy and was
trying to think anew the Western
intellectual tradition and that has been
certainly picked up by people like Bruno
Latour grand Homme and who wanted to
return to things and rather than to kind
of stay with endless abstraction and the
utopianism in the end perhaps this is
really a critique of utopia utopia as
realistic but ultimately not real and
this is quite interesting to reflect on
and material what is perhaps not
necessarily more realistic and probably
even less realistic in appearance but
more Rio as Network the critique also
extends to the typical tripartite
structure of utopia dystopia and
heterotopia which dominate it appears a
lot in our discourses in in architecture
and this is the final slag
I won't also say argue that there is a
possibility of a borrower and ascetic
round in the intermediate orders as
material orders further than endlessly
going back to the cycle of renunciation
reduction imprint and this requires
perhaps new empiricism and I think there
will be a great thing to have and
perhaps a new way of looking at the
[Music]
perhaps the second most popular
linguistic system and see what they can
give us in terms of a different way of
thinking about the world and mapping the
world and order in the world and perhaps
we are not so invested and in a almost
unthinking way in all kinds of utopias
and particularly today the technological
utopia in relation to data ok I'll stop
here thank you
[Music]
okay
does anyone have any questions
the question that
thank you very much for your
presentation it's very intriguing to me
I'm Chinese
I just have a question I won't ask I was
wondering you you kind of address the
logic of materiel order to work the ends
I was wondering could you explain will
be more how you see the relationship
between this logic and like the current
dominating economic force in city making
in contemporary city making in China I
think in a way there's a form of
capitalism which you know now you can
describe as a multinational finance
perhaps that's producing a lot of the
building's type the Dayton cities but
that particular form of capitalism does
not have to be always the same and it's
interesting that my friend and colleague
of some variety scott lash who recently
together with Michael Keith and fewer at
two other scholars produced a book
called China constructing capitalism it
is very interesting to think about a
different kind of capitalism you may not
even want to describe it as capitalism
but a different kind of financing system
that doesn't work as a money utopia you
know what the current model is that the
capital is driving all the development
process it is really designed to use the
best highest profit that really is a
very simplistic construction of
capitalism and the
something that that even Adam Smith and
was having doubts whether that could be
the viable way for the future
it's a of course Adam Smith was thinking
about the Dutch capitalism in this in
the 17th century when instead of kind of
working on the economy of things and it
became the financing structure of stock
markets and and and chasing the shadow
of money that does not have a ground so
that really is something that we can we
think that should we actually turn
capitalism and money back to the things
and that could be indeed one of the
material orders that you can begin to
rewrite the rules of capitalism and
therefore really begin to produce a
different kind of City and not as a
result of money utopia but as a result
of of a different material order that
has money as one of the components and
we probably have to do this because you
know the way we the speed with which we
were destroying our environment is he's
a certain year long call for for us to
rethink that questions yes
and thank you very much I wanted to I
spend a couple of years in Hong Kong so
I'm a little bit familiar with the city
but I wanted to ask you a slightly
different question which is related to
the rise of the museums in China and the
buildings very much related to
speculation in real estate but I wonder
if you have something to say about the
museum or the sort of prefiguring of the
museum before that happened because from
what I understand there's a word kind of
archaic word in Chinese where the
closest to the idea of the museum is
encyclopedia mm-hmm
can you say something more about it's a
very interesting thank you for doing for
making that link I not sure whether I
can go immediately to you know making a
parallel it's really a very very
fascinating idea maybe there's some
middle stages where that actually
happened when museums you know those
museums most of them don't really have a
lot of great content the museums are
actually there too I would say a variety
of right the appearance of culture as
some kind of component there must be a
list of things a museum is just one of
them and that really is a composition of
figures that then became to gain or at
least in the minds of buyers and sellers
credibility of a place what would be the
place without museums so that really is
how I would see it at least
immediately thank you so I just want to
start with an impression I think your
presentation appears to me a little bit
like you like a Renaissance think a
little bit the way Foucault and the
order of things introduces Borg is
rehearsal of a Chinese classification
and I think your lecture has qualities
of that but then I want to challenge you
on a number of things you I think making
claims which I find hard to sustain and
there's a number of consolation so first
of all I think you tying too closely
together into reviewing languages versus
sino-tibetan languages and then he
created with phonetic writing versus
horrific writing as if the language is
so closely tied in with with with
writing systems and our writing systems
go back quite a bit yeah but I think
there is I will say universal agreement
one linguist that writing system our
secretary and derivative particularly in
the the reason why we have to say this
is because the those who work the
literati were absolutely minut minority
in society which then we would have to
argue that they would form that nucleus
he would kind of really impact back on
language which also which is which is
older I'm not saying that it isn't an
impact but there's a definitely a
primacy of of speech over writing
systems and languages and even also in
the indo-european of course the the
there was an absolute minority those who
actually writing and reading and that
couldn't have been a huge imprint I
think the whole idea of a kind of indoor
peon intellectual path based on phonetic
writing versus versus was
prolific writing I think is questionable
a huge claim and I think unsustainable
but I want to pick up another point is
when you come in with the phone phone a
centrist and critique of Derrida it's
very interesting I'm subscribing to
listen it's I don't think that you and
you kind of but you use a derrida's from
the centrosome critique to kind of back
up some kind of notion often you have to
without much telling us where there's a
certain advantage of superior to your
other knees in terms of your glyphic
writing versus alphabetic writing he's
not making that distinction he is if for
him writing is emphasizing the
importance of writing and in not as
something that you can't think of the
relative of speech when it comes to
systematic theoretical thought when it
becomes too philosophy that's right it
applies in everyday language we don't
need writing we it's not that
relationship isn't there isn't follow
centers almost perfectly the correct
message but I when it comes to
philosophy in its reflection this
becomes clear of course that that a
philosophical tradition and also the
elaborateness of a philosophy for of an
earth or like Hegel's for instance is
absolutely unthinkable in terms of of
depths and structuration and the
crafting of an amine ology without the
aid of writing then you see that writing
cannot be a superficial add-on where you
just illustrate and communicate your
thought that thought has been elaborated
through writing yeah and that's the
point that this is nothing to do with
the distinction between hero glyphic and
Chinese writing versus phonetic writing
this is perfectly coined and viable with
phonetic writing that this new dimension
of thinking comes into being and and as
the luminous on somebody's also
emphasizing
and that is not only the liberation of
an of a single text but after printing
the the possibility of her distributing
text and critiquing text and having
textual references and critique and
weeding out inconsistencies across texts
and building up an edifice writing is
absolutely critical absolutely crucial
you're living the literary and then
print based Gutenberg kind of
civilization which makes certain
intellectual achievements possible and
again I think that is at some point
worth making but I think that has very
little to do with I mean this is
phonetic writing as much as let's say
Chinese script there's no difference on
that on that point I mean on the
critique Verna centrism I mean I think
that there is a point which Patrick's
remarks tap into which in a sense is the
derrida's critique of Ferno centrism is
always to point out ultimately it's not
really a critique he's just to say it's
wrong and that underneath it so I mean
Derrida puts very polemic Lee his
totally counterintuitive proposition
that writing comes before speech and I
suppose on that you know anti phone
eccentric bassist Asif you perhaps but
nonetheless the question to ask is
what's writing I mean because it's clear
that Garrity's kind of a creature is not
writing in a kind of sense of
comparative systems mm-hmm you know it's
indifferent if there's Tamiya
between most aspects that I would know
about Chinese and
the Fona centuries are part of Western
is like a small subset of issues I mean
lately so Cyr is furious who is no with
the lack of photo centrism yeah I mean
this whole angry chapter on spelling in
hitting so I guess it's whether I mean
the two terms that I had problems with
still is on the one hand writing
mm-hm and on the other hand it seemed to
me to some extent the problem with the
temperature mm-hmm which also I mean in
art schools and in architecture schools
people totally forget or didn't know
that these terms come from rhetoric and
the you know a figure always has to be
kind of located in its rhetorical
function which I think serves your
argument very well well Wow where to
begin
I I think for whatever the problems and
opportunities of the word figure it's
certainly very essential to everything
had talked about and I certainly I
mentioned
Derrida but and I had to leave him very
quickly because I realized that he could
not help many many more beyond the idea
of honest entries and therefore I really
put quite a lot of emphasis on the
figure and figuration and in the sense
that the figure has some kind of
ontological status I also want to talk
about the figure through the Chinese
language is one of the living languages
of
of object images you know essentially I
think it's really not so much in the
construct the philosophy but more like
kind of taking a step back and think in
a way that my attempt to approximate
what the Chinese is doing in English you
know that's really a hard task to do but
but I think the figure probably has some
promise to basically expand the literati
the latest concern with writing or not
to a whole series of form making space
creating steps that then in the end you
know faintly you can naturally read them
as written text and I I don't know how
to you'll answer your question of all
languages are pretty much similar and I
III think they're really radically
different and they my own experience of
getting to know a different language
these languages might be different but
the difference doesn't reside in the
writing system which is a secondary
formation so so that's where I'd be
because in the way you talk about it and
it means that the writing system is an
enormous formative power over the
language itself and as wonder what the
mechanism is if only you very very small
elite is actually writing and it's
already filled in in the critical
language formation I mean to that I can
only say that if we begin to learn how
to do calligraphy and you begin to
realize that what kind of power that has
as you know what's demonstrated by the
Chinese artists and it the written you
know Chinese characters is you know
always being a major theme and then I
picked out to you I thought this to your
most provocative it it takes a Chinese
but the idea of the idea of an elite
affecting you know the language as such
can't be particularly novel I mean if
you think of English I mean a very small
literate elite between between 1400 and
1600 completely like re latinized
English the sovereigns gave the
Shakespeare which was altogether
different than Chaucer whereas the same
difference doesn't apply in Italian
such mechanisms yeah but I think figure
and figuration is more important than
that immediate claim that you're having
problem with we doggedly could go on
forever and with Patrick here even
longer than that but thank you very much
for coming and thank you very much for a
very very nice lecture and can I say
those who are around tomorrow morning
are welcome to come to the seminar at
half-past ten in the phd room which is
to use the very architectural expression
at the back somewhere
