welcome everyone to the future of agenda
it's great to see so many of you braved
the great Saturday morning and came to
join us in this we think very very
important of it I'm Matilda Tom I work
at Goldsmiths University of London and
University in the south of Sweden
Linnaeus University and currently I'm
doing a project where we look at the
housing needs and dreams of migrants
older people and students and ultimately
we see this as how do we share our lives
on our home that's ours and at home I
have two young daughters sharing a very
small bedroom in North London in North
London flat so I'm very interested in
this sort of the pragmatics and
paradigmatic of sharing spaces and
gender issues very much coming to that
and we know that gender equality is one
of the most important nodes in the juban
sustainable development goals so we know
that if we have gender equality we also
have environmental improvement better
health and more financially prosperous
communities and we also know that found
the circular houses with fruit Gardens
tend to perpetuate gender stereotypes so
it seems like people in those houses the
women became sort of more domestically
inclined in a very old-fashioned way but
the future of gender is about so much
more it's about the narratives
meta-narratives the stories we live by
and tell in our everyday life in Sweden
we have scenes you could tell by my
accent my dodgy actions I'm Swedish
probably in Sweden we have since 2
fifteen feminists government and is that
the same as the future gender does that
really promote gender identities beyond
the the binary notion that we are so
often encounter I'm so delighted to
chair this panel and I was thinking also
that as we know that the future is
always a dance with the past and the
present and when Elizabeth darling and
Ben Walker and Manny Jay and all their
colleagues have set this conference in
motion you are together with all of us
both rewriting the past and the present
and the future
by giving a space for other voices and
narratives and that's so exciting and
it's very exciting for us all I know to
be part of that we got some very
insightful and exciting panelists with
us today we have maria-paz gonzales
works today architectural association
and she's going to share with us some
new ways of looking at gender topologies
we've got Dolores Lola Reese I'm hoping
I pronounce my last name right from
little architect and you're gonna share
some very important stuff about
education and gender and architecture
and we also have Catalina Bonneville and
threose Christian so from maquette
arctas and you can assure some
explorations that sort of explodes on
the binaries in a way I'm save you sure
that exploit this may be a very harsh a
term open up and we have you are very
knowledgeable and exciting audience
today and we want to hear from you so
we've tried to set it up so we will get
there from here as well so months ago
the panelists and I
had a little discussion how we could
make future gender also sort of how of
this panel so we tried to think about
how we could get more voices included
how I could trouble that maybe power how
you kiss that sometimes the car in a
conventional panel format we have some
bold ideas we wanted everybody to wear
slippers and I think you will talk about
that later but it turned out that that
is non serious the slipper storage
speaking to that hundred fifty but Allah
we wanted a circus eating but managed a
correctly reminded me of that in fact to
tell you about in this space but what we
have we have a table of joy materials
and I can say there's something already
terrified that's ok
a lot of post-it notes I think you said
that Saturday brains can hide behind
yeah you can use the post-it to write
questions or make comments and we will
sort of harvest these post-its and bring
them into the discussion if you want to
you can also get up and draw I will do
some drawing to show you how you can
look you'll still be okay but so that
they can start to share some ideas
because we know that most of the future
gender will not fit within this fashion
but we can start and share and have some
exciting conversations and we can create
a patchwork that we can continue working
with collectively so that's our hope so
moving on quickly to our first speaker
so welcome please Maria here um well
thank you miss Hilda for that amazing
introduction and I think I'll apologize
I'll have to read very very quickly
through this to kind of stay on time the
work that I will discuss with you today
is relating gender typology is called
the possibility of a feminist approach
to architectural type but more
appropriately
I would like to call it houses for work
the house since the beginning of its
history has been the frame for the
reproduction of life and gender roles a
powerful symbol of organization and
mastery over resources nourishment
clothing women children and slaves and
the choreography of relations in space
husband wife father son the master slave
among many others in canonical texts
like Alberta's 15th century treatise on
the art of building in ten pots when
discussing the design of private houses
in his fifth book Albert II offers a
survey of the house by narrating
sequences of spaces and declaring the
female domain as to be out of bound to
all but closest kin segregating the
realm of the house from the realm of the
city and with this the domain of women
explaining this in earlier text by
Albert II amongst other authors as
belonging to a natural law or
disposition
this is persistent even in earlier text
in the la familia on the third book
entitled liberty of Emilia economicus
literally the law numbers of the
household oils Albert II establishes the
natural order of this economical law it
is though nature provided for a well
being arranging for men to bring things
home and for women to guard them the
women as she remains locked up at her
home she watch over things by staying at
her post
Mel's mobility in opposition to women's
confinement reinforced women's place to
be inside as the administrator of the
home relating closely female with
economy in its original sense economy
royal is literally the household
management for the sustenance of life
now philosophers like Aristotle and
Hannah Arendt describes such
undertakings related to human
reproduction as labor the slavish nature
of all occupations that serve the needs
for the maintenance of life labor as
aaron describes that dissipates it is
indeed the mark of all a boring that it
leaves nothing behind that the results
of its efforts is as quickly
consumed as the effort is spent this is
offered in opposition to the notion of
work work which is associated with the
production of lasting objects a table a
chair but also a poem or a painting and
has the possibility to out live human
existence resulting instead in a type of
reification the acknowledgment of these
distinctions has only chefs has not only
shaped the physical form of the house it
has in time also become a platform for
women's emancipation starting in 1869
with the demand of wage housework and
the socialization of reproductive labor
subsequently reignited in 1972 with
international wages for housework
campaign the rethinking of labor
resulted in architectural proposals that
in fact held radical political socio
economical implications the earlier
becoming a movement named material
feminist in tolerance Hayden seminal
work the grant domestic revolution with
projects like the American woman's home
by Katharine and Harriet Beecher which
we see her to the right we're a model
for a centralized core containing the
main labor spaces kitchen washroom
stairs etc is proposed to increase the
efficiency of house management or menu
CFA Pierce's neighborhoods conformed of
kitchen les houses organized around a
communal a cooperative housekeeping
Center women's acknowledgement an
organization of Labor held inspiring
architectural and political potential
however circumscribed within the house
as the feminine sphere in traditional
notions of feminist fear perpetuating
historical divisions of labor and
departing from what was all the work
what other figures argued like Ethel
puffer house and Charlotte Gilman which
is a women's expansion into unchartered
masculine realms whilst maintaining
their involvement in family life
and the bearing of children with
different intensity and in diverse
political context and certainly with
different political intentions in time
women's association with labor became a
project of the state especially during
the periods of World War one and World
War two with Lenin's the great
initiative described the need for
housing with collective services in
order to involve women in industrial
production housing the new way of life
became the architectural project of the
first years of the revolution projects
like what we see here to the right
stunning red straw housing combined were
not only spaces for cooking and washing
work decentralised also sleeping
quarters were segregated adults from
children's in different plots in the
United States and in great numbers
during World War two projects like van
port city integrated the entire support
system of daycare centers communal
kitchens and living quarters devised for
women workers and their children
although quickly dismantle or never
achieved the temporary suspension of
culturally constructed gender divisions
expose material strategies for the
organization of labor in large scale
with the intention to sustain women in
the workforce now the purpose of my
research is really the focus of of
independent architectural projects
especially those influenced by modernist
ideals modernism as conceptualized by
Marshall Bergman and in a very very
broad sense can be understood as those
theoretical and artistic ideas about
modernity that aim to enable men and
women to assume control over the changes
that are taking place in a world by
which they too are changed the
possibility of a new relay of new
relationships enabled by modernist
ideals inevitably informed the concept
of ization of domestic spaces in the
house as Siegfried Gideon describes in
1929 today we need a house that
corresponds in its entire structure to
our bodily feeling as it is influenced
and Lee
through sports gymnastics and census way
of life light transparent movable
consequently this open house is also it
also signifies a reflection of
contemporary mental conditions there are
no longer separate Affairs all domains
interpenetrate radically abstract in
self referential architectures
inadvertedly served as a conceptual
platform for women's difference and work
the research my research explores three
of such projects Eileen Gray is housed
in Castile at Ueno Gorman's Casas
comella in Dina Bogardus Casa division
so I'll start with Alan gray Tom Papa
yeah a house for herself castellari 1932
to 1934 as early as 1926 working with
john vidal ET on e 1027 island great
purchases a modest piece of land for
herself above the port of Monteux tam
papaya from the local saying with the
time in straw defects ripen was
conceived for herself as a space to
retreat think and work the house main
living spaces are distributed on a
surface which looks which took the
agreed which took us agreed the
structure of existing stone cisterns
this allowed for us sectional complexity
changes in floor levels and ceiling
heights helped to mark thresholds along
a space that flows and becomes
continuous from inside to outside this
is possible by a free-standing wall
located carefully to screen any unwanted
gaze continuities also reinforced
materially light fixtures floor and wall
finishes are extended onto the terrace
that becomes a second exterior living
room the desire for exteriority and
nature was a driving force of her design
in addition great ability to work in
different scales is evident in this
project walls cabinets chairs all
seemingly developed in situ during the
design and construction of building of
the building along with local
the house was great main residence until
the war when he was vastly pillaged
later carefully restored and sold in
1954 Casas Camilla's studio houses for
two painters Frida Kahlo and Diego
Rivera in 1922 to 1932 1929 to 1932
designed by a recently graduated Juan
O'Gorman the project for a new studio
house for Diego Rivera in a separate
apartment for his wife Frida Kahlo began
in 1929 obermann's incursions in
functionalism were greatly influenced by
corbusier's words and ideas and although
a pure functionalist language might
appear in opposition to the spirit of
post-revolution era and the clients
support for Mexico's artistic Platinum's
the language enable new ways of
rethinking the projects unique program a
painter and an intellectual in her own
right Carlo - required a studio to work
as she mentioned - Lucien blush in 1931
in a journal entry she liked the idea of
having two separate houses I can work he
can work referred to sometimes as chaos
Camilla's twin houses these two volumes
are far from symmetrical the disparity
between them is associated by critics as
one serving the other although
biographical accounts contradict this
readings describing a much more fluid
relation between the two spaces the day
would typically start with breakfast and
Frida's apartment although the location
of most of the meals would take place in
Diego's kitchen the inclusion in an
inclusion and doubling up of kitchens
and studio spaces in both apartments
denotes a key logistic self-sufficiency
also the frequent frail connection
between them through a bridge suspended
in the third level almost assures no
connection between the two houses
although Carlos creative space is mostly
linked to Casa Sol where she was born
and returned to after 1939 and died in
this studio house is where she produced
some of the work that would later
consecrate
as an artist lastly Casa de Visser Lina
Bo Bardi southbounder 1950 to 1951
completed in 1951 around the same time
as miss Honda rose Farnsworth house in
Philip Johnson's Glass House Casa de
vida was the first fully design and
build work by the architect in her new
homeland Brazil where she moved to in
1946 a great sense of admiration for her
for her new home certainly informed at
this time like a Belvedere even in the
first sketches of the house there is a
clear intention of sight lines toward
the surrounding nature the house is
organized around a main space that
generally can delivers over Pilates
dining room fireplace living room and
library sit indistinctly indistinctly in
the same space noticeable only by the
functional restrictions of furniture the
furniture that occupies it the large
void in the center is built around an
existing tree which allows not only for
light into the middle of the floor plate
but open sight lines across the entire
space that becomes porous and reflective
to a degree that although one feels
contained and sheltered this space is no
longer a room a corridor sets apart the
central space from the rest of the house
and connects to the couple's quarters
the service quarters are visibly
separated from the rest of the house
connected only by a bridge which is the
kitchen informal and easily accessible
from both sides
although typical of the day the strong
segregation between the served and the
serving is one of the notable noticeable
hierarchies of the design contradicting
from strong social views professed by
bombarding my reading is that labor
spaces are generous when looking at the
floorplan and carefully considered in
the way the layer disorganized acceding
surrounded by nature almost as allowing
for both parts to be private to each
other as Leena later noted in her last
lecture in
in 1989 she did not have an office she
worked from the silence of her of the
night in her house and spent her days on
the construction site so open space to
wrap up when looking at the projects
together abstract definitions other than
their use house office workshop are
necessary to attain the underlying ideas
that do allow this this projects to be
grouped in a kind of new type of house
one that in contrast to the entire
history that precedes it is constructed
and concerned with other than human
reproduction in the containment of the
women housewife in his canonical essay
in the journal opposition's Rafael Moneo
describes the design process as bringing
elements of a typology understood here
as the idea of formal structure into the
precise state that characterizes a
single work I would argue that
regardless of the inevitable influence
of ideas of liberation functionalism and
existence minimum early in the design
process these projects became rather
individual influenced by their immediate
context relations between work and labor
privacy privacy interior et and
exteriority a rule governing all
projects is the active search for a
space for work through redefining making
visible and at times a facing
organizational hierarchies of labor in
simple geometrical model of edges the
locus of this new type is a larger open
space I'm sorry in the case of Tampa FEA
her work space physically flows into the
exterior continuing finishes from
interior portion of the space enables
suggesting fluidity between inside and
outside in the case of sub Casas
camellias the space for work is almost
the entire volume contained only by the
doors that that access it penetrated
volume in the case of casa
the video is elevated to match the
canopy of the surrounding nature almost
acquiring a type of intimacy with with
the context this individual
manifestations defy the notion of the
female containment organized outside the
Uighurs and Nomos of life in this new
type there is a material search for a
space of self-discovery and an opening
and search for flexibility as a
potential setting for creative
production these three houses designed
for or by women although conceived in
different geographical context when
collated and looked at together they
bring forward a new and common kind of
feminine domestic space one that is
carved out from within the reproductive
territory of labour and that opens up
the possibility of space for women's
work thank you so well thank you to the
organization for the innovation okay so
little architect is an educational
program introducing a school children to
the topic of architecture we are part of
the architectural Association visiting a
school and have been offering our
lessons in London primary school since
2013 the goal of our work is to educate
the school children aged 4 to 11 in the
observation understanding and
questioning of their own built
environment our aim is to create and to
create a proactive and committed
relationship between citizens and the
city I will show how little architect
uses architecture as a tool to transform
and enrich children's understanding of
their habitats the chosen context for
these lessons estate schools offers a
wide and diverse spectrum of children
enabling the program to bring new role
models into the classroom am asking
male based curriculum while fostering a
creative way of thinking leader
architect teaches children to think
about architecture not to make
architecture that's something that I
want to highlight we don't want em to
become architects
we are not indoctrinated in them at all
so it's so we wanted we want to empower
children in having firm attitudes
towards
a local and global sustainable
development very much in line with the
UNESCO objectives for 2030 little
architect was originally a sketch out by
Marcus's in 2011 but it wasn't possible
to develop his program due to the safety
the rules first for children safety so
it didn't develop so in 2010 I came to
live in London and I and after spending
a couple of years researching and
testing a methodology to incorporate
architecture in the UK a school
curriculum I offer my experiences to the
IAE I was teaching here in the summer
school and I offer infra system to
Natasha son Mayer I really your friend
that is highly missed I love you Natasha
citizen Elena stone warmer here at the
AAA so see was the first the first
person here at the AAA who knew about
what I was researching about primary
Christopher piece the director of the
AAA visiting school rapidly saw the
educational strengths of this project
and gave the green light to the program
which has so far reached more than 4,000
children here in this map we see we can
see that we went to sorry but this year
and we'll have here Moravia and Sofia
will have been in sidewall
a tiny village in Northampton and we
have an in Chatham again deprived area
of the UK with our lessons so it's maybe
nearly 5000 children we could say in
this years okay so I wanted to start
with Rosa truth Izawa whose commitment
to act education and improvement of the
school curriculum has clearly influenced
my work she was a japanese-american art
and education activist devoting many
years of her life to create and
consolidate an intertwined relationship
between artists and primary schools
through health success
Alvarado art workshop in San Francisco
was around 1968 till 1973 1975 and she
transformed the way in which art was
understood in society so as I won that
artists are key figures for schools I
firmly believe that architects more
specifically female architects should go
to schools and what this is an image
from the archive here in area IV is why
I think we have to talk to society
because after many years practice in
myself architecture I realized that a
real dialogue towards better design of
cities can't happen if the contact part
has no knowledge about the main points
of the conversation and we have
neglected for many years the the
conversation with society like even the
language the the way we talk to society
in my view it is our duty as architects
to offer knowledge about architecture
and cities to establish bridges of
profound communication with society and
to make visual and tangible our role as
women in architecture so the beginning
of the negative female stereotypes start
as far as Pandora and evil which means
equality eternal get a portrait of we
that's their that's their in here in the
back of our brains and so after
generally sort of women fighting for
equality we still find behavior songs
lyrics adverse movies or music videos
giving us a distorted idea an image of
women shaping and perpetuating the great
male hero so when we female architects
this amazing women when we visit the
primary school classroom we are not just
teaching about architecture and the city
we are making various feminist
statements so you know learning is never
an isolated process it is contextual
learning happens everywhere through
formal and informal education in both
types of education we find the official
the hidden and the null curriculum we
later we can go to what is what is the
meaning of exactly the hidden curriculum
in the in the school environment but
later in the conversation maybe so the
official curriculum is in the UK is the
one that little architect sorry is the
one that little architect has carefully
studied to incorporate architecture in
the statutory learning hours but what we
are doing from inside the education
system is an attack to the hidden and
then did I say this already
no to the hidden and the noon curriculum
we do our approach from three angles
today I'm going to focus my attention in
the in in the angle of feminist side of
the program that is broader and so we
the three legs we could say the three
approach is taking down stereotypes
about contemporary architecture and
modernity and also yeah I'm not going to
enter but yeah also about living in
community this is not for a sustainable
city
we can't dream about houses for every
family a house a garden that's that's
not but incorporating a positive
powerful active female role into the
children's imagery and a third one
retraining the senses in order to grow
children's capabilities to observe and
being curious hence improving their
critical thinking
so Maria Castle assistant Spanish writer
art activist and professor in Madrid and
I'm lucky I know her personally and
simultaneous that any act of teaching is
a performance we share her idea and we
have designed the script for our
performance in schools like this act
number one going to instead of waiting
for removing the idea of the superstar
male architect we go to teach two
schools in going in more in moving
ourselves towards children rather than
expecting them to come to our place we
have made one of our fundamentals we are
setting or eternal relationships and
generating in the children and an
unconscious feeling of self-esteem
we are erasing hierarchies architect
equal primary school teacher we female
architects become part of their daily
environment thus we become familiar and
trustful Bruno Munnar is called for
demolishing the myth of the star artist
and in our case we are demolishing they
start our kaput act number two the wow
factor and the pedagogical impact of the
brand new discovery this is probably my
favorite one the wow factor involves
clapping/cheering
hugging on a blood is the wow factor and
they Maria Sophie I know that is true
and the impact of them of this up
so every stages a daily ages children
usually don't know the meaning of the
world architecture and generally they
confuse I will be sticking with
archaeologist or builders that's a
continuously we find that especially in
deprived areas of course if we teach
sometimes we teaching independent school
they know because their parents are
architects most of them we are a plug so
when we go to deprived areas they don't
know so so in that we female architects
right sorry so when a female our cadets
have design architecture control a
building process know about materials
and construction systems know about mats
and structures have convinced clients
and politicians and ultimately make
people lives happier we are offering a
brand new female role model it's
strongly linked to concepts such as
power knowledge and care yesterday we
were talking about the care how
architecture is just only mean to care I
I think it's part of our discipline we
highlight the role of female architects
bringing examples of their work and
introducing a narrative to communicate
their ideas to children Allison Brooks
Sara wiglesworth Benedetta Tavia way
Anna Harrington Marta Parra an anomaly
or zaha hadid Lina Bo Bardi Godot etc
and how and how we explain and how we
create this narrative to create
proximity with the children so Saha I
don't care about this design that much I
care and I explain that Sofia was the
super clever woman who lifted a building
to run for longer and this children
doesn't need to go out of the building
to make to celebrate the sport they able
to just run so and negated
they celebrate that woman through design
is making their lives easier
um the second example Benedetta
when a lepida caring architects that
design a new landscape for the neighbors
this is throwing them the most cloud
project in our lessons
so when Anita found this this market in
Barcelona the life of the neighbors was
absolutely they were horrified by the
landscape very weak also does the ANSI
suddenly create this amazing new reality
so they open the window and see has
offered topography
colorful environment see scaring of the
citizens and that's that's the message
that we are giving them and the that's a
building that I design and I deny
directive and why because it's not a lot
only because if not we would be
perpetuating the star female architect
because they are not so tangible and
it's necessary to talk about women we
have been talking about women but it's
also necessary to offer something that
they can approach in an in an easier way
and that's why I always add something
that I developed so this is a building
where we included birds in the roof
working with a biologist and I told the
narrative of this this this is a slide
they really like it and I of course they
they love this like and then and then
some pictures of the power of a woman
controlling the building site in reality
and they cloud and they and they really
like that
feeling okay sharing is caring and
caring is empowering so they say there
is a definition of children a postman's
made and she said children are
delivering messages that we send to a
time we will not see
and I don't like this poetic definition
because I think it creates a gap to open
between adults and children and I'm
doing the opposite we are doing the
opposite we like to create and celebrate
a team and to work together for a better
future children and adults we are
empowering them and we are making them
responsible of the future and social
empowerment needs to come together with
teaching the tools to reach to reach the
ones in power and this is a very old
examples at the beginning of the lessons
and we wrote postcards to Boris Johnson
yeah yeah I'm finishing I only do yeah
and well postcard to Boris Johnson
expressing their besides for London in
the future we also have written to
history in town council the royal
heritage lottery found because in less
than 15 years they will be in charge of
law no 15 20 years they will be doctors
or schoolteachers taxi drivers
architects soft keepers or maybe
politicians so female architects are
empowering them to claim for better
cities and really really fast
oh sorry act number four and I finished
with this one
the a a as an amplifier the medium is
the message
welcome to the a a the greatest school
of architecture on the planet
that's not my sentence if you are a
staff member of the staff you will
recognize it was bread still in our
welcoming letter so in words of bread
still there is no other place like yay
but regardless if his words were
accurate or not the AAA is today an
influencer it is a reference in the
architecture of Rihanna's mossad McLuhan
stated the medium is the message and the
message consists of an independent
self-funded architectural school
teaching architecture in deprived areas
of London and this is the most
significant aspect here
it is it's replica capability and the
legacy that it might live in the
aggregate of sector and the position
that we female architects will address
as the time passes thank you very much
[Applause]
[Applause]
thank you very much Lola for sharing
this inspiring examples with us and also
establishing Orca texture as how to
engage with society as well as building
second so we invite our next panelist
chattering up on the video and today's
50 of them
hi my name is TS Christensen hi I'm
Katarina born again do don't you stand
outside the mic all right okay but I'm
in the thank you is that it sounds so
loud all right okay yep and we're
actually missing our third member today
is Mariana alamos Silva but she's with
us and this is a picture standing very
happily at another bodies fabricator
pompeya yeah and we were absolutely
happy to be invited to come here and
talk about the future and which does not
have to be distant rather we think about
it as something very near something we
wish to grab by the hand this for years
now we've been working on a large
artistic research project called the
club scene it's been affiliated to the
Swedish Centre for architecture and
design and financed by the Swedish
Research Council so it's quite fantastic
we've been met and we've been making
full-scale clubs financed by the Swedish
government
and the club scene involves the staging
of clubs of importance for queer and
feminist activism nationally and
internationally and our methodology can
be described as simultaneously critical
as reparative and the series examines
the nightclub as a space and activity
essential for the drive to act up in
queer movements the social the erotic
and the political are inextricably
intertwined on that streets a
inextricably intertwined thank you
jennifer bloomer for that the club
produces self definition recognition and
a sense of home we aim to bring forward
the importance of clubs for people who
do not confirm to the binary gender
system we who always calculate with the
threat of violence be it in the streets
or in our families the nightclub may be
the only place like home hmm a common
thread in the space as we create is to
never separate form from content for
instance we mean that it is a mistake to
forget the space we are in such as today
the seminar room when discussing how
architecture and design play part in the
normalization of certain bodies and
behavior at the expenses of others so
there are lots of questions of course
opposed to space like the one we're in
today who have access to the space whose
preferences does it confirm to which
bodies where and how press up against it
and most importantly of all who are
these bodies with this is a paraphrase
of aspect problem and there are always
at least three sides to what we do our
practice is informed by the theatrical
the carnivalesque and activism
and together we explore the effects of
aesthetic expressions from interlocking
perspectives such as anti-racist class
awareness and queer feminist
perspectives we work to enhance the
understanding of how architecture design
and craft can support difference and
create more accepting and varied
environments we like to discuss using
our research practice as a starting
point the intimate and very reciprocal
relationships between material social
and political considerations how things
clothes and spaces all play part in the
construction of who we are and what we
can do and most importantly of all how
design craft and architecture can
support dreams needs and desires for a
future society that has room for all of
us in mycket we often say that we work
with minimalistic maximalism it doesn't
mean that we have to do a lot of things
or make a lot of objects but we focus
carefully on the details in each and
every object and to take care takes time
both an action and thought the process
is open and ideas can be reformulated as
we rework the materials what's more we
also claim that what we want to create
is maximalism with minimal effort
is a good example of that it's also
words to say that for an English mainly
new speaking audience that may get in in
translation it would mean a lot in
English and it's actually a name that
came off because we get MKT it's Mariana
Katrina dress and in Swedish language
you write MK TT when you run to make the
ride add a short for writing Mick gets a
lot and so then of course that's how the
name came about and then we realized
that it became an ethics of sorts for us
and also an aesthetics since the
beginning of a quorum our collaboration
in 2012 matka has been working with
staged events that in different ways
works as reparative spaces spaces for
sharing and learning our passionate
group has been busy doing collaborating
often with large networks of people and
reflecting and the anger is an imported
driving force for many which often
results in a strategy of resistance that
circles around punctuating patriarchal
and racist ideas and to counteract them
but it affects us to always have to
exist in aggression so when the body is
constantly located in a hostile or
threatening situation anger it first us
for a long time but eventually we felt
clogged by all the rotten
the ideas and the attached forms and we
then realized also actually but all by
always working in response to all those
things where the aesthetic expressions
weren't challenged enough either you get
very boring responses when you were at
work like that all the time so to start
working suggestively instead became a
survival maneuver and we felt that we
need to define what we think is
beautiful and wonderful instead that
which is generous and generosity spreads
it occurs to suggest since one has to
try and navigate through things that
what is on grounds which are often
unknown and such process requires a lots
of support and we give it to each other
and such and also it becomes a
simultaneous process when we provide
space both for ourselves and for others
and there is an urgent need for more
spaces with conditions for suggestive
work to develop and Eve kosowski
Sedgewick texts and touching feeling
gave us words to understand what we're
striving for criticality is significant
but the promise lies in the proposal
that touches you from experience we can
assert what historical sources
repeatedly show namely how absolutely
key aesthetic expression is for
political struggles and change to occur
references to different styles such as
symbols materiality and colors are
important in any design project however
they seem to be even more important in
relation to queerness or perhaps they're
just discussed more fiercely hmm a
straight modernist expression passes as
neutral and does not call for the
articulation of the aesthetics meanings
too invested in it and time and again
we're met by this absence of language
but that feeds our drive to do what we
do and perhaps through our efforts to
articulate the status
of our field we can challenge this
normative silence the research that we
undertake is borne out of the space in
between the three of us in maquette we
call this space la tierra and the medium
in homage to Gloria anzaldúa she
establishes the border line between
Mexico and the United States of America
as a metaphor for all types of crossings
between geopolitical boundaries sexual
transgressions social dislocations and
the crossing necessary to exist in
multiple linguistic and cultural context
hmm so Tierra means earth land ground
and soil similar to the Swedish you'd
and entry medial means in between and we
as we're all urgently aware of these
border lands are violently contested
with boundary walls and weapons la
tierra and remedio is not a transitional
passage between two permanent positions
rather it's a dynamic zone unstable
unpredictable and always moving that
links us to other ideas people and
worldviews it can be understood as a
place and condition where something can
happen something we may not always
recognize it can therefore be
experienced as ambivalence uncertain and
even frightening and lift slot na'vi
begin installed vividly eval translated
into dream castles where we build the
city we want to live in is which the
slide shows like an overview of is about
how the built environment architecture
affects us lifts Lockton tour around
Sweden to places with extensive
development projects they're made
collectively and on every new location
suing circles are organized that produce
more lifts lot and discuss urban
development questions in this work lots
of different groups take part newly
arrived teenagers local politicians
maybe museum pedagogues local artists
Eldar groups etc and when we do these
lift slots their castles together we
dream about how we would like our future
surroundings to be the project has been
inspired by an Akira some files for
launchers architectures and by the
contemporary arc
artists trinket Rachel Shannon and her
airborne textile pavilions the dream
Casas they're constructed out of
materials that have had a previous life
they're recycled plastics old sails
broken umbrellas that we've been
collecting all around the city and after
a rainy day you know that's just a
really great material plenty of
umbrellas out there and our goal is in
whatever we do it's not to produce waste
but actually to turn waste into an asset
this lifts lot the castles in the air'
are kept afloat by a faint but constant
air pressure from a fan we we invited a
large group of people like 20 people and
we invited Rachel Shannon from Baltimore
to come over to Stockholm and teach us
how to create air castles and we also
managed to borrow the space where
Nicholas m-files big Cathedral the home
katha Darlan like you remember this guy
gent ik skull through a woman's body
where you entered through between her
legs and inside that there was like an
exhibition with masterpieces I cook with
some masterpieces there was a milk bar
and there was a lot of things happening
there in 1966 as in-your-face attitude
architecture we managed to borrow that
space for our workshop where we started
to create the air castles and all these
people now I have to how can I make you
imagine this in the space here ohit's
large floor I mean the space that we use
so where they she Cathedral was from
Cathedral and it's about maybe four
times as big as this space so really run
large space and probably twice as tall
and and then we had all this material
and all this
hands and fingers that together both
worked on separate parts but also
managed to make a large tapestry
together and then at the end which is
the fantastic things and I I can't show
you it but at one point you don't really
know you have all these ideas of what
this air cos is going to look like but
you don't know it's just laying on the
floor and then you put the if with the
fan on and it starts to race and this
architecture is always on the move it's
a very open noxious architecture because
it doesn't sometimes little it's always
like moving and then when someone enters
something happens to the air inside and
so on
okay so what's that vivid in my fear all
right let's see and then I think we'll
finish with this is you - yeah this is
the project work that we're working on
right now and here we're taking the the
imaginary the dreaming together
attitude forward and we imagine that
this kind of sewing circles that we've
been working with with the air castles
it's a way that we could work
transforming cities wouldn't that be
wonderful to work together in like large
collectives - with lots of hands and you
can see the different attitudes in the
skills and the and the last and the size
of each participant but actually
together they form a large something and
maybe this is a way to repair construct
reinvent and possibly even reconcile in
in Rowlett which is a city it's outside
a city in Sweden called John shopping
and we're working on a more larger scale
project there but according to the same
ideas that we've been developing in all
our projects we have met this fantastic
dance group called mixed answers started
11 years ago by two sisters at the time
they were in love
ten years old and they've been taught
themselves how to dance street dance
they're super super cool and in front of
the telly and then they started to teach
other young people how to dance and now
and then they started their academy and
now they have about 200 young persons
girls used who participate in their
dance classes every year and they're in
raw slit and they have a really good
space in the basement of the culture
house in rosslyn but it's completely
invisible in the community and and so we
were asked by to join to make a project
and dream up a project together with
mixed answers Academy for Ross slit and
it's part of a large program by the
Swedish government called constan their
art is happening and it's a it's a
project to bring out grassroots groups
in a lot of different spaces areas in
Sweden which have a very low voting
turnout in that census but it's a it's a
way to kind of bring out democracy I
would say and it's a it's also
collaboration with local housing company
and the local City Council and what
we're doing together with mixed answers
is that we're giving were kind of a
support structure for this group and
sort of trying to be the kind of
architects that create help them to do
what they dream of and what we do of
course doing it together and I think one
of the important things is that the
first thing we had to do when we got
there was to dance with them of course
you have always have to risk your body
when you when you work if you want to
create some kind of change and and they
are it's gonna be a kind of three-step
development the first one is the
temporary dance for outside so they come
out of the basement and actually do the
practice on the streets and we're
already doing that together with
and and they also been doing that prior
to us of course because the thing in
Rosslyn is that there is a really large
other culture surrounded by its the
football culture which is the only
visible culture in the engrossment and
the football community they have a large
football field have super tall like like
posts and you can see it when you drive
away drive pass on the motorway whereas
the mixed answer script they always
these girls they're mainly girls they
are practicing them in the basement and
they only get to show what they have
they dance when they're having a show
and there so we thought it would be
important and also them of course all
comes from them so it would be really
fun to actually have the practice but
just like to practice on the soccer
field like dance practice openly in the
in the public space so then we're now
the next phases that we're gonna
establish a more permanent dance place
with a roof it's called a cap you see it
on top there it's one of the best
baseball caps of the girls and and we're
gonna establish its outside the culture
center which is also partly the public
school in Rosslyn and and then the third
step is to create a dance palace with
lots of exercise spaces a restaurant and
so on and that's the the tall building
you see on the bottom where which we
talk about as the toffs what's that in
English ponytail yeah pony is really
tall permutate so that's the ponytail of
it so the capital Epona table in a few
years time in Ross setting up shopping
welcome and with presenting a book
project that might be might interest
some people or a lot of you who mirror I
think um I've been co-editing this
together with Rami amazi and my cachaça
Rami amaz is a tall to University in
Helsinki and micah shot at kth and
stockholm and the book project is called
feminist futures of special
as materialism activism dialogues
pedagogy x' and projections and the book
is of the fruit of the gender and
architecture course taught at the School
of Architecture in Stockholm and
actually every semester since 2004 we
have that course and the title spatial
practice is a broad term for
architectural artistic design and other
disciplinary and interdisciplinary
practices engaged in studying and
transforming space and in the book
there's a round 38 not around there's 38
voices or contributors focused on moving
together beyond analysis and theorizing
and the book is notable in the mix of
practical concrete examples with
theories references and methods all
directed at working teaching drawing
organizing and designing for feminist
futures and also in the book I guess
similarly how do we think we treat
futures as times and places of radical
openness in which different norms
structure rules and cultures may emerge
an opening for playful experimentation
utopic possibilities a stage for testing
various feminist scenarios and subject
positions and you can get the book
online and I think also maybe they a
bookstore will actually be selling it in
the future ok yes that was it thank you
thank you
[Applause]
Thank You Catalan 90s and thank you well
analysts we've had a riveting journey
through space is craft from within
architecture that kids can participate
in to also shape the future and have a
voice and questioning the neutrality of
madame modernists aesthetics but also
the modernist project I think and I also
got a new word obnoxious architecture
which I love and it feels really both
restorative and troubling as a term so
thank you we have now time for a couple
of questions and then the very last
minute we're gonna turn to this table
and pick up a nose itch yeah
so if you still have notes that you want
to show put them here and I will also
make sure that we capture all of it in
something of documentation but if you
just want so can we have some questions
or comments from our wonderful audience
the these women were atypical in that
they didn't have families to contend
with and and therefore the the buildings
themselves would be a typical for me in
in my career experience in having
observed contemporaries the main
obstacle to progressing and pursuing a
career in architecture
dogs - not alone in that is the main
burden of family responsibilities rests
on the one wound would you care to
comment on that yeah it's it's a good
observation because they it was very
troubling for me to have to to look at
this house as avoiding the the idea of
the the nuclear family somehow because
these houses are not there
typical houses but I think in the
projects that I that I studied before
the material feminist projects for
example or even the the larger projects
of that I call the projects of the state
do deal with labor with this idea of of
Labor and children um I think labor
labor never disappears and I think in
this houses it doesn't it doesn't
disappear either and and I think kind of
framing it a little bit towards the
future of this idea of gender and how we
how we women occupy society in a
different way that they the kind of the
structural reworking of how families can
live together or how perhaps this labor
can get kept get organized I think
that's absolutely primary to the idea of
how do we include women in society in a
different way but it is an unanswered
question I think it is it needs to be
addressed and I think the idea of of
nuclear family is absolutely essential
yeah - they're rethinking of the future
of women in the future of gender the
children are put in another building yes
to be cared for by other women that's
right is in a way the same spatial model
of the three of the free space of the
examples that the the issue is elsewhere
yeah and so you know maybe some
exercises of yes yesterday for example
there was somebody who wanted to come
but had a very energized 18-month year
old who ran up and down the stairs of
the AAA and she hoped he would fall
asleep in time and he he never fell
asleep
and in a sense she was as outside the
conversation as they as they plans and
so you know maybe just a trace the
presence of the toddler in the plans it
may be something which little architect
could do of the imagining of of the
space because at the same in the
panel we have somebody honoring the
creative engagement with children so you
know what happens when that merges with
the air houses you know you can kind of
imagine a fantastic mashup of all your
presentations today and we will conclude
in a couple of minutes as well by Justin
to give you a space to answer there I I
love the idea of mashing up all the
presentations I think I think there are
they're they're very different visions
of perhaps the idea of obviously of
women in society and I think the project
with children is definitely if I should
be closer to your theme maybe we could
we could generate plans driven by
children of their activities and their
the way they enjoy home and where they
feel how they feel in cases that
traditionally are in my experience is
the kitchen love to be in the kitchen
and it would be really beautiful to see
the drawings of their sketches of their
movement with this plan so it would be
another way of showing the architecture
through the time that they occupy the
way
space to another would be really
interesting maybe we can plan that that
workshop you know not only did I get
there yeah
I thought if it's if it's okay for us to
take another couple of minutes man AJ is
that right so be mover with Judah know
and we can share a reflection it's just
around the many lovely notes we have
here on the kitchen just to remind
everyone that the sort of most famous
modernist kitchen the frankfurter
kitchen is why Margaret acutally hot ski
a woman who has was well in her writings
reminded us which is odd to say in in
this context that she was first of all
an architect and that's why she designed
the kitchen in this particular way it's
also a kitchen which helps women to
emancipate themselves from the work in
the kitchen but she the that is less
known of hers is designing kindergartens
and again she was not a mother she had
no children but she has come to design
the kindergartens via communism and her
work in Russia so I just sort of wanted
to bring that person to the room and
when I mentioned the kitchen the kitchen
in my situation now in Spain I used to
live here in London now I'm based in
Spain the kitchen is not only the place
to cook and to celebrate
Union wrong in my in my case is the
place where I work and the place where
the children were when they were really
young in the kindergarten we have
furniture for them to stay so at the end
the kitchen is nearly the
three three places together and
celebrating that working alone it was
designed for one person to work in it
for one so it was only a one person yeah
and also when she got when she got the
Commission to design the kitchen she she
she was a women really outside of her
norm and she didn't have any idea of
cooking she didn't know how to use the
kitchen she hated cooking but she was
given the Commission cuz she was a woman
so obviously she would know what to do
in that space so it's quite a it's an
interesting a very polemic example I
would think but yeah and I want to bring
this back to the Future gender in a more
general way and I I think we noticed
that in whichever space we talk about
the kitchen space in its paradigmatic or
its pragmatics it shapes us and our
relationships as all these other spaces
do in their different ways and I was
hoping that Lola and Marilla she just
want to as a final note to honor our our
audience here and us all as
collaborators to just pick up on one
thing and just give us a note for the
future or a question for the future and
it doesn't have to be as big yes I make
it sound so just one for
little reflection for us to shine yeah I
think your question of killed children
and how to incorporate children but also
elderly in in society in the way that
labor and work this distinction of work
being kind of a concept that relates to
the edifying the the production of
lasting objects in the association with
women of the production of lasting
options I think is an important
reflection Thank You Maria Lola what
would you like to say your ask you know
taking a look to notes I would like to
focus the conversation in in the future
because it's nearly a conclusion today's
the end of the three days of
conversation so I would like to to drive
that message what can we do to be more
visible and to have more power or to
make an impact in society and to raise
our voice what do you think we can do
after these three days that we have been
leaning on your encyclopedia learning
about matrix in the past learning about
so many activities that women are doing
today your lecture so what do you think
I would launch this already what we are
doing in a schools how we are
approaching children I firmly believe
that they so we can make an a change in
the way they they imagine a woman some
behave in the built industry and in
their energetic cherian so what do you
think we can do more what can what else
can be yes so thank you Lola I'm gonna
let that question hang because we are
moving into the final panel so I'm gonna
say that I've really enjoyed this
session of what I see as a really
exciting dialogue between people who
work with history and people who are
occupied more with the future and how
much we need it
each other in in these spaces and the
spaces we create together and thank you
everybody for being here with us and we
look forward to converse more
conversations and more doing with you in
the future thank you
[Applause]
