thank you for the introduction and thank
you for the invitation I'm excited to be
here and I will be presenting my work
which is part of a larger research
project between different universities
and industrial partners and like Ali
said I'm focusing on the rationalization
within the construction industry so in
general if you have a question while I'm
presenting feel free to raise your hand
and interrupt me like yeah so nowadays
with the development of new tools and
new methods within the construction
industry it's quite exciting to be an
active part of it we have the the saving
of the information of a building
energetic digital model nowadays we have
the use of drones of augmented and
virtual reality for the monitoring the
of of the construction process sometimes
they play an active role in it and
things are developing very quickly of
course this is unfortunately only a
small part of the construction industry
because for the larger part of it we
still use many methods and processes
that are traditional and by traditional
I by no means mean that tradition is bad
yeah you'll see that through the lecture
I when I talk about all the means of
construction and fabrication I refer to
the impact that this has in the
environment so despite all the process
of the last year's construction industry
it's still responsible for one third of
global energy consumption and when we
talk about developed countries like the
UK this rises up to 50 percent when we
think about the whole lifecycle of a
structure so if we look at the lifecycle
of a structure obviously there are many
many reasons that factors that can
affect it and these are just indicative
but usually you start with the design
development construction maintenance
demolishing cause no structure lives
forever
and then the demolished materials are
ideally reused and they they're used in
a different context and this of course
is all part a very small part of a much
larger image so within that process if
we manage to change even a very small
bit in the lifecycle of a bit of one
building we we can have a much larger
impact in the if we look at the larger
image so this is where rationalization
comes into play if does anyone know what
rationalization is so I looked it up
when I started my research because you
use it but you're like I was trying to
find the definition and I found many but
I think the best one is this one it's
actually one of the first one which was
given in the 80s
Pilon say he was the director he is the
director of carry technologies and he
describes our civilization as an
introduction of mathematical rules of
construct ability in order to legitimize
crazy designs so we will be looking at
rules of constructability and we will be
we will try to define what crazy is so
of course we could do it in any of the
parts of the lifecycle of a structure
but we would be focusing on geometry
let's just mention here that I'm not
studying how a geometry was generated
whether it's good enough for the purpose
that it is trying to serve or yeah I'm
just looking at how constructible it is
because there is a relationship between
the geometry and the fabrication because
we know that some forms are easy to be
build and they can start they can span
for a long time while others are harder
right so how what defines how complex
the geometry is where complexity is can
be defined as having many parts that we
cannot describe or understand or find an
answer to so this is what we are trying
to avoid in construction
we're trying to have control of whatever
it is were building and we will be
particularly looking at space form
structures trusses so they comprised of
members sticks which he combined with
joints and these structures became very
popular after the 50s when mirror a
German constructor he patented a system
that allowed you to have a joint in
which you drill holes and then you
connect members and it was very easy to
build quickly and large large-scale
structures so they started people
started using them in large span
applications and nowadays with all the
tools of analysis and from finding and
manipulation of complex geometries we
start seeing space frames being applied
in large-scale structures of complex
geometry so this is the Heydar Aliev
center of the Hadid Architects and
Azerbaijan this is the Singapore Art
Centre in Singapore this is the Dyke new
taxing airport in China I might be
pronouncing it wrong and this is the
plan for the New Mexico Airport that's
why I said the plan for the airport yeah
I was careful with that so we can see
when we look at the development of space
wave structures that does shift from
this to that so what's this what's that
this is a singly curved geometry and it
has a constant curvature what that means
is that even if we just had a pencil and
a paper we could calculate we could
define the angles of the members we
could see what geometry would get and we
would have the same angles on the top
layer and the bottom layer throughout
the whole structure so the same joint
throughout the whole structure say
member lengths easy to build
so now we go to that in which the
curvature is not constant it's given by
an equation which is usually quite
complex to understand or define it
changes a lot and it has an effect an
important effect and the members and the
Giants of a structure because it they
need to be different in order to
generate free from geometries and in my
research I focused mostly on the joints
because I have a high impact on the
construction that usually as you can see
they they're responsible for thirty to
fifty percent of the whole fabrication
cost and twenty to thirty percent of the
mass so if we can understand or improve
the joints we can have a larger effect
on the construction process of free from
space friends so what we're going to try
and understand today is first of all we
need to study how joints are fabricated
what degree of viability to different
fabrication processes allow for so if I
fabricate a joint with one process if I
fabricate dentin joins where they all
have to be exactly the same can they be
a bit different and if different how
much then we're gonna try and evaluate
the variability in joint how diff how
much different the joints within a
structure are and how is this difference
distributed within the structure and
finally if we combine these two study
areas we can get in a deep understanding
of what actually the construction
complexity of a structure is what
habitation process is the most
appropriate for our structure and how
can we actually optimize its geometry to
address this issue so needless to say
that there are many fabrication
processes for joints you can cast the
metal sphere and drill holes in it you
can cast a mold and then the sphere in
it and drill holes you can 3d print the
join you
and have molds out of wax which you use
a certain number of times and then you
destroy it many so if we want to
classify them in terms of variability
we're looking at two factors the batch
size and the automation so butter sizes
how many joints do you fabricate on one
go so for example if you 3d printer
joint every time you set up the Machine
you fabricate one joint
well if you if you imagine like
factories in which they have mass
production of joints they would press go
and they would fabricate hundred
thousands of joints at once so we're
trying to combine the batch size with
the process automation the process
automation defines how often we can
actually intervene in the process so how
often can we tweak the information will
provide different information for the
elements that we produce
so again 3d printing every joint has its
own file of information that you sent
the machines every time can be different
if you must produce joints then however
many you must produce they're the same
so we're starting to see that there are
two types of fabrication processes at
the one end of the spectrum we have the
discrete fabrication in which you
fabricate one element and however many
elements you fabricate with this process
they can all be different and we have
the continuous fabrication in which you
fabricate many elements and they're all
the same
so in between you have the fabrication
and groups which obviously refers to the
case in which the fabric you fabricate
classes of joints and within the class
we have a small amount of viability of
your members and this is the most
realistic scenario in practice and like
Lindsay and says the rationalization
definition guy like he mentioned when
it's not feasible to have complete
uniformity in joints and free from
geometries but when you fabricate in
groups if the threshold of of the joints
that are the same is
below a certain limit you can make up
for the cost of the joints that are too
different from each other because
obviously discrete fabrication costs
more than continuous fabrication so it's
all about finding a limit and yeah so we
will be looking at how many groups of
joints do we have and how different the
Giants are with each other of course
there are many different types of joints
at more than 250 granting system 15
fabrication firms so it's hard to
understand ordinary lies a way to
approach this problem if we look at the
videos play yeah just a second anyway so
different joint designs allow for
different degrees of tolerance and this
can be either because the design itself
allows the members that connect the
joint movement them on different planes
either vertical or horizontal or because
of the fabrication manufacturing
equipment isn't hundred percent precise
I mean even with the robotic arm you do
have a tolerance of point zero one
degree within last one of two years or
even in fabrication because if we think
of a scenario where you're on a
construction side and there's there are
two joints and the member is half a
degree of what are the chances that the
people on this side will actually send
the member back and ask a new one they
were probably just pull the member but
in place this will of course induce a
bending moment on the member which is
not supposed to take but that's not our
focus now so if we combine all these
tolerances of the joints themselves with
the fabrication process we can see that
within a project there's a certain
amount of tolerance that you can
consider acceptable which means that if
joints have an angle difference below
that limit they could still
theoretically be fabricated within the
same batch so how do you use this in
practice how can you actually make use
of that and improve it our designs
scenario 1 I'll show you two scenarios
scenario 1 is that you're in the design
development stage you have the geometry
that you want to fabricate and you have
decided on the fabrication process that
you want to use so this means that you
have a fixed process and the joint
tolerance so the way you can use this
approach in practice is that you can try
and identify the optimal fabrication
clusters so we're going to check test
this on the Heydar Aliev Center of
Architects the whole structure comprises
of a library auditorium and a museum for
the sake of this research we'll only
focus on the museum so the museum itself
it has 318 joints if we consider that
there's no tolerance at all you would
end up with 33,000 18 jean clusters so
if you look at the graph on the on the
bottom on the horizontal axis there's a
tolerance that you consider acceptable
and on the vertical is the number of
different joint clusters that you need
in order to fabricate it and the spheres
in different colors they represent
different fabrication budgets so it's
evident that if you increase the joint
hollerin that you allow for without
changing the geometry at all the number
of clusters will drop right and
gradually as it increases very high
numbers you will see that you will end
up with having just one very big cluster
with a lot of tolerance within its its
members so for the sake of this study we
consider that we have an input
fabrication tolerance of 5 degrees and
this with the five degrees tolerance we
have 1067 Giants with input geometry
that we had from the from the architects
so the goal of this is to start
optimizing this the the bottom layer of
the truss structure and try to identify
the one that yields the smallest number
of joints and as designers you can
define the depth in which your bottom
layer joins can move because you would
obviously have some design restrictions
and structural restrictions but the
point being that through this process
you can achieve an important reduction
in the number of joints that are
required for the fabrication of this
without compromising structural
performance we achieved a 15 percent
reduction in the joints and in order to
evaluate what effect this has on the
visual on this aesthetics of the
structure we will run a cross-section
through our structure on the left-hand
side it's the original structure of the
building and on the right hand side is
the optimized geometry after the
optimization process and this should
[Music]
there's a small difference trust me in
that what I meant to say with that it's
not from my laptop so the videos don't
play my apologies for that following if
we read papers that describe the
structure of practice they mentioned
that that the average depth of the space
frame throughout the museum stretches
one meter so when we run the
optimization analysis the joints were
free to move from half a meter to ten
meters so they had quite a lot of
freedom and there were many
possibilities to find improved solution
the interesting bit is that the final
geometry that had improved the smaller
number of joint clusters it the depth
range of the of the optimized structures
between point five and point eight so it
means that the difference the visual
difference between the original
structure and the optimized this very
very small the the the whole building
covers an area of twenty eight thousand
meters I mean the two buildings together
so a difference of 20 centimeters in
depth without compromising the
structural performance can lead to very
important savings when it comes to
fabrication and construction so overall
this this can give us a very good
understanding of how by looking at the
construction complexity of our
structures in early stages of the design
you still have the possibility to
significantly improve without
compromising the design
so now we'll go to a different way in
which this workflow can be approached
and practice in which we are again in
the beginning of the design development
at this time a bit earlier on so we have
a geometry but we haven't decided on the
fabrication process yet so what we're
trying to do is we're trying to identify
which process is more appropriate or
what type of processes can we use in our
structure to have an improved
fabrication workflow with the smaller
cousins model carbon emissions so we're
going to test this in the Singapore Art
Centre
actually there are two structures which
are the same and we will apply the
workflow only in one of them as a case
study so the scale of it is quite
similar to the one of the Heydar Aliev
centre so around 3300 joints and the way
we approach this is that considering
that we don't know which fabrication
process we want to use yet we don't know
the number of clusters or the size of
clusters that we are going to have so in
this case we try we analyze our
structure for different number of
clusters and we try and see how complex
it would be so in this graph and the
horizontal axis we have the number of
clusters that we analyze it for and then
the vertical axis we have the inter
cluster variance so that is within one
fabrication batch so within one go and
throughout the fabrication process this
describes how different the members
within what one cluster are and we
analyze this for ten fifty up to five
hundred join classes and we're trying to
see how that affects the fabrication
process so we can see that obviously
larger circles I mean if you look at the
legend on the right described clusters
which are more compact so elements
within that cluster are more alike
no I'm sorry the vertical axis describes
how come back the clusters are and the
size of the circles describes describes
how big they are so when we analyze our
structure for ten clusters so the 3300
Giants we divide them in ten clusters
obviously we have large clusters in
terms of items which are not very
similar with each other while you can
see as we increase the number of
clusters the classes become more compact
with each other and smaller so if we
look at let's say 400 joints it's still
not easy to try and understand how the
fabrication process is for this right
because imagine that on the vertical
axis there are 400 clusters meaning 400
circles overlaid the one on top of each
other so it's hard to understand okay
where do I have most of my clusters and
are they big or are they small so to get
in and a better understanding of that we
try and overlay this with the frequency
distribution of this clustering analysis
so we can see that for classes which are
very full in which the inter class of
variance is small meaning for compact
clusters these are the most of my
classes so 259 clusters they actually
have identical members with each other
and then I only there are only a few
classes that have members which are
highly different with each other so this
starts giving us a bit of a deeper
understanding of how the fabrication
process could be
in order to make use of it we need to
have an idea of what joint we're gonna
use because like I mentioned before the
joints themselves they have some degree
of tolerance embedded so if we use a
joint like the one presented on the top
right of the slide these runs they have
a very small tolerance with each other
so this means that in the classrooms
that have a very small tolerance I could
mass-produce them because most of my
classes they're not different with each
other anyway while the ones that have a
large inter class of variants meaning in
which I have a large variability within
one cluster it would be hard to
mass-produce them if I use that type of
joint so for the smart for the back part
of the graph I would it would make more
sense to use a discrete fabrication
process so fabricate each joint on its
own which translates to that so the dark
joins in the in the structure are the
ones that were at the front of the graph
which were all in clusters which had
items which were very similar to each
other
while the light blue ones are the ones
that were at the back belonging to
clusters with high variance with between
their members so looking at this graph
we can directly understand how our
structure is and the important thing is
that this helps us identify where to use
what fabrication process because even
though in practice people use only one
process for the whole structure this
allows us to understand how it might be
more efficient to you combine them in an
informed way and going back to the same
graph as before we can see that if we
were if we would use it
a fork type joint which have which has a
much larger and better tolerance because
this can actually allow its members to
move to move on one plane this would
mean that I would have the possibility
to mass produce a much larger amount of
my clusters it's up to 120 degrees of
the classifiers I could mass-produce
them so in effect this graph changes so
the contribution of this research is
actually important thing is that it
gives you an indication of the
construction complexity of your designs
it can be applied on early stages and it
can be applied on logical area
structures so it actually promotes an
informed application of the novel
fabrication processes we get better
engineered solutions and we get a
smaller cost and less carbon emissions
so if we think about the construction
industry and the rationalization in it I
would like to end this short
presentation being Greek with a Greek
quote that all in good measure meaning
that there is a continuous development
of novel fabrication processes we are
going to use them and that's good but we
shouldn't forget that mass production or
traditional processes have benefits
themselves so we should try always and
find a link and the balance into how
these can be combined in an informed way
to reduce the carbon emissions
that's questions I haven't really gotten
into the technical details of the
strategy of the tools applied because I
wasn't sure how much so if you have any
questions
I'm confident that that's the case in a
few years yeah like if because there's
such a big benefit of using new
technologies that are continuously being
developed but we're at this stage of
history let's say where we we had we
still have both and we do have the
production of large-scale free from
designs so I think that it's good to
think and consider how the benefits of
both the truth is that when I started
the research everyone was like just 3d
print everything through you print
everything and I was like ok maybe
that's the answer
I mean maybe doesn't make sense and I
should focus on something else but it's
interesting that Arup had made a study
on 3d printer giant steels and they
actually it was for they designed this
roof structure in Denmark I believe it
was in 2012 and they took a traditional
joint design and they took another
optimized joint but was 3d printed so
they did spend a lot of time they also
focused on optimizing the mass of the
joint so the final output 3d printed
joint had a very complex geometry which
was complex but also materially much
more efficient
prepare to the traditional joint but if
there's paper that there are quite a few
papers on that project from Salonika
chart and I had talked to her with as
well and she she mentions in the papers
that because really printing is such a
new process and it hasn't been applied
it hasn't been generalized in
construction yet they had to run
material certificate if ik material
certification because the process wasn't
certified they couldn't guarantee that
in terms of fatigue over time that the
joint would perform itself as good as
the traditional one because the
traditional joint I mean I don't like
using a traditional but I can't think of
a different term at the moment it it was
produced with the process which was
certified but so they had to spend quite
a lot of extra money on certifying the
material process and it was interesting
because after they went through this
analysis what they ended up doing is
that they kept the the optimized
geometry of a giant but what they did is
that they 3d printed molds in sand in
which they cast steel joined afterwards
and the thing is that you they use the
3d printed geometry in the mold which is
not the final product so you don't need
to certify its performance in terms of
fatigue or overtime you use the same
mold 20-30 times however many times
depends on the scale and the properties
obviously but the actual joint is cast
so casting is a process that is
certified and then it's much cheaper and
easier so I think that's where the
clever solution let's say come up it's
when you try and rather than
generalizing something you and
forgetting completely about the old one
when you try and see try and find the
benefits from using both
yep I just want to say thank you cluster
being a a group like joints so my my
approach is that if you if I have a
geometry that I want to fabricate
initially I calculate all the angles of
its joints and this creates a data set
of angles so I know joint 0 has angles
ABC joint 1 has AP a 1 B 1 C 1 etc so in
order to see how different they are with
each other you try and cluster them and
the joints that are more alike you put
them in the same cluster of course this
leads you in a position where at the end
you would have let's say five clusters
and each cluster would have joints which
are exactly the same they have some
difference so let's say in one cluster
that the maximum difference between its
members is three decrease whatever so if
you assume that three decreases are
allowable considering your joint design
and fabrication process then you would
design let's say you have 10 elements in
this cluster you would design 10
identical joints which have whose angles
are in the 1.5 so then you every joint
would have a maximum tolerance of 3
degrees
yeah yeah I was actually talking with
Lana kenja news there the company who
had designed the Mac New Mexico Airport
and they were also saying that even
though they have the technology of
generating in the joints that are
individual like and different one from
another the even if you are able to do
that then the cost of having doubly
curved glazing because they work a lot
with stadium etc then that increases the
overall cost of the structure as well so
even though I study let's say space
frames and joints you always need to
look at the larger picture and how this
is only a small part of an actual
building and that again is only a small
part within its lifecycle and etc etc
look thank you
