welcome everyone good evening my name is
marina Otero and we are together with
Nick axel we are the editors of this
work body ledger book so I'm extremely
grateful today and in particular to the
director of a fan can also - manager for
organizing this book launch and his
conversation and also to our guests
today who were also contributors to the
book so the book were poly laser was
first conceived as that that's pavilion
for the Venice architecture of Daniel in
2018 and the book addresses the spatial
configurations modes of living and
notions of the human body that are in
gender but disruptive changes in labor
ethos and conditions the project imagine
that a group of practitioners designers
researchers institutions will come
together through 2018 and 19 to foster
new forms of creativity and
responsibility within the architectural
field in response to emerging
technologies of automation we believe
that this field of research is
transforming the environment and also
the bodies that inhabit it
and yet it's still largely the boat of a
critical spatial perspective and perhaps
it's also an opportunity now that we are
in this particular series to define new
canonical histories any ideas about
practicing and thinking of architecture
so next to the exhibition in Venice we
develop a series of other projects like
performances podcasts and new research
initiatives and also a book that is the
reason why we are gathering here today
so I'm gonna invite Nick to explain a
little bit more about the the toriel
project and then we will enter more into
the content of the book Thank You marina
thank you everyone for for coming to the
contributors Maria Teresa too many today
I want
I want to zoom out to start and to speak
about this as an editorial project and I
want to start this with a somewhat
personal reflection on editorial
practice so editorial practice in in
architecture is or at least was until
not too long ago what I would call a
tragedy with the movement of what came
to be canonized first here in that room
and then all around the world does the
arc essenes movement editing became a
question of platforming of giving
opportunity to new voices which is
something that's vital to fostering and
the development of new personas new
identities new new practitioners but
what makes this a tragedy was that the
editorial practice resembled the worst
of what we think of as platforms as
neutral as not questioning of content of
allowing absolutely whatever it was
about hype it was about identity it was
about community but not so much about
engagement about dialogue and about
thinking so I personally became an
editor because in in short I never had
one but I was always looking for one
I became an you know I I always wrote
knowing that I had something to say but
that I didn't entirely know what or how
to say it I was looking for someone in
writing to collaborate with I was
looking for an interlocutor and couldn't
write alone
so from this experience as a writer and
my becoming of an editor I learned that
one of the most important
characteristics of editorial practice is
something that we may think of as
sympathy it's about listening it's about
engaging other people in a dialogue in
which by giving with them giving you
their raw text and the authority of
decision they're they're giving their
position to you and allowing it to be
challenged but by taking that
responsibility you must also be humble
and recognize that your own position is
not absolute
so editing for for me and what I would
argue it should be is about willing to
challenge someone else's position but
it's also about having one's own
position be challenged so editing is
really about dialogue
it's not just about giving space but
also working with it's about co-creating
something that would not and could not
have been there otherwise so now to to
start zooming into this book the
intentions I think behind this book are
somewhat similar what we were trying to
do with this was to gather a different
series of voices of backgrounds of
knowledge --is that that don't
necessarily or immediately relate to
each other but that each contribute with
a distinct and invaluable position with
regards to this cosmology of concepts
being brought together here work body
leisure so this book is not about
consensus but it's also not about
dissensus either there's no agreement
but also no disagreement it's it's a
book and I need to emphasize this it is
not a catalogue it is a book that asks
what happens when you place things for
example like the philosophical history
and radical politics of boredom together
with the history of automation in
suburban home construction and the
coastal landing sites of
cross-continental fiber-optic cables it
asks what we can learn by thinking about
automated logistics together with the at
times deadly economy of selfies and the
recent history of office design the
answer to these questions are not
necessarily known in advance and they're
not necessarily known now yet and these
questions also are not that that resides
somewhere in between the contributions
these are not necessarily obvious so in
this sense the the book is not easy it's
it's a challenge to its readers but it
also places an incredible confidence and
trust in them it tries I would argue in
maybe a more humble way than I'm that
I'm doing right now to allow us to find
each other and and to hold hands as we
as we grow through this this unknown
dark of of this present of automation in
search of a brighter future so thank you
so yeah I think unique and so the book
charts a journey through a series of
architectures in the Netherlands and
Beyond in which bodies are categorized
and transformed offices playgrounds
farms factories virtual spaces windows
beds and doors as scenarios that might
look familiar if really accessible or
seemingly banal but are nevertheless at
the percentage of the transformation of
labour
Unser's perhaps to redefine notions and
spatial conditions of work and leisure
as well as architecture itself so today
we want to emphasize so talk about two
main threads in the book one is about
histories about technologies and other
nests and the other is about the
relation between work and the domestic
space so wanna start with the first and
I will start with what mark weakly
thought about revisiting the work of
constant Newhouse constant near house
attempt to resolve that economy between
work and leisure in his seminal project
new Babylon there's an architectural
paradigm of free space and preached I'm
afforded by automation Society will
devote its energy to creativity and play
by robotised in labor constant demanded
the right to not labor and visualize the
imminent post labor world and yet as a
projective old his optimistic vision
gradually gave way to more conflict on
perspective violence will not be
eradicated by the new technological
order mobilized by to satisfy the
society needs rather it will rebuild as
an intrinsic part of such order new
Babylon was an architecture founded on
the exploitation immiscibility of
working bodies conceived as automated
machines the automated machines will
allow this elevated construction to be a
free space for play for humans so the
question is will new Babylon be possible
without the work of the other
if according to wigglies reading of new
babylon architecture was not labor and
the world
Bijan labor is all architecture constant
not only ambition the end of
architecture and architects as we know
it but all signal is the violent and
conflicted nature of its practice
something that we will also try to
unpack today more than 40 years after
constant new babylon the architecture of
full automation is currently being
implemented in many countries and
especially across the netherlands from
the country's main port in rotterdam to
the spaces of greenhouses and dairy
farms where humans are being largely
replaced by robots in the project
automated landscape that is via the new
institute with martin Cowper's and
Victor Mature sons and the product
claims that if new Babylon there was an
architecture for play the territory of
the Netherlands could be seen as his
counterpart a productive Cartesian
landscape design for an unprecedented
efficiency and behind the supper and
banality of the landscape some of the
images that you might see in a loop in
the screens a mechanic and data file
data file Beauty rebates itself but only
through the spaces and the screens of
the control rooms or the iPads or the
phones through which what was before a
farmer now has become a manager
controlling these automated boy bodies
the progressive replacement of certain
bodies in the productive spacesuit
automation is also the core of one of
the contributors work Simoni kill
nichols talks about the parameters embed
in designs of words that are being used
to optimize contemporary work spaces
ergonomic softwares are applied to
virtual factories to evaluate works
worker safety comfort and productivity
before building in brick and mortar the
human body is first measured renders
data and standardized and ultimately
represented as a digital avatar and
deploy via these simulations for the
design of physical
workers and workstations in shape in
architecture these virtual models define
what a human body is an optimal
parameters while the non-standard body
the unrecorded order often marginalized
in terms of class gender race or
disability is rendered non-existent
similarly the work of Liam Jean that
probably most of you know particular the
render dance project thinks about these
visions of the future design by Western
architectural offices and they're
actually produced by outsource render
farms workers in India the piece by Lee
and Jung takes us behind the scenes of
architectural renderings and fill
production to the work of people who
whose stories are often ignored by
dominant discourses the reality draws a
picture of the human labor involved in
architectural practice so many of these
contributors talk about or are aiming to
find the spaces of resistance for the
fight of non exploitative non
discriminatory world in particular
Malala focuses on the doors of no return
the doors on her return are a symbol of
the transatlantic slave trade from which
captive bodies were transported to the
so called new world the space between
the door and the ocean is a site for
engineered rational racialized body one
that percentage analogy of violence that
precipitated the forced movement of the
slave and those still unfolding
oh the migrant and the refugee the doors
Allah argues are present as a violent
absence in front of the ocean the
Atlantic Ocean and every other body of
water that carries the histories of the
ongoing destruction of the migrant poor
rationalized and general body yet the
door Amal argues or rather the Tres halt
between being are not being is suicide
for science fiction a space product of
refusal for the Russia
a little imaginary of no nots plot ative
non-discriminatory worlds and on this
note I would like to welcome our first
speaker is Ahmed Hamid makes moving
image performance and written work that
explores contemporary borders and
migration and visual cultures of the
black Atlantic her project black cattle
aunties and a rough history of the
destruction of fingerprints has been
performed and exhibited internationally
since the co-editor of futures and
fiction's 2017 which was nominated for
the International Centre of
photography's infinity award she's
currently the program leader of the MA
in contemporary art theory in the
Department of visa cultures angle at
Goldsmiths so please join me in welcome
welcome in a year sir Hamid thank you
[Applause]
hello can you hear me I'm never quite
sure how to engage with these
microphones how far or how close I
should be okay good okay thank you so I
just want to thank marina and Nick just
to start off with for their invitation
to contribute to the book and to and to
this launch and for Nick's patience with
the many drafts that we went through
over time so my contribution to the book
was called retrograde futurism and it's
as marina said it's a part of a larger
project called black Atlantis which is a
series of lecture performances films and
sound works where each chapter is a
collection of sounds and images that
looks at the black Atlantic and it's
after lives in contemporary illegalized
migration on the Mediterranean in
oceanic environments through Afro
futuristic dance floors and sound
systems and in outer space
using Walter Benjamin's concept of the
dialectical image I examine how to think
through sound image water violence and
history as elements of an active archive
and of time travel
as a historical method this project as a
whole combines two discourses
afrofuturism and the Anthropocene it
follows a critique by the geographer
Phil Sternberg of the black Atlantic
where he says it focuses on the surfaces
of the ocean rather than its depths and
as a result of this the wetness of the
ocean is lost and thus it's haptic
tactile quality is lost as well so a key
methodological threat of black Atlantis
is to take the story of dreck Xia an
electronic band from Detroit whose
mythos built through liner notes
describe a story where children born of
pregnant sleaze thrown overboard were
able to adapt to living underwater as
they went straight from living in
amniotic fluid to ocean water and so
built a black atlanta's called Rexy a--
using drexy as a method brings the black
atlantic below the water with its
imaginary of a black atlanta's comprised
of former slaves living underwater what
wetness brings back to the table is a
sense of a haptic the sensory the bodily
and the epidermal what below the water
and atlantis brings back is the bottom
of the sea the volume of the water the
materiality of the space of the ocean
and other protagonists that inhabit the
sea and what Drake's here brings into
this whole thing is time travel as a
historical method
so apart from being a book chapter in in
the book that we're launching today
retrograde futurism has taken on a few
different forms it's been a lecture
performance and it's also been made into
a film called a long road and on phantom
or in the shadow of our ghosts which I
made with the artist Hamid een Khan for
the 2018 Dakar by Anil and was also
shown at the showroom as a part of an
exhibition called working practices last
year as well but both the film and the
performance follow the same migrant ship
that sailed from Cape farad's the Canary
Islands and then finally drifted to
Barbados so I'm going to show you a bit
of this film and then say a little bit
more afterwards
[Music]
I would like to send to my family in
basada
a sum of money please excuse me and
goodbye
this is the end of my life in this bit
more open sea
I am from Senegal but I've been living
in cap red for a year
things are bad I don't think I'll come
out of this alive I need whoever finds
me to send this money to my family
please telephone my friend
Ibrahim a drama
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Applause]
on April 29 2006 the 20-foot boat was
but it off the southeastern coast of
Providence on board eleven bodies were
found by the Coast Guard's preserved and
desiccated by the Sun and saltwater the
goth ship was adrift for four months on
the Atlantic Ocean it set sail on
Christmas Day in fryer in Cape Verde
Islands full of migrants from Senegal
Guinea Bissau in Gambia and route to the
Canary Islands each of these people paid
890 pounds for the place on the boat
the boat ran into travel at Malibu the
Mauritanian pole and whilst out towards
its destination for a time by another
ship an article in The Guardian
conjectures that the line was severed
possibly by being hot with a machete
once adrift the ship began it's slow
movement across the Atlantic buffeted by
winds and rain and pulled westward by
the oceans currents by January all the
passengers had died with many of their
bodies either jettisoned into the sea or
washed overboard the gods shipped and
traveled to two thousand and eight
hundred miles to Barbados the names of
mami wata Melissa mami wata
Yemanja Critic written
both say makanga bones
can be seen
Moana Madrid agua here Manya last year
in madam was her man baboon - maman dulu
my mom look
my MA blue is all the water Anderson
both destroyed and preserve the bodies
of these 11 men herded together in the
capital mama de marte a small fraction
of the 40 augmenting set of with who
died and the worst overboard into the
sea mohandro what Rama's Rudi's those
bodies becomes marvellous the forces of
the sea it's salt water lapping wind and
Sun corrugated Moulton River maiden they
make the bodies a part of the ravages of
the sea and connect them to the others
not seen that fell my mother ocean DC a
force fossilizes the bodies of this man
who died on board destroying and
preserving
Hahnemann the force of the sea winds and
weather is insidious in complicit in the
transformation of these dead men into
forces of my mama mama mama glow so
retrograde futurism brings a drag sein
half the commingling of bodies and water
as an inhabitable environment to the
surface of the ocean above the sea the
rain Sun and salt water of the weather
brings another conjunction of elements
another amalgamated in habitation that
produces another kind of subjectivity
that also brings the bodies on board the
ship into a constellation with the boat
that they were on when they died the
corroding of bodies that confers life to
the boat as a ghost ship or a coffin
ship is a kind of futurist amalgamation
of humans and machines gone retrograde
we're here the machine carries the
weight of dissolution and death
both ship and bodies carry traces of
life and death the sea wind and salt
water are the catalyst and medium that
confers contingency onto both a
suspension between life and death
animism and horror that can only make
sense to the operation of state power
that sends these men and boats to sea
and strands them there as a force
inextricable from the weather the boats
drift along the same route that bore
slaves ships from West Africa to
Barbados centuries before forms another
undercurrent of horror of this journey
one journey recapitulates the deaths
meted out in another the forces of the
weather and the fact of the jettisons of
enslaved men and women by ships
captain's coupled with the laws that
permitted them to do so
amplify the same desperate gestures of
the men who died on board this ghost
ship this is the story that retrograde
futurism follows and hopefully this
exploration of the ants prosthetic drexy
enocean as an environment and the
temporal of this juncture that the ghost
ship embodies and the horror of its
journey can add to our conversation
today
thank you very much vision so I want to
when this loads I want to introduce the
second the second strain of the of the
evening in the second facet of the
discourse that were that we're trying to
canonize let's see let's see how well
that goes though so as as marina
mentioned one of the key strands in this
book is situating the space and the idea
of domesticity again within this
constellation of concepts and so one of
the main departure points for this is
the contribution by b-trees kala Mina
who is also contributed to the Pavilion
on the on the 1969 bed-in for peace
protest by John Lennon and Yoko
no miss took place in the Hilton Hotel
even though it was repeated in a number
of other places in Montreal etc so in
the John and Yoko went to the Hilton for
their honeymoon but they invited press
to visit them from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. so this bed in is you can kind of
see on the back a hairpiece and bed
piece it was staged as a protest against
the Vietnam War and Beatrice departs
from this as an as a way to understand
the way that so sorry this is just a you
can rent this suite and if you want to
today and in the Hilton it looks a
little bit different it looks actually a
bit more real if you go to the new
Institute right now where the
installation is but so Beatrice uses
this as a departure point to understand
the way that work and particularly
office work has been folded into the
realm of sleep in the bed so this is an
advertisement that if you've seen her
speak before you've probably seen it's a
Bluetooth technology advertisement 2014
allows you to collaborate in bed gives
you the you know the luxury at the same
time this is from from 2007 the metro
naps energy pod which is the world's
first chair design for napping in the
workplace but this this confluence or
this overlapping of the activity of work
and the space of leisure the bed
this is not something particularly
particularly novel I mean this is a
photograph of a few Heffner from the 50s
with this famous
technological bed but at the same time
this is Richard Nora's bedroom in the
video house that was equally connected
but so there there is this um there is
an element in Beatrice speaks about a
transposition of work onto a space of
leisure but a part of this book also
looks at a somewhat longer history of an
entanglement between these two terms
because as we know work is not just
paperwork it's not just office work I
mean the office itself is as you know
it's dirty Oh common States it's it's a
rather
the understanding of duty and it's funny
to actually think of the Vatican as the
longest continuously inhabited office
space in the world thanks Dustin
Peterman for that for the observation
but so you know this this our domestic
investigation in this book it's not just
about the transposition of the office on
to the bed it's not about you know the
prosthetics that allow this
transposition but rather understanding
the bed and what takes place under the
sheets as a site and activity of work in
and of itself so another crucial
contribution to this book is an image
essay by anne-marie de Vil's who's a
curator at the Amsterdam Museum on the
history of prostitution in the
Netherlands so this is a very famous
photograph by a by - photographer Cory
Yaron of one of the first window
prostitutes in 1968 parrisha Lane and
you know it's it's a quite typical image
of a woman sitting in a window because
when we think of Amsterdam this is
probably what we think this is this is
the image of the red-light district this
space that has been given over to you
know - prostitution and it's not just an
architectural typology here it's an
urban typology that almost gets reduced
to a color red similarly it's it's an
interior we saw some of these images
before these are photographs from tests
young blood from 2008 to 2014
documenting the interiors of these of
these red-light spaces that some common
features is always the locker which
you'll also see is a it was one of the
main design features in the pavilion and
also as you can see quite clearly here
an alarm button but so I want to return
to this photograph to maybe shed light
onto a different history because we
should not so quickly assume the
Netherlands the space the champions
itself as the as you know as the pioneer
of liberalism to have always been
liberal this photograph was actually
taken when the prostitution was illegal
this was an illegal activity that was
taking place there was a Dutch decency
act of 1911 that was enforced and in
the 1970s or 80s so this this illegal
ization
of prostitution it not just gave birth
to a more private industry where you
actually needed to use the curtains to
be able to protect yourself and to save
yourself from the eyes of the law it
also created distinct urban topologies
this is a a parking lot that was used
for prostitution in Utrecht but you can
see this typology repeated throughout
the Netherlands also in Rotterdam etc
and similarly this is a neighborhood
that was you know each of these
houseboats was was was inhabited by a
single prostitute at a time I mean or
more than one if that's what you were
paying for I guess so you know in kind
of weird Dutch fashion this was also you
know embraced whether it was illegal or
legal it was embraced through design
through planning so these are some
objects that that kind of characterized
these these neighborhoods so the tipple
zone is the prostitution zones have even
had their own their own garbage can and
they have these these signs like you're
you're not allowed to work on the docks
as the bottom one says so prostitution
you know as one of the if not the oldest
you know profession in in history and
this kind of orange you know this this
original overlapping between work and
leisure was replicated or was was
followed up in in other in other
contributions as well in recognizing
what work is we felt it necessary to to
republish the seminal text by Sylvia
Federici wages against housework which
is calling for the economical
recognition of gender domestic labor but
then next to this you know in maybe in
response to these protests of course
there is there's technology there is
automation to try and save the day it
always presents itself as the solution
but very rarely does it ever actually
alter the underlying conditions and
power relations of gender race age and
identity so that this is a this is a
design project from the Austrian design
hustle chairman which was effectively
the the first fully automated kitchen
what he called the the ETV the
electorate techno vision so this is a
this is a detail photo and I mean look
at how much fun and leisure is now
taking place where where work used to so
you know what one of the things that
that Herman was said in describing this
project is that you know the the woman
quota no longer goes to the individual
appliances rather the appliances would
come to her and so you know to quote
marina from from the editorial or sorry
the curatorial statement at the
beginning of the book automated
technologies are often envisioned not to
liberate but to support women in the
perpetuation of unpaid domestic and
reproductive labor and with that I will
hand the mic then the presentation over
to Maria Tabuchi who writes if I can
maybe end off with with a single single
quote from their contribution to this
book which is a an excavation in
archaeology of odium that reproduction
as feminine feminism teaches us is not
leisure and work can never be kept out
of the house
thank you so much Nick for this really I
mean really great introduction and
really it's very much spot on because
it's going to allow me to jump
immediately in the you know Women in
Technology
okay I think it was with you and I think
actually your statement on you know that
the process that shared process of
editing is was very inspiring well thank
you and thank you marina actually for
for having us and of course I'm
representing not only myself but also
peer Victoria already who teaches with
me here and in for my unit 14 and we
wrote of course actually this piece
together and it's a piece that is of
course kind of the result of things that
we have been thinking and researching
actually for a while now that really
have to do actually with domestic labor
it's research that we actually started
in the unit and continued also through
the work of territory with dogmas or
with Martina Tottenham and for the piece
that actually we wrote for you and with
you somehow we thought of looking at the
same problem of work in the house from a
different perspective and actually
questioning whether there is a
possibility actually for a space of non
work in the house and the example that
we found the first example actually that
came to our mind was actually to look at
the culture in fact actually two
different cultures that actively
despised work which is something that
for today is pretty bizarre
in fact we tend to think that actually
we a heretic part and parcel the whole
of greco-roman culture you know
translated want one too today but in
fact actually we lost many of the
guiding intellectual and cultural
principles that actually shaped
greco-roman society so we really thought
of actually working on this idea of
hatred of work somehow and this is not
it's like the title just of my
presentation not really of the piece
because the title of the piece was the
form of audience or the form of the
space of nothing basically the space of
non work and of course then as I was
saying before our investigation started
from this very simple
you know type of genealogy we used in
the traditional industrial city to work
to live so the idea is that actually you
know you have to work basically outside
of the house and then when you come back
to the house the house is a kind of
haven of peace and of intimacy this is
of course a complete fabrication and a
complete lie because obviously it hides
the unpaid domestic labor obviously but
let's say that at least the intellectual
let's say the cultural construct really
told us well you go outside a shitty
toil to bring back basically money to
your family in this kind of safe space
that is the house of course as I was
saying before this was a completely
mystification of what was going on
because in fact actually the house was
engineered as this kind of diagram of
production and reproduction that was
very rigid and that still today a
hundred and fifty years after Henry
Roberts we are still applying cookie
cutter so much so that of course my
generation your generation is the first
generation that actually probably does
leave to work so we see in fact on the
contrary that actually with this kind of
diagram we have a bit of a problem
because in fact it pigeonholes actually
different activities in different rooms
and this kind of doesn't really match
anymore the way we live today which
which resembles very much the situation
that Nick described before which
actually we work from our bed we work
from our bathroom and in fact actually
we loved work we have actually really
learned to to live to work so in fact
actually two things are completely
folded onto each other and this is a
theme that I don't want to dismiss
because I think it's something describes
quite well actually who we are as
subjects it's also team that as
architects we have explored with a few
projects most notably one of the last
projects that we did together so myself
black square with dogma was actually an
intervention within one of the rooms at
the British Pavilion in 2016 curated by
Schumi both and Finn Williams and Jack
self and actually we were really trying
to develop a model that did the deed
function actually for both working and
living I'm not going to enter the
project I just want to say that I don't
want to completely dismiss actually this
perspective of actually melting living
and working because it's very realistic
in terms of who we are today
however we are starting to see the
limits of course of this of this
and I think it was very clear in an
introduction so we tried to look back
and we try to think if we are so if we
had this kind of Stockholm Syndrome of
now you know lobbying the thing that
probably enslaves us and if all of our
culture today
I mean globally is really dominated by
by work as almost I cannot be the
ultimate criteria by which actually we
judge things in general
how can we imagine other criteria that
are not necessarily productive that are
about solidarity law of play and so on
and so forth so we look back at the
greco-roman because the Wicca Romans
were very fixated on hating work and
trying to reclaim life as something
separate with problems of course and we
were going to see that in a second so
there should Greeks really thought that
if you leave you cannot work so there
are some people between us who live and
those are wealthy Mahler that are born
in the place where they live wealthy
citizens so that means like maybe 10% of
the population
anybody who is not actually born in the
place where they live is already not a
citizen of course women don't count and
so on and so forth but let's say if you
are one of those you cannot work it's
like it's impossible because you have to
live and living actually means devoting
yourself to political activity and war
perhaps the Romans who were much more
pragmatic thought that well work was
very important for the Romans but they
also felt it as a huge burden they
really thought that if you work you
can't live so in a way they had a kind
of divide itself where they recognized
the importance of work and productivity
but he also felt it as a huge burden as
a huge stress so it's very briefly
actually four points about spaces where
both the Greeks and the Romans in
different ways actually tried to
cultivate this idea of no war and I have
actually to me sorry I just want to
briefly show you what I mean it Iranian
town and would have look like before the
mature Classical Age this is a drawing
that for me is quite interesting because
everything that you see in black is the
first phase of construction of this town
and everything that you see
is the second phase what can we read
from that well that initially the houses
were larger much much larger and not
subdivided and then later on in time
probably around the seventh sixth
century people started to actually
fragment basically this big hole houses
and that were like no just one like one
big single hole into smaller spaces that
are more like purpose choreographed
somehow what is meant for in terms of
actually measuring work for me is very
simple initially actually work leisure
ritual and so on support work space
undivided unscripted probably scripted
through time but not really that much
through space and at a certain moment
actually all these different moments of
human existence had to start to be thank
you choreographed in a rather different
way where every single moment of your
life would have a different place where
you will actually carry on a certain
kind of activity so you would have a
space for praying and a space for
sleeping and those would not be the same
space but again I think actually this
drawing for me is actually quite
meaningful because it goes to show that
initially all of these activities were
in the same space with no subdivision so
the first point that I want to make
actually about the Greeks is that for
the Greeks true leisure is really the
highest experience of intellectual
freedom so contrary to what we think
today that actually work is the real
mean which actually you fulfill your
intellectual ambitions for them it was
exactly the opposite it was exactly true
doing nothing just through doing the
things that are the least productive
that you would fulfill your your your
full potential as a human being but of
course this came with strings attached
it came at a very high cost it came at
the cost that all the people who did not
leave worked and those were 90% of the
people if not more and they were all the
subjects that were marginalized which
bizarrely were actually in fact actually
the majority of the population how did
this actually inform domesticity in a
Greek house and I have to make here
disclaimer the Greek constellation of
settlements
it's very diverse so I'm making here
like gross generalizations just for the
sake of discussion I'm just going to
take a kind of standard more or less
recoil cause more or less from the 50
century before Christ and you see here's
something quite interesting all the
different rooms have kind of the same
size more or less they are organized
around the policeman courtyard and
they're used seasonally depending
actually on environmental conditions
there's just one exception rooms a and B
so that left-hand corner and the
right-hand corner at the top and those
are the two spaces that we can say were
truly gendered and kind of purpose
constructed in Agricola's and room a is
what was called the and run so the space
for man and room B is what was called
the eCos so what we would say today that
the house literally that is in fact
actually the only room that has a fire
and has water so it's like a kitchen we
could say but in a kitchen come bathroom
it's like a kind of basically service
corps let's say so a service corps was
mostly inhabited work by women and it
served for all purpose of purposes of
like you know daily reproduction but
space a is actually what I'm interested
in now because actually space a is the
space of absolute non-work and is the
space that was called Janvrin that was
just used in a very specific occasion
that was the symposium that is basically
the drinking party and only for men and
their paid companion so that was
basically the courtesans both boys and
and women so of course true laser then
requires a space outside of the need of
need so you don't there's nothing that
you have to do in the space that's a but
also outside of ritual because in a way
ritual is also scripted so it's not
completely free which means that for the
Greeks sport and theater and
entertainment were not leisure because
they were not completely in a way freed
from the rules of ritual in the country
what for them was in fact
sorry what for them was in fact
completely free I mean what was leisure
time was drinking again not eating
because you need to eat to survive but
you don't really need to drink alcohol
to survive right
and of course non-reproductive sex and
poetry because also poetry is something
that is essentially useless and and I
think it's actually really interesting
to look at this basis on these spaces
were usually in a corner of the house
they were normally actually expressed
also to the outside so towards the
street with a different type of clad
English so they would also be has some
kind of status symbol that you would see
from outside and then inside there would
be fixed furniture like a bench running
around the whole room so that's how we
recognize them that actually in our
logical digs and the last data that I
always found really so funny and
interesting is it's the pretty much the
only room in the house that has a really
really heavy door and we can tell this
actually from the hinges so it means
that actually it's basically the only
room in the house and you can truly lock
and that means that you can lock
yourself in not that you lock it from
outside meaning that we really construct
a kind of bubble that is completely
outside of the realm of the masticity
and it's really there for for the
purpose of actually allowing the male
the male like the male head of the house
and his guests to enjoy this complete
bubble of nothingness now the thing that
I think is amazing about this space is
that it's a space of pure hedonism
somehow but at the same time it's the
place where Greek politics actually were
born is the place actually where Greek
poetry was born and it's a place where
pretty much any important invention in
terms of partially philosophy poetry
politics and so and so forth they were
not really born in the Agora they were
born in here they were born you know
during
moments of sexual play of you know
listening to music playing around with
poetry and of course being deadly
serious actually in the moment of having
fun and then if we have to move to how
their neighbors actually the romances so
the problem of leisure and work they had
a slightly different actually point of
view on that because the problem is that
the Roma house contrary to the green
house is really seen as a social space
it's open at all times of the day people
come and go so for them really the
personal for the Romans the personal was
social and then also later became
productive which means that in fact
actually we don't have any momentary
interruption in the house that resembles
actually the symposium or the undrawn in
Greek culture so it means that also the
whole house becomes productive that we
don't have this kind of resting space
anymore
and I just want to show you one example
one such Damas we can find actually in
this plan a space that hosts also
evening parties is the G space top right
basically the big room on the courtyard
on the second quarter on the garden but
this is a very different space actually
from the on Drona it's a space well
first of all they do it in there so it's
not only the super flows nature of
alcohol but it's you know proper place
where you can have banquettes it's a
space for both genders and it's
especially a space for social
representation I would say so from this
point of view it's completely embedded
in the realm of need or what the Greeks
would say is that we are not need
because it's political it's commercial
it's right it's explicitly about
networking I would say you know using
like a contemporary term which means
that you are not really going to go in
there to relax you can kind of have fun
but it's always going to be somehow a
productive extension of your social life
let's say so of course then if we look
at the evolution of the space of the
normals we can say that funny enough in
this very very scripted environment in
this very social intense environments
that the Romans actually had in their
houses a revolution really began in the
space that I will call it opaque space
of Solitude
so in the space of doing nothing and
there was such a space the
space was the curriculum so that is
actually the space where the Romans
would go to sleep that was an extremely
reduced sleeping part I would call it
that pretty much only has a space for a
bed there is no window option in this
curriculum so they are clearly extremely
functional spaces where you just go to
drop at the end of the day and maybe not
even really for sexual intimacy in fact
actually most of these beds were quite
small so these pieces were sometimes
actually beautifully decorated but they
were always tiny even after in the in
the wealthiest houses that Mantid
actually that was the only place where
you could find in fact I shall respite
from this super intensive social life
and that meant that in fact actually
these were the first places where the
Christian religion was actually
practiced within these doses don't my
anyway however my the plural is so that
meant that actually from within you have
actually the very revolution that broke
apart the Roman Empire was pretty much
actually started in a bedroom started
actually from this pace extremely
constrained space where you would be
able to be in there alone and pray
essentially that's also then not a
surprise that then this space would
become the blueprint for the monastic
cell and would be translated one-to-one
so we found that actually was very
interesting for us in this second
example especially in the case of the of
the Romans the fact that actually
something that was in fact initially
part of a very rigid apparatus was
misinterpreted or was hijacked or was
appropriated let's say by the Christians
to break down this order from within and
we thought that that was interesting for
us because if we feel so constrained by
contemporary apartments there are very
much diagram that I showed you at the
beginning maybe it's not a question of
inventing necessarily new types but it's
a question of first challenging and
deconstructing actually the topologies
that we have from within and why one way
of challenging challenging them of
course could come from challenging the
very idea of work and productivity so I
would say that actually you know what
the Greek can teach us if they have
anything to teach is that doing nothing
is a form of freedom but also what the
Romans actually can teach us is that
perhaps doing nothing can be a form of
agency thanks
thank you so much Maria so as you see
there with these two conversations we
wanted to address the idea of course
labor and automation in a particular
fashion and different way because there
are many talks about automation and the
possibilities of non work not working
but most of it signs laser this knowing
nothing is a dispense of the work and
exploitation of others
so as using your maybe methodology of
time travel as a historical method we
wanted to bring different stories not
only for the from the here and now but
also other type of histories into the
conversation in order to maybe make this
conversation about automation of it
Richards and maybe to instigate some
friction with this I want to invite
director French presentations and maybe
to share your thoughts about these
themes I mean first of all thank you so
much for bringing your book your ideas
and this conversation into the lecture
hall strangely enough I I felt different
forms of violence throughout your
presentations responding maybe to the
premise of of the book nor of the work
in which you don't attempt to
necessarily have a dialectical
conversation or an oppositional one but
actually an assembly of certain issues
that are addressed one after the other
hoping that something might emerge as I
kind of an editorial voice that is not
necessary and the stood as a whole but
as a as a series of maybe footnotes Nova
story that is undergoing that we as
contemporary agents can just punctuate
it was very difficult actually for me to
go from the constant new house and the
idea of labor and the view of clay and
how actually one can start rendering of
registering the landscapes right now
constitute the Dutch landscape knowing
that the space of
of transactional and at the same time
global domination through a form of
optimization of production and
distribution and then immediately jump
know into into something that is as hard
and as difficult if you want is the
crisis of migration and the violence
that is happening in nature in a global
a geopolitical context and it made me
think in relationship to both of your
presentations and we have a few
questions known I will try to make a bit
of a summary and then I will try to be
precise it's something that has to do
who has and we mentioned this last week
who has the right to speak on behalf of
who yeah because of course you're
speaking in behalf of something that no
one really can claim authorship no and
something that is within Western culture
we can really talked about it but Ayesha
I felt that if instead of you were
talking about but this kind of
anthropocentric the accelya there was
someone else speaking with that kind of
extreme poetic anesthetic violence on
relationship to that subject I think we
all would have had felt that something
was extremely wrong right and I think
that really made me reflect about what
is that that we are doing when we are
putting those subjects on the table with
the kind of generosity and violence at
the same time research and artistic
practice require and demand and of
course that brings me back to the moment
in which of course a
nique you were taking us through that
kind of journey know those spaces of
prostitution is lavery and labor that
only became almost okay no it was almost
all right at the very last closing
comment when suddenly the emergency
button of the room of that prostitute a
working was equal to that chicken
cooking machine no and that in fact all
these technologies seen as notions of
progress are in fact justice leaving us
independently if something looks as
benign as a kitchen or as problematic or
as questionable as a brothel room but
beyond that kind of reflection that
might be very much seem very obvious the
question is what is that that we are
doing in terms of like changing the idea
of
action critic versus agency no and so it
seems to me that there is a lot of like
reflection and maybe some critique
embedded but where do we actually find
ourselves the leverage to add in the
design or transformation of some of
those conditions or circumstances that
surround us and and of course with with
Maria's presentation or the way in which
we I mean I always like to fantasize no
and and but how do we construct those
neo canonical histories how do we
rewrite that history in a way that
allows us to to be more powerful not to
create new discourses and of course we
all inherited the fact that the Agora
was the place where democracy was
invented I mean who was there to
register that space and I love the fact
that you are shifting right that kind of
like so well-known narrative doing what
I mentioned not is kind of like time
travel as a method for exploration and
historical research and to try to give
us another narrative well in fact we
don't necessarily care this is what is
interesting is that we might not
necessarily care but what is that that
is being delivered to us as a kind of a
certain idea of truth necessarily as
long as that actually arms us to act and
to produce an entire new set of spatial
social political articulations that
might be able to really allow us to act
into some of the things that we consider
are not good enough that are wrong and
so one of the questions here looking
into a I would like to think I mean we
are not that new but I would like to
think it's a new generation of practice
practitioners editors writers artists
and how do we position ourselves and
this is a larger question how do we
position ourselves beyond editorial
project of just putting things one next
to each other difficult subjects and
contemporary subjects between technology
and the body to really try to to start
acting and and how how far are we
willing to to reach and that obviously
that's a question that goes into the
into the decorator into the initiator of
this project as someone who does that
work constantly as part of a cultural
institution but again like my
stomach was getting close and close and
close and close throughout the
presentations and then I've been open
and then closed no and that's a very
strange feeling that we ourselves we
need to understand
where's your agency no I understand the
space of reflection I pay I understand
the space of critique but where is our
agency where does the agency of this
project reside my important question I
think in that sense the podcast Nick was
saying is a weird creature because the
Sun necessarily include all the voices
are in the pavilion and we try to do one
experiment that is bringing these more
long theoretical essays together with
shorter reflections that are we call the
kind of image essays that almost like
images and captions and we might get
primarily practitioners to reflect on
contemporary spaces and how they address
these questions from a more I will say
instrumental approach so we try to bring
these notions together and that was a
kind of a form of departure to
understand how these narrate narrative
school infiltrate practice as well
obviously it's not the only only way but
for us it was an attempt to bring this
conversation this seems together the
conversation about innovation and
technology that many times are very
devoid of critical perspective so what
we have trained to do is bring these
notions and these themes into the space
of the school of their architecture to
question these technologies not only
embrace them but also understand which
other lineages and histories they they
belong to and they are connected but
also to the space of practice to invite
architects and designers to look into
the spaces of automation that most of
the times are not designed by architects
so invite them to see and learn from
these spaces and see you know how they
are occupying larger parts of the
territory and affecting the way in which
we live in in the space and yet most of
the times we are not part of these
processes and finally also through
policymaking so one of the questions was
been that
Pavillion obviously there is a official
representation of a country and many
officials are participating in the
conversation so trying to you know make
a whole coal country reflects on beyond
the optimism that this technology is
bring how you can reflect on how these
practices are connected so former
histories of the country maybe
look there's llave trade another it's
like to see so being very you know
hearth perhaps about maybe the wealth
that allows for these technologies to be
implemented where they come from
so I know you think I let your project
your questions about the if we can talk
on behalf of others I think it's
inevitable in this project because we
are told all the time sake but about
other nests and it starts with idea of
position in the robot as the other and
what we tried to explain or like maybe
not explain but bring together in this
book is that the other is the robot but
the other is the woman the other is the
migrant the other is the lay body there
so what over history we have position as
the other has been changing over time
so perhaps the way in which we imagine
that robotic bodies or mechanic bodies
will operate us for us to create a laser
driven architectural space well we have
to see that perhaps this also set in the
the stage setting the boundaries or the
conditions for series of exploitative
practices that have been ongoing through
history I mean the idea of these other
known like when we talk about we the
other like we usually a lot these days
know it's like because we and someone
has who is we and I said we is always
the other right we is never ask tweezer
words that other but I Asia maybe there
was something that of course there is
this urgent need to to produce those
sanctuaries and at the same time to
unveil
those histories and that is a history
that is well-known that is reported but
it's never known enough now that is
never reported enough and I think maybe
for me what would be interesting is like
this is an ongoing project that probably
I've been working for many years now and
I would like to learn a bit more where
somehow it has started and maybe that
could be an entire lecture itself but
where do where do you see it going like
where would you like to see it really
moving towards because I think that
that's really for me in a certain way I
like to move maybe today this
conversation from that space of
reflection and understanding towards
this space of action I found extremely
beautiful not that kind of Oneiric
fictional construction in which suddenly
the the anger is transformed into almost
a kind of a fairy tale no in which
suddenly like and how does one take them
that that power no that beautiful color
of the sea and transform it into that a
force that you want to have so I'm I
don't know where are you taking this
project where is the next step I was I
was getting ready to talk about who
speaks for whom I mean I mean for me my
interests have been quite long standing
in the Middle Passage as well as doing
organizing work with illegalized
migrants from when I lived in Canada and
to me there was an analogy to be made
that could only be flattened if that
analogy was made to directly so to sort
of to think through the Middle Passage
and think through the Mediterranean as
somehow being in conversation but not
making one a metaphor for the other or
anything like that so for me when I
discovered Drex eeeh that became a very
interesting way to sort of think about
just the mode of speculation is
producing certain kinds of connections
that that that that don't get flattened
out because you're in the mode of
speculation but that said I mean I think
that the the project is to sort of try
to think through what is sort of enabled
at that level of remain
but I think it's also I think there's a
kind of ethical component as well
because you can't only stay in the mode
of of the speculative and you can't
always do these meted lines so I think
for me the future the future of the
project really is to find ways of
staying with this hypothetical drawing
these kind of very sort of tenuous lines
I would say between two moments and then
finding a way to ground it under it so
actually this film that I made is
actually a collaborative film that I
made with Hama Dean Cain and one of the
things that I was thinking about when
you're talking about who speaks for whom
so I'm gonna bring it back to that is to
sort of think about about that because
if he was in the room we would be
framing it together quite differently
and I don't really like to speak for him
but then there's a way in which one has
to sort of narrate the the genesis of
the film so Hanna Dean actually lives in
Brussels and has a refugee passport and
arrived from Senegal by walking to the
northern coast and so when we made this
film together we made it we just had a
fantastic conversation but part of the
film is actually grounded in sort of
finding a meeting ground between what I
was interested in what he was interested
in the very vast terrain of what
migration is on the Mediterranean but
for him so he's a practicing artist and
he travels well and for him to speak
about his role or his his history as a
refugee as a kind of active agency but
for me to speak of it with in my
position isn't and that's a co-optation
so I always hover between that you need
to collaborate with someone who actually
is had the first-hand experience or do
we as artists and architects carry the
responsibility as part of our role to
actually be able to speak on behalf of
others I think I think I think it hovers
between the two I think I think both are
equally important to me the story is
this ghost ship which have which sort of
sailed in 2006 I only heard about it
when I was in doing research in Barbados
and it's a story that I think should be
more known so that I did I didn't want
to sort of talk about that's
but on the other hand to be honest we
were paired up for the by Anil and it
was a beautiful thing because I think
there's a way in which one works and
then if you come into contact with
someone who works very differently with
a very different set of vocabularies
then something third gets made so I but
I think it's I think it's absolutely but
I think also the the danger of speaking
for is something that we should be very
very aware of throughout and you're
always on the cusp of failure I think I
don't ously I mean there's an editor
make one always I mean it was beautiful
what you said at the beginning right
that sometimes an editor doesn't do much
except that one makes things sudden
happen maybe I can disclose right now
that the first person that ever read my
statement for the directorship
application for Business School was Nick
and and I think you changed two words
and put an S when you put people
together and you let them speak and but
the question and the difficult one is to
put people that otherwise would never
come together right and when you put
ideas that would never come together and
the danger know of doing that as a
curator as editor or as a commissioner
and and I think that I mean throughout
your presentation know jumping from from
one bed to then like from like someone
else's research to your own research to
some ideas to other ideas the idea is
not only in terms of advocacy know it
taste in terms of ideas how do we we
have a right to a point in which they
have a starship and and in terms of
original research versus I mean ideas of
plagiarism it is a vast and ECT even in
architecture and design I think it's a
very interesting phenomenon and someone
who constantly has to deal with ideas
from others that then actually is not
being position and
with its own history or other histories
very interested in a topic that is not
personally about work body or leisure
but it has to do a lot more with with
the work that you guys do know when do
you encounter an idea or a work and
maybe that's something that things that
might not have made it into the book or
things that actually when you say baby
is good but it's not good enough or this
idea hasn't been cooked enough but is
violent enough because there was
something about your presentation that
made me think about at some point were
in the societal Society of the spectacle
no and then I was just like I think it's
like violent this is spectacle this
equality is a spectacle like there
wasn't a spectacle is a spectacular
ization of the ideas that you were
presenting that that I think there is a
real editorial hanging there and I would
like to hear a bit more about when you
live in and what do you leave out yeah
so when I when I tend let's say when I
do some design practices or when I when
I make images it's always grounded in
cartography and I think you know when
when I started this discussion with
marina or when we when we you know when
I was approached to work on this we had
a discussion that was trying to take
these it these ideas that you might have
had about these concepts and and find
their limits or at least find our limits
with them and so we we kind of opened up
a terrain I think within ourselves and
an understanding of what this project
could be and from there you know we we
kind of started populating and you know
we we didn't you know I I don't know I
maybe we wanted something like an even
covering of the field something like
this but you know I think what what we
were what we were trying to do is to
position things that were not too close
and that were not too distant so that
you know we might be able because I
think something I mean if we think of
this book as as a map as a cartography I
mean it doesn't make sense but you
points one on top of each other at least
in this kind of horizontal approach of a
map that we can think of but at the same
time I think that there you know we
wanted to make sure that there was you
know we wanted to make sure that things
were not too close but we so we wanted
to make sure they were far enough I
guess
you know I think you know we can look at
maybe Benjamin Bratton's idea at the
stack of like a vertical cartography of
of the city you know I think what we
were trying to do is create a
three-dimensional space where you can
start to to identify different sites I
mean also to speak to your to your first
question of intervention of agency
different scales and so you know exactly
how we you know we decided you know what
fell in and what fell out I think it was
you know for example we wanted diversity
in terms of the the manner of
approaching topic so if we didn't we
wanted some more lengthy academic
scholarly text we wanted to others that
were more fictional that were more that
were more that were more poetic so I
mean I I feel uncomfortable invoking
this term but I'm going to but because
it's not entirely intuitive but you know
I think it is about kind of
understanding and tuning yourself to the
nature of the project that you're
working with which I think was even
though I it was it was frustrating at
times but you know having these kind of
three terms was really useful for that
so it was always about kind of sensing
the limits and sensing the proximity and
distance between things question about
reasoning about authorship because I
think is very important so I was working
before in an academic institution in
that Columbia and obviously I was very
much aware of you know how to use
sources or to quote someone and and Sun
and and then within the academic world
very much says authorship is very
connected to you know the
intellectual work I work in a in a
public institution that is connected to
you know the government's who mediates
between the field theory and the
government so in a way my role is to
instigate certain debates and many times
I've been you know in these
conversations like who is the owner of
the conversation on automation who is
the owner of the conversation on work
and leisure it has been done before
always will be done again I honestly
don't care my role is to make sure that
these conversations happen and to find
different people to bring together and
so to have these conversations I don't
think I should have any or not I always
say that to claim an authorship on this
conversation or to claim ax and off yeah
ownership on it I've just assembled may
be the way of editorial collateral work
people who actually has much more
knowledge than I have and they can share
it but it's an interesting idea
because many people feels very
threatened by this type of works and I
continuously see people say night I
cannot do this in this biennial because
you did that already this seems like
well but it's to advance the
conversation so why let's copy each
other like I mean I I refer the work of
other people but I make sure that I use
their names I mentioned them at the same
time less appropriate idea so father's
and and advance them I think otherwise
is we are we just wasting over wasting
the time I mean and I'm saying this
because I think your work in many ways
it's always collaborative in nature yeah
and well we all understand the value and
importance of recognize me after ship
and the intellectual property that goes
associated to business models and forms
of livelihood there is also a kind of
detrimental aspect to it that actually
positions I kind of knew map of
geopolitics variance that one might not
want to enter there was a thought that
actually a Maria well you were talking
what I love but I don't know that kind
of theoretical work or fictional work
because I think at the end of the day
probably doesn't really matter is that
how do we how do we and it goes back
into agency unlike so whoever figured
some of those things out and realize
that they elite doing nothing nowhere in
fact the ones that that were in power
somehow managed in like two thousand
years to glorify the glorification of
work as the mechanism for actually the
democratization of society because now
everyone right even like everyone is
working right even they kind of
supposedly like the elites are also
working even when they are not working
they still want to work and because it's
either it's the work through social
media everything and so if one tries to
think of a perverse mode of how do we
Democrats I society is by actually
transforming work into something
glorified and now we're actually running
to the point in which suddenly so much
people is working that we need to
actually go back to the Universal income
and that in fact working will be a
luxury because that's the way in which
we know and so that there is a kind of
like this topic horizon in which
suddenly work will be the highest
privilege to be able to do the things
that you really want to do or even to
just do something at all and so I'm
reading that into special conditions no
I think they then the question goes into
into one that I think also affects very
much this building and the kind of
pedagogical undermine and underlining of
this space that we are also made of
small rooms no we hardly have this main
lecture hall in which we can feel that
for room that is not a forum that would
ultimately is a theater not is like that
theater of performance and so in this
kind of like kind of quest of
identifying spaces and saying maybe more
or least less of that know there is one
of the students in and actually another
unit that is not yours that is looking
into the into this fashionable atrium
know that in all this collective working
spaces appearing as the kind of new
cooler space that this is the kind of
Moeller sign of the over the precariat
no and and so I'm very interested
because you're translating your ideas
always directly into architecture and
spatial conditions and so if if now we
are going towards this total
glorification of work into which
actually managed to democratize action
like are we just making an entire
society of rooms I mean I would just
like to keep you talking a bit more but
in the same way that I asked a chef is
like where is this research and this
work going like where are you going
especially absolutely I think it's a
really great question that for me has
two sides to it one has more to do with
this
storytelling if you want that exactly as
you said after certain degrees not
doesn't doesn't even matter whether it's
true or not of course I mean we try to
be as rigorous as possible somehow
beside the point and so that's one
question and then the second question is
more topological I would say Reedy
architecture and if we go back to the
first question first the storytelling
for me what was really interesting of
this occasion that actually marina and
Nick gave us is that as essentially as a
feminist the subject that I that I
really scrutinizing most of what I do is
the woman but then I always thought that
one of the most beautiful things about
feminism is that that's it's as much
about liberating man as it's about
liberating women and so both the
narrative of the cubicle and of the
andron are really very much about the
main subject and sometimes was about
also about a non-standard male subject
and about the queer subject for instance
which is very important particularly in
the Enron so you know we that's in terms
of storytelling what I wish for myself
is first of all to have this kind of
feminism in the expanded field somehow
that is going to somehow yeah maybe the
colonized man as well because I mean
they deserve it as much as women and I
think that also means a little bit maybe
betraying or like going beyond my or our
mind at least for sure
Marxist background because of course the
Marxist background is all about
production it's all about work and and I
think that maybe it's as much as that
has been useful it's about really
constructing new narrative
that go against this big narrative that
most left-wing progressive thought has
been I don't want to say poison by but
definitely informed by and I think that
maybe if we start to shift in a way the
the focus maybe we're not going to Bank
our head against the wall about
reproductive labor and the woman
enslaved in a house which are all things
that are very much true than they are
very much at the core of my work but
maybe now the way I'm trying to think
about it now is how about shifting the
perspective and also seeing that also
men is to be liberated just as much as a
woman typologically I think that this is
a huge question for architecture listen
is partially for a long time I thought
and in part I'm still convinced and I'm
going to give a very very simple answer
that just doing the spaces that are non
scripted and made that might be also
over dimensions let's say useless spaces
might be almost all right have done it
in many projects so it's just when I'd
want to see random and say extra space
so in a way pushing the user in a
position where they have to make up
their own script because there is
essentially no predetermined agenda that
is like the most basic answer that I can
give and we've been working for on that
for quite a few years now so I do have a
question also with myself whether there
are other ways to to break down actually
the the logic with which we designed
today that are not simply well let's
make bigger spaces that are bigger I
still think that that's not a bad answer
but I'm not sure that it's the only
answer and we can have and going back to
the shop rooms that you were saying yes
I think that sounds like a really
interesting idea so to conceive maybe
not of buildings but of the city has
rooms so somehow and maybe actually
really curate them in a different way
could be interesting because we would be
forced actually to reach it actually the
meaning of what these rooms are and so
on and so forth but to be honest I think
that this for me is the one design
question today especially for people who
design domestic space that's saying an
office space which by the way today can
we really tell actually what's the
difference so sure
but there's definitely a big question as
designers as designers therefore which
if anybody has the answer
stand up actually would be great also
you know to open the conversation also
to the audience but our very very
provisional answer was to go in that
direction of making less scripted spaces
and making yes species that are over
abundant so that you can reinterpret it
but what we were trying to do actually
with this little investigation here was
also and we don't have an answer yet to
do the opposite so to say okay let's not
change the diagram let's just change the
way we use the diagram because that's
actually what the Romans did and what
what the early Christians really did in
fact actually I mean they used they
didn't change anything they just use
things differently all of a sudden and
that's why I actually I think for me
it's almost like a kind of a virtuous
circle because I have the feeling that
big question to our quest for a new
typology that is going to respond to our
way of living maybe realizing the
storytelling more than the design that's
why I think pieces like yours are so are
so important because they are really you
know those moments in which actually we
start to think about things differently
and and I mean and it I have to say it's
weird coming from me because I'm read
like a designer's designer but I'm
starting to think that maybe it's more
important first to change the narrative
to change the words that we use or
change the way we use certain words that
say rather than trying to find a
typological fix immediately
and we don't change the space we just
changed the diagram right and the
diagram stands for some ways not only
function but also for all the possible
things that that diagram might represent
these questions of ownership time money
I don't think it is time for questions
and and for opening up to date today to
the floor
I have two two questions well once yeah
two questions the first is for you so at
at what the very beginning you said
fairly emphatically this is not a
catalogue this is a book and so like
that the fact that you were so emphatic
about that really stuck
but then following I haven't actually
seen the publication and I haven't and
then I can take the question away but so
based on kind of what's been presented
and the discussions you know when you
were saying earlier I kind of I don't
care if someone copies the ideas or
builds off of the ideas everything that
you're saying and presenting to me
really seems like a catalog so I'm very
curious and and for me book has a very
specific meaning so I'm curious maybe
what was the thinking behind you saying
that so emphatically and really like you
don't want anyone to misunderstand guys
this is not a catalog so yeah yeah I'll
start with that I mean there's there are
no photographs there's nothing that you
would see in the exhibition in the book
the book was conceived of as so actually
the the work buddy leisure project if I
may is be kind of on behalf of it it's
it's it's seen not just as an exhibition
it's seen more as a curse or project
that manifests in different forms so the
book was seen as one instance of the
project the exhibition similarly was one
instance of the project there were a
series of events and public programs
there was also one instance so you know
while we do we did invite actually
required all of the contributors the
main contributors to the pavilion to
contribute with an essay what you will
find like the what they contributed was
very different and so for example you
know beetrice kleh Mina I mean she
recreated the the Hilton suite of the
bed-in for peace but you're present in
exhibition itself your
with just the recreation there's not
really like a historical you know
backing to that but there's also not
directly uh I'd say that the context of
ideas that you can situate in relation
to is not as full so while it it shares
some content it also adds an enormous
amount more it is not a documentation it
is it is an instance of a faculty you
know it's like a very briefly but also I
think even if you sure methodologies in
editing and curating the spatial
component of the book or the exhibition
allow for interaction spatial
interactions and proximities and
distances that are different so there
are certain narratives that come across
in the pavilion there are not presenting
the book and vice versa so there is like
in a way there could be two different
projects that share certain ideas yeah I
don't know if that's so important to say
this is not a cut like depends what you
define or spoke and curious because you
seem to have a very particular idea I
don't have a particular idea for what an
exhibition is and I think that's what I
enjoy that every project for me as an
exhibition we start from zero to define
what it is and the same with a book so
I'm curious about what do you know the
reason that I ask and and like I was
just intrigued by it is for me
essentially a book is just a space like
it it's a blank canvas so - so and and a
catalog is a subcategory of a book so to
specifically deny the subcategory but
not identify but like just bring us back
to like the mothership I didn't get what
was going on and I was just it's just
what happens to anyone who's on a
national
villian you want to make sure you don't
do a catalog it has to do with what
things are not known but what things can
be and I think that that's a very
important question because is it we
spent last year looking very much into
how does one produce a taxonomy of books
between the area of the monograph or the
idea of the atlas or the geography of
essays like how does one categorize this
kind of contemporary form of books that
emerge from specific exhibitions that
are not they don't want to be
categorized as catalogues right because
you will be careful when it will arrive
to any library go after later on into
the metadata and you will see in the bag
that it will say catalogue of the
exhibition right and so as much as you
want to claim that it is not in fact it
is and it is going to be registered as
such and so then the question is I mean
I think you have just opened up an
entire other Pandora Box that it has to
do with what's the problem with
exhibition catalog maybe I just bring
back the table to the question - nique
because what's a problem with exhibition
catalogs or maybe I show you have done
in Norfolk exhibition catalogs I mean I
don't know who what to take the question
but I think is a very good question yeah
I don't know it for me it's it maybe is
kind of a semantic thing where there are
certain assumptions that we have of a
catalogue that it is representational of
of something that that happened in a
space so you will go and you will see
photographs so I think the catalog
serves as a representation for the the
exhibition when you can't when you
couldn't have gone and I think this is
not meant to be like so I the catalogs
don't have a purpose yeah I just think
that's not what we made like if we
really wanted to
a catalogue that would have represented
the exhibition in printed form it would
have been a very different no no and I
think I'm starting to understand now and
partly the reason that I am fixating on
this is like because I fundamentally
think that words are incredibly
important and in when you were saying
whether it's a matter of redesigning the
topologies or redesigning the narrative
and for me it's so much about the
narrative and the choice of words and so
so for while I can understand while I
can understand the desire to not be the
catalogue for me it's like prejudices
ideas spaces are created through our
commitment to one word or another and
and therefore if it is as a kind of full
believer in the construction of
narrative over production if we kind of
link it back to the production yeah I
just I would just say then then book is
not a good enough word because book is
just it's a generic it it's a space
filler it doesn't actually mean anything
it's a space just as the thought there
was one thing I was thinking about well
the relationship between book and
catalog but maybe about the idea of how
different forms sort of convey their own
sort of narratives I mean my own project
has that I mean retrograde futurism this
what I showed a film clip of has three
very different lives one in the book and
one as a performance and I would say all
of them have a starting point of a
certain narrative but they wine isn't
reducible to the other you know as an
academic you know that the written part
is the most privileged in terms of raff
and things like that but I would say
that it's not an illustration and it's
not a documentation of the other
I think what a catalog might be in that
instance is a documentation of the
exhibition itself whereas if you have a
larger project it could just take on
different iterations and each iteration
will convey something about the larger
project that the other forums can't and
I think it's a similar thing right this
thing to be very honest I think the
that's like the national pavilions have
very like difficult you know dynamics
now you have to respond to certain
conditions so even if we are streaming a
proud of the work we did I will say that
the book allow us space of freedom that
was much more complicated to address in
the pavilion for instance a year so
Maria were not present their walls were
not present in the pavilion so I think
that it was much more playful the way in
which we addressed even that the
pavilion was quite playful but I think
the the conversation with Nicola for a
total conversation and so on in that
sense I'm very grateful to Nick to to
take the project to another dimension
another I kind of pick up on something
you talked about about how you conceived
of the book as a kind of mixture between
these longer texts and then these shorts
of photo essays and you said that they
were a way to test how practitioners
could instrumentalize some of these
ideas I guess in the very recent past
yesterday I had to chair a very charged
discussion between an architect who was
trying to instrumentalize an idea and a
critical theorist was framing the kind
of bigger picture within which that idea
happened and it was really interesting I
mean it became quite oppositional which
was interesting and fun but I think in a
way I think both of them could have
learnt a lot from each other and I'm
just quite curious I think it's a great
setup for a publication but I'm curious
as to like how does this project
continue and maybe what are the forms of
conversation that could exist between
these practitioners who are testing
these ideas and then the kind of
academic essays that are kind of framing
or time-track I love the idea of time
traveling as a form of research that are
kind of framing it with an kind of
the lineage is it through kind of
setting up more conversations like this
that bring those different types of
people together to talk about some of
these ideas or I know that the you were
saying earlier that the exhibition is
now in Rotterdam so is it and as it
continues as I think I sure you were
saying earlier that in each text that
you write it kind of changes the project
or the project develops a bit so I'm
just curious as to how this bigger
project of work for you leisure will
continue to evolve briefly but I think
you see the different contributions of
the book to will be clearly identified
two type of voices or languages I mean
very in very blunt and the practitioners
have a particular approach that is very
optimistic I will say in the relation to
the possibilities of this sign
whereas that's not the case it's more
like what we have seen today a bit more
critical approach and so on so these two
worlds that's what I was saying is a
weird creature because sometimes they
seem to go through in a completely
different dimension the interesting part
is but I've been collected in that
particular space suddenly they happen
they have read the book they haven't
participated in different conversations
and they might be certain certain you
know assemblages that will happen and in
many cases architectural offices that
are they were designing workspaces
without being part of these
conversations now they you know they
they tell that having these these
discussions allow them to reflect on
their work in a different way I don't
know that's positive or negative I don't
have any judgment or issue there but
it's true that many times these two
worlds have completely different
languages going back to the idea of
language and many times it's very risky
to bring them together because they seem
not too much I'm probably the case of
this book sometimes is like they have
made a mistake it might be the case
we drive its 8:12 and I believe we might
try to wrap this thing up I mean we did
talk about I started saying that I felt
violence no but we did talk about
violence and we talked about very
difficult things like migration
technology automation slavery freedom
and and the subjects could continue
endlessly how do we produce a kind of a
lexicon of contemporary issues that we
believe are urgent and need to be
addressed from a multiplicity of lenses
I think that's probably one of the
things that this book really stands for
even through kind of a different
disguise cover the message that I have
behind in my back is actually making me
very nervous and because it says doing
nothing is a form of Asian and I say
what you do nothing someone else is
doing it for you
no and so the question is what kind of
agency and and and and and of course
that one is referring to another form of
agency and a different kind of
nothingness I want to congratulate you
in your somethingness and I think
there's nothing less that is not there
and for this conversation tonight and
please thank them for this fabulous talk
and let's get that book
[Applause]
